Art in Review
Bill Jensen and Myron Stout  Washburn Gallery 41 East 57th Street Through May 9
The larger of these two shows consists of pen and brush drawings in ink by Bill Jensen.
The artist's familiar organic shapes -- part botanical, part anatomical -- are here, but in the absence of the densely textured surfaces of his oil paintings, line and tonal shading become the center of attention.
In the works that refer to Goya's "Disasters of War," these elements are put to dramatic effect.
In others, they have the spring and the transparency of Chinese ink drawing.


Review/Cabaret; 25 Years With Bobby Short
Bobby Short has been synonymous with Manhattan's cabaret high life for so many years that it is easy to forget that the singer and pianist was not born into the world he has come to symbolize.
And on Tuesday, opening his 25th season at the Cafe Carlyle, Mr.
Short celebrated his roots in a program that was generously peppered with reminiscences of his youth in Danville, Ill., and his years as a pre-adolescent nightclub performer in Chicago and New York City.
"I have a compelling superstition about Stephen Foster's song about race horses," he announced early in the evening in an anecdote about how his mother's superstitiousness had rubbed off on him.
"If I can get through this song without a hitch, the rest of the show will flow like glass."


INSIDE
Familiar End in Mideast Talks
Israelis and Arabs ended their fifth round of talks without signs of progress on major issues or a commitment on meeting again.
Page A6.
Navy Report on Sex Assaults
The Navy said many women, not just a few, were abused at an aviators' convention and said many officers would not aid the inquiry.
Page A14.
An Everglades Cleanup Idea
A system of trading pollution credits could help to rid the Everglades waters of phosphorous from fertilizers, economists believe.
Law, page B18.
Exxon Official Still Missing
The disappearance of the president of Exxon International remained a mystery and officials refused to discuss the investigation.
Page B1.
Nets Walk the Plank
New Jersey's season of near-mutiny ended in a 98-89 loss to the Cleveland Cavaliers in the fourth game of their N.B.A. playoff series.
Page B9.


ICF International Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29


Slaney Enters Mile at New York Games
MARY SLANEY, who holds five American middle-distance records including the mile, has entered the mile at the New York Games at Columbia University on May 24.
Meanwhile, ZOLA BUDD-PIETERSE, the South African middle-distance runner whose collision knocked Slaney out of the 3,000 meters at the 1984 Olympics, has withdrawn from two American meets she had entered over the next two months.


Corrections
A picture caption on Monday with an article about educating Japanese students in the United States misidentified the school shown in Great Neck, L.I.
It was a weekend school, which emphasizes teaching the Japanese language -- not a juku, a cram school geared toward teaching students to pass entrance examinations.


Washington National reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Meditrust reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Chrysler Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Singer Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Review/Film; Backstage At a Trendy Restaurant
"The Linguini Incident" trumpets its eccentricity with its title and casting, as well as in every other way it can.
When a film's most down-to-earth actor is David Bowie, that film is clearly determined to stay off the beaten track.
In this case, the first-time director Richard Shepard (working from a screenplay he wrote with Tamar Brott) locates the center of his offbeat universe in a desperately hip restaurant called Dali (with appropriate decor, including a melting clock).
The casual animosity among owners, staff and patrons (whom one waitress describes as "trend-sucking leeches") provides this cheerfully bizarre comedy with all the energy it needs.


Dinkins to Visit Europe in June on Trade Mission
Seeking foreign investments to pull the city out of its economic slump, Mayor David N. Dinkins will try to persuade European companies to place their American corporate headquarters in New York City when he visits Europe in June, city officials and business leaders said yesterday.
Mr.
Dinkins formally announced yesterday that he will visit London, Paris and Frankfurt on a five-day trade mission beginning on June 1.
The New York City Partnership and the New York Chamber of Commerce and Industry will pay expenses for the Mayor and his aides, estimated at about $4,000 per person.
A total figure could not be obtained last night because officials had not decided how many aides would go.


Sun Energy Partners L.P.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Enserch Exploration Partners reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


For Children
'Franklin the Wizard'  Murphy Center Puppet Playhouse Asphalt Green 555 East 90th Street Manhattan (212) 369-8890 Recommended ages: 1 to 7 Tomorrow and Sunday
Steven Widerman and Susan Widerman Blog, a brother and sister who are master puppeteers based in Manhattan, normally put on their original fairy-tale shows at their studio on Union Square or, most recently, at the Metropolis Cafe nearby.
This weekend, their troupe, the Puppet Company, is heading to the Upper East Side, where "Franklin the Wizard," their puppet musical, may be seen at Asphalt Green.


Knicks Try to Make Like Pistons Yet Again
So far in their playoff series, the Knicks have beaten the Detroit Pistons at their own game.
For years, the Pistons have been known for physical play, for strong defense and for their ability to win close games.
But in the first three games of their best-of-five series, the Knicks have been the aggressors.
Their defense has been stronger.
And by winning Game 3 in overtime, 90-87, the Knicks proved they could win a tension-filled playoff game on the road against an experienced team.


Mae Clarke, 81, Actress in Variety Of Movies, Is Dead
Mae Clarke, a film actress best remembered for the scene in which James Cagney pushed a grapefruit in her face in the 1931 gangster movie "Public Enemy," died on Wednesday at the Motion Picture and Television Hospital in Woodland Hills, Calif.
She was 81 years old and lived in Woodland Hills.
She died of cancer, said Louella Benson, a hospital spokeswoman.


Books of The Times; Stories About People Who Haven't Got It Right
Stardust, 7-Eleven, Route 57, A&amp;W and So Forth  Stories  By Patricia Lear  161 pages.
Alfred A. Knopf. $19.
In the O. Henry Award-winning story "Powwow," which appears in Patricia Lear's new collection, we are introduced to Avery, a single mother with three children who runs a boarding house.
Avery receives a phone call about her grandfather -- it seems his girlfriend in the retirement home has committed suicide -- and though she barely remembers the old man from her own childhood, she decides to pay him an impromptu visit.
Not much happens during their visit -- they talk, chat with friends and go to the local Dairy Queen -- but the "powwow" somehow helps crystallize Avery's sense of the precariousness of life, its surprising twists and turns.


World-Class Shooters Challenge N.R.A.'s Role
A group of former world-class shooters is challenging the National Rifle Association as the governing body for sport shooting in the United States, contending that the N.R.A. has too much power, so much that all competitive shooters, including those who reach the Olympics, must be N.R.A. members.
Today in Chicago, a two-year fight for control of the sport will reach a critical point, when the N.R.A. plans to ask the United States Olympic Committee to approve a charter that defines the N.R.A.'s role as the national governing body.
Included in the proposal is an expanded role for athletes, coaches and others and the elimination of mandatory N.R.A. membership for athletes.


Alexander Minz Dies; Ballet Master Was 51
Alexander (Sasha) Minz, a former ballet master and character dancer at the American Ballet Theater, died yesterday at New York Hospital.
He was 51 years old.
He died of a heart attack, said Howard Gilman, a friend.


Sports of The Times; Home Teams Playing With Desperation
IN our building.
The hockey players have this quaint expression which means "home." This time of year, everybody's a hockey player.
Everybody goes mucking in the corners, even the basketball players.
No athletes want to lose, but they particularly do not enjoy being eliminated from the playoffs "in our building."


Ryan Returns, and Gets Rocked
White Sox 12, Rangers 1
CHICAGO, April 30 (AP) -- Nolan Ryan was wild and was hit hard in his return from the disabled list tonight as Chicago beat Texas, 12-1, behind Craig Grebeck's six runs batted in.
Jack McDowell (5-0), the first five-game winner in the majors, threw a three-hitter to beat the 45-year-old Ryan, who had not pitched since opening day because of a strained left calf and an inflamed right Achilles' tendon.


Andrea Electronics Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Equity Silver reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


On Stage, and Off
The Missing 'Falsettos'
The Broadway season ended this week on a slightly sour note for "Falsettos," despite the many positive reviews it received.
It was the last musical to open by Wednesday, the cutoff date for Tony Award eligibility, but neither Channel 5's 10 P.M. news nor Channel 4's 11 P.M. news carried reviews by their respective critics, Stewart Klein and Pia Lindstrom.
"Falsettos" combines two one-act musicals about gay life in the early 1980's -- "March of the Falsettos" and "Falsettoland," by William Finn and James Lapine -- that were produced separately Off Broadway.


As Museum and Mall, A Seaport Lives On
IN a city of marvels, the escalator ride in the Pier 17 Pavilion at the South Street Seaport occupies a special category.
The ascent begins next to a display of Nordic Track exercise equipment, and as the escalator rolls upward, a memorable scene unfolds before the dazzled spectator: a genuine middle-American mall, a spotless temple of T-shirt commerce, complete with functioning restrooms and telephones that work.
And food.
Lots of food.
For the full effect, one really has to leave the tasteful ground-floor restaurants behind and ascend to Level 3.
There, in the infernal circle of fast food, the cholesterol transgressors circulate from Pizza on the Pier to Seaport Fries to Wok and Roll to Athenian Express and back to South Philly Steak and Fries, clutching oversize waxed cups stuffed with french fries, balancing pizza slices whose three-inch surface of goo is moving steadily toward the edges of the crust, already drooping under the weight.


Dixie Yarns reports earnings for Qtr to March 28


Reliance Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Aaron Rents Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Duracell International reports earnings for Qtr to March 28


Quebecor Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


American International Group reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Anadarko Petroleum reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Writer and Broadcaster Win Award
SAM GOLDAPER, who covered basketball for more than 40 years with The New York Times and other newspapers, and CHICK HEARN, who has broadcast Laker games with eloquence since the team moved to Los Angeles in 1960, have been named winners of the 1992 Curt Gowdy media award by the Basketball Hall of Fame.
The two men will receive their awards at a dinner on May 9 in connection with the Hall of Fame enshrinement ceremonies in Springfield, Mass.


Lansing Pacific Fund reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Arrest Made in Mugging of Brooklyn Priest
A 21-year-old man, who was already under arrest in Queens in two robberies there, was arrested early yesterday in the mugging last week of a 69-year-old priest who had been making a routine nighttime check of his church grounds in Brooklyn, the police said.
But as that case was being resolved, another Roman Catholic priest, the third in two weeks, was assaulted Wednesday night at the door of a church rectory in Queens by a man who demanded food and became angry when told the kitchen was closed.
The Rev.
Francisco Ares, 44, of Christ the King Church, 145-39 Farmers Boulevard in Springfield Gardens, suffered a split lip from a punch in the mouth, the police said.
His assailant fled.


Tejas Power Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Critic's Notebook; Early Capra, When He Had An Edge
FOR many people, Frank Capra will always be Santa Claus, the Easter Bunny and Clarence the Angel rolled into one, the director who can make grown men cry at "It's a Wonderful Life" and political cynics cheer at "Mr. Smith Goes to Washington." I'm more partial to an earlier Capra scene, in which Barbara Stanwyck jumps off a yacht in the wee morning hours, rows to shore wearing her evening dress, and is chivalrously given a ride by a man who will turn out to be rich (Ralph Graves).
As they drive along the dark road, she says, "Hey, you don't happen to tote a flask, do you?" As if it weren't enough to defy Prohibition in this 1930 film, its title, "Ladies of Leisure," suggests a deeper shade of disreputable conduct.
Stanwyck eventually explains her less than brilliant career: "Well, brother, that's my racket. I'm a party girl."
We're a long way from Bedford Falls here, and some of us say "Thank goodness." As a film, there is plenty wrong with "Ladies of Leisure," including the kind of contrived, goody-goody ending Capra could never resist.
But until the call girl and the rich, artistic hero decide to live happily ever after, this film has a refreshing toughness, a sardonic edge and a sense of grown-up sexuality.
Those qualities are the very opposite of the homespun virtues that dominate his films in the late 1930's and 40's, and cause his work to be described as Capracorn.


4 Guilty in 1988 Robbery
Four men, including a reputed captain in the Lucchese crime family, were found guilty Wednesday night of a conspiracy charge involving the $1.2 million robbery of an armored truck in Brooklyn in 1988.
The jury in Federal District Court in Brooklyn convicted the four of conspiracy to commit the robbery, but acquitted them of larceny and weapons charges.
The defendants were Louis Daidone, identified by the authorities as a Lucchese captain; Raymond Argentina, identified as a Lucchese member, and two associates, Alan Taglianetti and Robert Molinelli.
A fifth man, Mr.
Argentina's brother, Peter, was acquitted.


Sounds Around Town
Jonathan Schwartz, Live
Jonathan Schwartz, Rainbow and Stars, 30 Rockefeller Plaza, (212) 632-5000.
Jonathan Schwartz, the author and cabaret performer who is also New York City's most literate and stimulating disk jockey, is at Rainbow and Stars on Sunday evenings with a live version of his radio show.
Each week the series, which is called "The Music of Time . . . Jonathan Schwartz and Friends," has a different guest.
This Sunday, he will be joined for music and conversation by Michael Feinstein, a performer who matches him in erudition and charm.
Rosemary Clooney, Judy Collins, Maureen McGovern and Mandy Patinkin are among the future guests.
Shows are at 7 and 9:30 P.M.
Admission is $45 a person, which includes dinner.
Sarod Virtuoso
Ustad Ali Akbar Khan with Swapan Chaudhuri, Tully Hall, (212) 875-5050.
Ustad Ali Akbar Khan is considered to be the foremost exponent of the sarod, a 25-string Indian lute known for its lyrical beauty and rhythmic intensity.
He has composed music for a number of award-winning films, including Satyajit Ray's "Devi." In 1967, he founded the Ali Akbar College of Music in California, where he continues to teach.
And in 1990, he became the first Indian musician in the United Sates to be awarded a MacArthur Foundation Fellowship.
Showtime is tonight at 8; tickets are $15 to $40.


Nervous Suburb Joins Police in Silence on Missing Exxon Official
The disappearance of the president of Exxon International, Sidney J. Reso, remained a mystery today and authorities refused to discuss the status of their investigation.
Throughout the day, there was a flurry of activity outside the house of Mr.
Reso, who left for work at 7:30 A.M.
Wednesday but never arrived at his office in Florham Park, a 15-to-20-minute drive from here.
His car was found facing the road at the foot of the 250-foot driveway, the engine idling and the driver's door open.


Art in Review
Renee Green  Pat Hearn Gallery 39 Wooster Street SoHo Through tomorrow
Renee Green's art can be both intriguing and impenetrable, dense with ideas yet visually emaciated.
The three installations in this exhibition tackle the intertwining subjects of racism and colonialism -- an ambitious project -- although unfortunately nothing here is on the level of the artist's impressive debut at the Clocktower three years ago.
Nonetheless, different parts of these pieces are engaging, especially when the artist combines language with oddly fitting sculptural constructions.


MCN Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Women, Insurgency and the Senate
How does a man who has held elective office for nearly 27 years win when women are in and incumbents are out?
That formidable challenge facing Robert Abrams, New York State's Attorney General, illustrates how national trends are shaping the race for the Democratic Senate nomination in New York.
Yet the state's quirky dynamics may also skew the political equation that produced a stunning surge by women in Democratic primaries for the Senate in Illinois and Pennsylvania.


Information Resources Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Companies in New York Are Paying Bills More Swiftly, Data Show
The financial vise that has been gripping many New York City companies may finally be easing, according to recent data collected by Dun &amp; Bradstreet Information Services.
The data provide new evidence that the local economy may be improving, and, surprisingly, at a faster rate than the rest of the nation.
"We're finally seeing some turnaround," said David Kresge, a vice president at the company.
Mr.
Kresge bases his optimism on two measures that are showing improvement: the speed with which companies have been paying their bills and the number of companies that are expected to have credit problems over the next 6 to 12 months.


Clippers and Dodgers Games Postponed Because of Unrest
Growing concern over continued rioting and looting throughout areas of the city forced postponement of tonight's basketball playoff game between the Los Angeles Clippers and the Utah Jazz at the Sports Arena.
The game was rescheduled for Saturday afternoon at a time to be determined.


Hanover Insurance reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Hemlo Gold Mines reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Horsham Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Murray, the New Reliable, Does It Again
The swing can appear tired.
The swing can appear fooled.
When it shows up in the clutch, though, the swing appears incapable of failing.
Eddie Murray, 36 years old but clearly not exhausted of ways to win games, won another game for the Mets last night.
His run-scoring single in the eighth inning rescued the team from the verge of a painful collapse and sent the Mets to a 4-3 victory over the Houston Astros at Shea Stadium and a sweep of their three-game series.


The Road Trips Not Taken: Michael Knows It by Heart
Dan Duquette was not in his office yesterday.
Nor was Dal Maxvill.
Bill Wood wasn't either.
Bill Wood, in fact, was in New York, where the Houston Astros were playing the Mets.
Bill Wood is general manager of the Houston Astros.
Dan Duquette and Dal Maxvill are general managers, too.
Like Wood, they have been on the road with their teams this week.


John Donovan, 63; Wrote Books and Plays
John Donovan, a novelist, playwright and past president of the Children's Book Council, died on Wednesday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 63 years old.
He died of cancer, said Paula Quint, the president of the council.


National Fuel Gas reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Mr. Gasket Co. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Frank C. Brown, 85, Company Consultant
Frank C. Brown, a retired management consultant, died on Tuesday at Stamford Hospital in Stamford, Conn.
He was 85 years old and lived in Stamford.
He died of heart disease, his wife said.


CHRONICLE
SHEENA EASTON, who collapsed on stage at the Wednesday matinee of "Man of La Mancha" at the Marquis Theater, left Roosevelt Hospital yesterday and is recuperating at home.
DENNIS CROWLEY, the publicity agent for the show, said yesterday: "Sheena Easton had vomiting and fainting due to an intestinal disorder. She was released at 1 P.M. today and is resting comfortably at home. Miss Easton is eager to get back to 'Man of La Mancha' and will return to the show as soon as possible."


Toddler, 2 1/2, Is Removed From Home Of a Teacher
A malnourished 2 1/2-year-old toddler, wrapped in seven disposable diapers and unable to speak, was removed by the authorities from a squalid home in Queens on Tuesday after an anonymous tip that the boy had been left alone was telephoned to 911, the police said last night.
A special-education teacher at a public school in Brooklyn who says she is the boy's mother was arrested that night and charged with endangering the welfare of the child, a misdemeanor, the police said.
The woman, Helena Piccininni, 40 years old, was released on her own recognizance and told to report to a court hearing on June 2.
Reached by telephone last night, she declined to comment.


From the Outside but Still Looking in the Money: Arazi Draws No. 18
Some unexpected spice was added to the Kentucky Derby today when Arazi drew the No. 18 post position on the far flanks of a huge field of 19 horses.
But his trainer, Francois Boutin, shrugged and said: "C'est la vie."
The supercolt from France nonetheless was ranked the 6-5 favorite by the oddsmaker at Churchill Downs, who apparently thought along with most other racing people that Arazi's fortunes would not be dimmed by things like post position, traffic jams or the fact that no favorite has won the Derby in 12 years since Spectacular Bid.


Wilbur S. Howell, 87, Professor at Princeton
Wilbur S. Howell, a retired professor of rhetoric and oratory at Princeton University, died on April 20 at the Foothill Acres Nursing Home in Neshanic, N.J.
He was 87 years old and lived in Princeton, N.J.
He died of a stroke, his family said.


Corrections
An article in The Living Section on April 15 about luxurious topless clubs misstated the number of topless bars in the United States aimed at a white-collar clientele.
It is 50 t0 60; the total number of topless bars is 1,100.


Art in Review
Jeff Wall  Marian Goodman Gallery 24 West 57th Street Through May 16
The Canadian artist Jeff Wall seems to be trying to resuscitate history painting, with its emphasis on the stately depiction of morally uplifting themes.
Mr.
Wall's grandiose photographic tableaux, enlarged to mammoth proportions and presented as light boxes that recall the color blowups Kodak used to present in Grand Central Terminal, deal with more or less contemporary topics.


Varco International reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Transatlantic Holdings Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Mobile Telecommunication Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-10  A SHOW OF FORCE IN KABUL  Afghanistan's most powerful guerrilla leader took charge of the security of Kabul after entering the capital overnight with a three-mile-long convoy of military vehicles and an estimated 10,000 fighters.
A1  SCHOLAR AS PRESIDENT  The new interim President of Afghanistan is a mild-mannered, soft-spoken former high school teacher and theology professor, a religious scholar in Islamic jurisprudence from a family of impeccable religious credentials.
A10  COUP IN SIERRA LEONE  Rebel soldiers in Sierra Leone announced that they had set up a new provisional government after overthrowing the President, who was reported to have fled to Guinea.
A10  ANOTHER YUGOSLAV CASUALTY  For many Serbs, the poisoning of Serbia's international image has been deeply painful, worse even than the steep plunge in living standards brought about by the old Yugoslavia's violent disintegration.
A8  AN APPEAL ON AID TO RUSSIA  Secretary of State Baker appealed to Congress that it "absolutely must" move quickly to authorize the Administration's package of aid to Russia, but was told that President Bush would have to take a much more active lobbying role.
A3  SENTENCED TO HANG  A white police captain in South Africa was sentenced to hang for leading a massacre of 11 blacks in 1988, But he may be spared the gallows because the Government has suspended capital punishment.
A3  POWER SYMBOL FOR BURMESE  Daw Aung San Suu Kyi, the Burmese opposition leader who has been under house arrest since 1989, is seen by her supporters as the most important symbol of hope in a nation that most of the outside world still remembers as Burma.
A4  JEWS WHO ARE ANTI-ISRAEL  A small sect of rigorously Orthodox Jews regards the existence of the Israeli state as a violation of divine will and are more anti-Israel than Palestinian leaders.
A6  FEW GAINS IN MIDEAST TALKS  The fifth round of Arab-Israeli peace talks ended with no apparent progress on any substantive issue and no firm indication of when the sides will meet again.
A6  JOURNALISTS ARE ACCUSED  Two Czechoslovak newspapers published a list of 376 journalists who are said to have acted as informers for the secret police during Communist times.
A8  National A12-24  LOS ANGELES ERUPTS  Social order broke down in much of Los Angeles only hours after the acquittal of four white police officers who beat a black motorist, Rodney G. King.
The violence left 14 people dead, hundreds injured and scores of businesses torched or looted.
A1  An attempt to save one store in a sea of violence.
A21  The violence spreads to San Francisco, Atlanta and other cities.
A20  Washington renewed its investigation of the Rodney King case.
A22  Why did the beating trial's jurors decide as they did?
A20  From Boston to Berkeley, fear, anger and astonishment.
A23  Meeting in Atlanta, black police officers protested the verdict.
A22  News coverage was hampered by violence against journalists.
A23  A POLICE FORCE CAUGHT OFF GUARD  The Los Angeles police were slow to react to the violence, even after its scope had become apparent.
A1  HOPES FOR CALM ARE DASHED  The City of Angels endured another day of violence, the smell of acrid smoke in its nostrils and its heart full of fear.
A1  SENATE VOTES CAMPAIGN BILL  The most sweeping campaign finance bill in 18 years cleared Congress and went to the White House, where it faces a certain veto.
A1  A Senate committee voted to save two Seawolf submarines.
A16  THE HOUSE'S CAPITULATION  News analysis: The leaders wanted to look after the House as an institution; the rank-and-file members wanted to look after their careers.
That is the quickest explanation of what happened when the chamber voted Wednesday night to comply with a sweeping subpoena for House bank records.
A1  NAVY FINDINGS ON SEX ASSAULT  A Navy investigation into sexual abuse at a convention of aviators last September found that dozens of women, and not just five or so, were assaulted there.
But the investigators have been able to identify only two suspects, a result of many officers' refusal to cooperate.
A14  U.S.
UNDERTAKES TB PROGRAM  The Government announced a plan to combat the spread of a deadly form of tuberculosis, including stepping up efforts to make sure patients take their medication.
A12  NEW FINDING ON OZONE HOLE  Scientists said that earlier fears notwithstanding, an ozone hole did not form over the Arctic this winter.
But they said pollutants would cause the threat of such a hole to recur each year.
A12  THE PRESS AND THE CAMPAIGN  The bitter Presidential race pictured this year on television has been blamed for ills ranging from Governor Clinton's negative ratings to the scant primary turnout in most states.
But it could be the news media that sustain the most damage if the fall campaign turns out to be another overwhelmingly negative race.
A18  Law Page B18  The plan to clean up the Everglades.
At the Bar  Metropolitan Digest, B1 Business Digest, D1 Sports B9-15  Baseball: Mets stop Astros.
B9  Basketball: Cavaliers eliminate Nets.
B9  Knicks beating Pistons at their own game.
B12  Clippers-Jazz playoff game postponed.
B12  Column: Vecsey on desperation.
B9  Hockey: Rangers look to Messier.
B9  Devils know victory will bring recognition.
B9  Horse Racing: Arazi draws No. 18.
B15  Olympics: Shooters challenge governing body.
B13  Obituaries B8  Mae Clarke, an actress.
Weekend C1-35  South Street Seaport at 25.
C1  The early Capra.
C1  Dance: France's future stars.
C5  Restaurants C26  Art: The Art Market C1  Word and Image: Short stories by Patricia Lear.
C33  Editorials/Op-Ed A34-35  Editorials A34  The other jury.
Helping Russia lift.
Mary Cantwell: Buffalo.
Letters A34  A. M. Rosenthal: Glad, not grateful.
A35  Leslie H. Gelb: The right beats up soul mates.
A35  Terry McMillan: This is America.
A35  Jon O. Newman: How to protect other Rodney Kings.
A35


Wind Out of Conner's Sails
The brisk winds that Dennis Conner has managed to avoid for most of the America's Cup defense finals kicked in today with a vengeance.
A 11- to 14-knot westerly breeze and rolling seas gave Bill Koch's boat, America , the advantage it has waited for in these 7-of-13-race trials.
America  beat Stars &amp; Stripes by 1 minute 43 seconds.
The victory gave America
a 6-4 lead in the series; Koch needs to win only one more race to clinch the right to defend the America's Cup against the international challenger in the series beginning May 9.


Art in Review
Cameron Shaw  John Gibson Gallery 568 Broadway (at Prince Street) SoHo Through Monday
Nostalgia, however tempered by irony, is a strong factor in the work of many young artists today.
It is apparent not only in the popularity of images drawn from childhood, but also in art that recycles cultural artifacts of yesteryear to recapture and critique the past.


Liberty Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Weldwood of Canada reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Imperial Chemeical Industries reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Review/Art; Looking at the Big Picture In 2 Julian Schnabel Series
In this recessionary time, leave it to Julian Schnabel to make paintings that are larger (16 feet square) and more expensive ($225,000) than many New York City studio apartments.
Mr.
Schnabel's ambition and ego continue to outstrip his ability to paint.
But there's something impressive about his sheer audacity, and just enough talent in him to make it impossible to dismiss his work out of hand.
One wants to ignore it but can't.
A suite of four of these oversize paintings, titled "The End of the Summer," can be seen at the Pace Gallery in SoHo.
At Pace's 57th Street gallery are paintings from another suite called "Olatz," which, at 8 by 10 feet apiece, seem modest only by comparison.
Nobody can accuse Mr.
Schnabel of genuine modesty.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  H.I.V. ON THE RISE AMONG BLACK WOMEN
The rate of H.I.V. infection has risen among black women having babies in New York City, while it has dropped sharply among white and Hispanic mothers, the State Health Department said.
The finding prompted a health official to warn that unless AIDS education efforts among blacks are more successful, "AIDS in future generations may be primarily a disease of black people." B3.
SIGNS OF AN ECONOMIC TURNAROUND
The financial vise that has been gripping many New York City companies may finally be easing, according to recent data collected by Dun &amp; Bradstreet Information Services.
The data provide new evidence that the local economy may be improving, and, surprisingly, at a faster rate than the rest of the nation.
B3.
CUOMO'S MAN FROM LIMERICK


Bally Gaming International reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


TakeCare Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


JWP Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Livery-Cab Drivers Stress Protection to Avert Killings
Angered and frightened by the killings of livery-cab drivers in the last several months, a group of the industry's representatives yesterday urged the New York City Police Department to treat the incidents as an "all-out emergency." They also called upon Police Commissioner Lee P. Brown to revive the use of undercover officers to confront the problem.
Already reeling from the shooting deaths of three drivers in the last 10 days, the industry received another blow early yesterday when a driver was stabbed to death in Harlem.


Assembly Passes Bills Supporting Executions
By overwhelming margins, the New Jersey Assembly adopted a package of bills today to make it more difficult for state courts to overturn death sentences, including a proposed amendment to the State Constitution specifically declaring that the death penalty is not cruel and unusual punishment.
Arguing in favor of the bills, Assembly Speaker Garabed (Chuck) Haytaian said that the New Jersey Supreme Court "has taken the death-penalty statute and turned it into a meaningless piece of paper" since the state enacted the statute in 1982 and the court upheld it as constitutional in 1987.


Kirkaldy Is Out of Intensive Care
WILFRED KIRKALDY, a West Virginia player who was seriously hurt in a car wreck in Maryland on April 19, has been moved out of the intensive care unit at a Cumberland, Md., hospital.
Kirkaldy and a teammate, LAWRENCE POLLARD, who was moved out of intensive care on Monday, were hurt while returning to school from their homes in Brooklyn after Easter vacation.


Hockey: Loser of the Tunnel Series May Head Straight for the Bridge; Devils Know Victory Means Recognition
The Devils believe that mental toughness will be the biggest factor in the deciding game of their playoff series with the Rangers and they are convinced that they have more of it than their rivals.
From Coach Tom McVie to the last player on the fourth line, the Devils said today that discipline and the ability to stay out of the penalty box would be the two key factors in the deciding game between the rivals.


At the Movies
Can the dead walk?
Sure.
Just ask Robert Klane.
Mr.
Klane who wrote the popular 1989 comedy "Weekend at Bernie's," in which a pair of yuppies, played by Andrew McCarthy and Jonathan Silverman, spend a summer weekend at a lavish beach house trying to convince various people that the tanned boss who has invited them isn't really dead.


Reliance Financial Services Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


American Educational Products reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Gulf Canada Resources reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Corvas International reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Hockey: Loser of the Tunnel Series May Head Straight for the Bridge; Rangers Hope Messier Will Solve Their Hex
This has been the plan since October, when bodies were exchanged and Stanley Cup hopes were hatched.
There would be a Game 7, sometime, somewhere, and Mark Messier would win that game for the Rangers.
Game 7 has arrived early, set for Friday night at Madison Square Garden against the Devils in the Patrick Division semifinals.
Standing at his locker today after a brief team meeting here, the team captain said he accepted the burden that comes with the reputation.


Quayle, on New York Trip, Visits Hospitalized Children


Goodyear Canada reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Ecolab Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Ameriscribe Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


The Art Market; Auction Houses Cutting Prices To Lure Buyers
TO judge this spring's contemporary-art auctions by their catalogue's covers, literally, is to conclude that times are good.
And they are, for buyers.
But for sellers and auction houses, the story is not so rosy.
Debt, death and divorce, the three D's of the auction business, keep the art market going.
And the adage will be underscored by this season's two weeks of auctions at Sotheby's and Christie's in New York, which begin on Tuesday.
And starting this weekend, the works to be sold, over 3,000 paintings, drawings and sculptures by such artists as Picasso and Polke, Renoir and Warhol, valued at more than $325 million, will go on public view at the two houses.


Review/Art; Contemporary Works From an Old Tradition
The National Academy of Design's 167th Annual Exhibition of contemporary art includes more than 300 artists, each represented by a single work.
It is a show as interesting, in some ways, for what it is not as for what it is.
It is not, for example, a reflection of the commercial activity of the preceding season or two, as the Whitney Biennial has often seemed to be.
Few of the artists will be familiar to even the most diligent habitue of the New York gallery scene.
Nor is it an index of mainstream styles.
Pop, Minimalism, Conceptualism, not to mention more recent developments, have yet to penetrate the academy's walls.
It is, rather, a gathering of artists working in styles and with themes that would not have felt too far out of place when the academy's handsome Fifth Avenue home was built at the turn of the century.
There are some well-respected names in this year's show, most of them from an older generation of artists.
Leatrice Rose is represented by a still life of metallic containers; John Heliker offers a shadowy male portrait; Anne Poor a characteristically washy tableau of dematerializing figures; Paul Cadmus a colored-chalk-on-black-paper drawing of a nude man reflected in a mirror.
There is also a lovely abstract work titled "Torso" by Andrew Forge, its all-over Pointillist pattern of pink and blue dots both obscuring and revealing a form underneath.


Broadcast International Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Tax Judge Lowers Assessment Of Undeveloped Wetlands Tract
In a decision that could cost municipalities millions in revenue, a state tax court has changed the way New Jersey's wetlands may be taxed.
In a case involving an undeveloped 240-acre tract of wetlands in East Rutherford, Judge David E. Crabtree ruled Tuesday that, because Federal and state regulations restrict the development of wetlands, the tract must be taxed as undevelopable land, not on the basis of its potential commercial value.
A lawyer in the case said the tract, which is near Giants Stadium, was the most valuable undeveloped real estate in New Jersey.


Rebate to Survive, Trenton Leader Says
The Republican Assembly Speaker, Garabed (Chuck) Haytaian, gave his assurances today that New Jersey's homestead rebate program would not be eliminated altogether, but would assist at least the elderly and disabled.
"Is it going to be abolished? Absolutely no," Mr.
Haytaian said at a press briefing today.
"Is it going to be reformed? Yes."
He offered no details about the changes the Republicans plan to make in the program, which funneled $710 million to homeowners and renters this year in amounts up to $500.


Instron Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 28


Changes Sought in Mariner Group
Baseball's ownership committee decided yesterday to ask the Japanese-led group seeking to buy the Seattle Mariners to make additional changes in its proposal.
"It's a restructured deal, but I don't want to get into it," Fred Kuhlmann of the St.
Louis Cardinals, the chairman of the 10-member ownership committee, said in Chicago.


Ameriwood Industries International Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


LAC Minerals reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Instrument Systems reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Dye to Quit as Auburn Athletic Director
PAT DYE, the Auburn football coach, said he was stepping down as athletic director, but not, he insisted, because of allegations of widespread rules violations brought by a former player, ERIC RAMSEY.


H.I.V. Incidence Rises Among Black Mothers
In another sign of the devastating effects of AIDS on blacks, New York State health officials released new evidence yesterday that the rate of H.I.V. infection has risen among black women having babies in New York City since 1988, while it has dropped among white and Hispanic mothers.
The Department of Health detected these trends by testing the one million babies born statewide since 1988 for the antibody to H.I.V., the virus that causes AIDS.
The presence of the antibody in babies is evidence that their mothers are infected.
The babies may or may not carry the virus.


Review/Film; Obsessions With Art And Money
Most film makers pretend to be anonymous.
Even when their methods and concerns are familiar, they hide behind or within the events and the characters on the screen.
Not Jon Jost, long identified with the American avant-garde.
His new work, "All the Vermeers in New York," opens today at the Cinema Village 12th Street.
Although "All the Vermeers in New York" is not exactly obscure, and although it proceeds in the chronological order of a conventional narrative film, Mr.
Jost is very much its most important character.
He seems to talk directly to the audience as if he were standing just outside the film frame.
He doesn't hector the audience; he nudges it.
He tweaks its sensibilities by interrupting expectations that would be slavishly fulfilled in any other movie.
Sometimes the effect is provocative and funny.
At other times it's like being locked in a room with a raconteur who won't shut up, and whose asides are not always as illuminating as they are intended to be.


Ryland Group reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Nets a House Afire, but the Wrong Kind
With Chris Morris and Drazen Petrovic each scoring 4 points in an 8-0 run in the first quarter and the Nets taking a 36-16 lead, it looked like New Jersey was on its way to squaring its series with the Cleveland Cavaliers last night at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.
But there was no harmony in the fourth quarter between Morris and Petrovic.
In a scene that typified the Nets' tumultuous season, Morris and Petrovic quarreled on the court as the Nets tried to hold off the Cavaliers.


Admar Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Omnicom Group reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


D.O.C. Optics reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Allied Products reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Fidelity National Financial reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Review/Theater; A Flock of Warnings
In Mac Wellman's apocalyptic vision, civilization is facing a Love Canal of the mind and body.
The view is as urgent as it is fearful.
It is an ecological nightmare, as weather reports from past centuries become auguries of approaching climatic catastrophe.
No matter where we are, "we are downwind of something peculiar." Mr.
Wellman's scathing new comedy, "A Murder of Crows" (at Primary Stages), is a red alert, to be ignored at one's peril.
Acid rain is coming, and the playwright is our caustic commentator and meteorologist.
The medium for his warning is a Middle-American mire.
The people in this anonymous small town have moved past hard times to desperate days.
As one character says, with full symbolism intended, "It's lucky the shallow end is near the beach." Otherwise everyone would drown in sludge.


RIOTS IN LOS ANGELES: The Blue Line; Surprised, Police React Slowly as Violence Spreads
The Los Angeles Police, apparently caught off guard by the violent reaction to the acquittal of four white officers in the beating of a black motorist, were slow to react, even after the scope of the anarchy sweeping the city had become apparent.
As unruly demonstrators threatened to invade police headquarters downtown early Wednesday evening, Chief of Police Daryl F. Gates was attending an event in the affluent Brentwood area, about 11 miles away, to raise money to fight a proposal on the June ballot to limit the term of the police chief.
Matthew Hunt, the deputy chief in charge of the affected area, was attending a community meeting about 6 miles from the police command center.


Hein-Werner Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 28


North American Biologicals Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Review/Opera; Stage Pictures of a Love Triangle
All through the New York premiere of Frederick Delius's opera "Fennimore and Gerda," presented by the Juilliard Opera Center on Wednesday night at the Juilliard Theater, I couldn't get greeting cards out of my mind; not the ones with coy messages or mocking wit, but those with elaborate gauzy photographs of lilacs in spring, or white cumulus clouds in the summer sky.
Open the card, and a sentimental poem offers testimony to the powers of love.
Throughout this ill-fated 90-minute work (which has had only a scattered handful of productions since it was composed in 1909), similar images -- some still, some on film -- appeared on a scrim behind which the opera's action took place.
Each image had some connection with the drama, and each had a very simple testimonial message.
Storm clouds meant ominous goings-on; autumn leaves meant melancholy; flowers meant youth; a rainbow meant hope.


Reviews/Film; Cabbies and Their Fares, As Seen by Jim Jarmusch
"Night on Earth" was shown as part of last year's New York Film Festival.
Following are excerpts
from Vincent Canby's review, which appeared in The New York Times on Oct. 4, 1991.
The film, which is partly in English and has
English subtitles in three
foreign
segments,
opens today in Manhattan.
The first image in "Night on Earth," Jim Jarmusch's delirious new comedy, is important: that of universal darkness in the center of which is a rotating sphere of brilliant blue overlaid by wisps of white.


Italy Ends Challenger Series Bid By Kiwis
After four months of racing on the water and four days of acrimony on shore, Il Moro di Venezia of Italy today won the right to challenge for the America's Cup.
The crew defeated Michael Fay's New Zealand team today by 1 minute 33 seconds in the final race of the challengers' trials.
It was a match sailed in the kind of wind that usually favors the Kiwis -- an 11-to-14-knot sea breeze.
But New Zealand could not turn around Italy's resurgence, a comeback that grew off a 1-4 deficit and a bowsprit controversy last Saturday.


TV Sports Chrysler and ABC Are Riding on Arazi's Back
Arazi had better win tomorrow's Kentucky Derby.
His owners are counting on the little superhorse.
So is ABC, which hopes the 90-minute Arazi Show will pull the Derby out of a two-year, 28 percent dip that lowered the ratings to 8.3 last year.
And so is Chrysler, which has sponsored the Triple Crown Challenge since 1987 and wants to give away $5 million to the horse that wins the Derby, the Preakness Stakes and the Belmont Stakes.
Arazi is the likeliest suspect.


Overmatched Nets Can Only Turn Out the Lights
When the Cleveland Cavaliers had finished putting the New Jersey Nets in their place, out of the playoffs after one four-game round, an appropriate epitaph for the Nets was written by Coach Bill Fitch.
"No one can say this team didn't get better -- in spite of itself," said Fitch, who may have finished a three-year run tonight as coach of the Nets.


Restaurants
La Reserve
It may be a journalistic cliche, but one could indeed say that La Reserve is an oasis of gentility along the free-flowing human stream of Fifth Avenue, near Rockefeller Center.
Inside the restaurant's dining room all is hushed and sumptuous.
The oasis imagery derives from colorful wall-to-wall murals of a marshy wildlife reserve.
Nothing here ruffles that tranquil setting.
Even the reserved owner, Jean-Louis Missud, speaks in the sotto voce of a librarian so that you have to lean right next to him to carry on a conversation.


Corrections
An article in Business Day on April 16 about import barriers misidentified the motorcycle that Marlon Brando rode in the movie "The Wild One." It was a Triumph.


Church &amp; Dwight Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 27


Review/Film; It All Goes Downhill Going Downhill
After about 80 minutes, "K2," Franc Roddam's screen version of Patrick Meyers's 1983 Broadway play, arrives at the point at which the play starts: Taylor and Harold, coming down from a successful ascent of K2, the world's second highest peak, have a nearly fatal accident.
They become marooned on a mountain ledge, halfway between real life and life ever after, in a situation that tests their loyalty to each other, their skills as mountain climbers and their commitment to existence.
The two-man play, which runs about 95 minutes, is something of a tour de force, a densely packed, hair-raising drama in which character is revealed through extraordinary event.
The movie is a windy big-screen adventure that doesn't get under way even when vestiges of the play do appear.
There seems to be very little of the play left.


CHRONICLE
The day the 1967 Arab-Israeli war began, Gen.
UZI NARKISS telephoned his friend TEDDY KOLLEK, then the Mayor of West Jerusalem, and said: "Teddy, the war has begun with Egypt, and when it is over you will be the Mayor of a unified Jerusalem."
"I don't understand why I said that," General Narkiss, commander of the Israeli armed forces that won control of East Jerusalem, said the other day.


Cambridge Biotech Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


ICM Property Investors Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


TSI Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31





The Spoken Word
DRAMATIC READING AND MUSIC, New York Society for Ethical Culture, 2 West 64th Street, Manhattan.
A reading by the actor Danny Glover from the works of Langston Hughes, with readings by others and a performance by the jazz saxophonist Henry Threadgill.
Sunday at 5 P.M.
Sponsored by the Frederick Douglass Creative Arts Center.
Admission: $15.
Information: (212) 944-9870.
SYMPOSIUM, Symphony Space, 2537 Broadway, at 95th Street.
A one-day symposium, "500 Years: Rethinking the Spanish-Speaking Caribbean," which will explore the histories and cultures of Cuba, Puerto Rico and the Dominican Republic, with educators from New York City, New Jersey and Florida.
Tomorrow, 9 A.M. to 4:30 P.M.
Sponsored by the New York Council for the Humanities.
Free.
Information: (212) 233-1131.
READING, Judith's Room, 681 Washington Street, Manhattan.
Readings by the writers Andrea Dworkin, Amber C. Sumrall, Dana Taylor and others.
Sunday at 3 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 727-7330.


UAL Corp. (X) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Coastal Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


General Re Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


St. Lawrence Cement reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Thinking Ahead to Life's Sad Tests
THE 11:19 bell rings at Paramus Catholic High School.
The door to Room 205 closes.
Sister Elizabeth presides.
The 24 girls are attentive; their uniform skirts are properly pleated, white blouses tucked in, mostly.
But this is not a required physics class, not a required algebra class, not a required English class.
This is a required class about life -- and death.


Future Now Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Quaker State Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Sounds Around Town
Max Roach Quartet
Max Roach, Village Vanguard, 178 Seventh Avenue South, at Perry Street, Manhattan, (212) 255-4037.
Max Roach will be leading his quartet, featuring the trumpeter Cecil Bridgwater and the saxophonist Odean Pope, this weekend.
The date's a chance to hear Mr.
Roach at close range, where every note of his drum kit, from the muffled thump of his bass drum to the frying-oil sound of his ride cymbal, has resonance.
Mr.
Roach is one of jazz's great figures: his sense of swing is distinct, his contribution to jazz's vocabulary immense.
Shows tonight and tommorow are at 9:30, 11:30 P.M. and 1 A.M.; on Sunday there is no third set.
There is a $20 cover charge and a $10 minimum.
Flanagan at the Keyboard
Tommy Flanagan, Sweet Basil, 88 Seventh Avenue South, above Bleecker Street, Manhattan, (212) 242-1785.
Part of jazz's appeal can be its ease, the way complicated conceits of the imagination are translated into music.
The pianist Tommy Flanagan does it better than almost anybody, his ideas springing off the keyboard.
And Mr.
Flanagan's sets are filled with pieces by Thad Jones, Thelonious Monk and Bud Powell, standards in the jazz world.
Sets tonight and tomorrow are at 10 P.M., midnight and 1:30 A.M.; there is no third set on Sunday night.
The cover is $15, and there is a $6 minimum.


Alliance Capital Management L.P.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Reliance Insurance Co. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


CHRONICLE
The show will go on in a different way on Wednesday, when GWEN VERDON, the dancer and actress, will present the memorabilia and papers of her late husband, Bob Fosse, to the Library of Congress.
Mr.
Fosse, the choreographer and director, was known for works like "The Pajama Game," "Damn Yankees," "Sweet Charity" and "Cabaret." Miss Verdon is also donating her own papers.
"I collected everything," she said.
"Early TV scripts, even when there were 5 or 10 scripts for each musical; letters concerning projects; personal notes, including ones he wrote to himself saying, 'Hang in there Bob; only two weeks to go.' I have scripts of my own that have grocery lists on the back sides."


Air Express International reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Tembec Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Beneficial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Kinnard Investments reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


TNP Enterprises reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Plan Reduces Public Areas For a Tower
The public areas at the base of the former A.T.&amp;T. headquarters on Madison Avenue, which were built as part of a deal to gain extra office space above them, would be sharply reduced and radically altered under a plan by Sony USA, which is moving into the mid-Manhattan tower this year.
Under the plan, which requires approval by the City Planning Commission, the cavernous open-air public arcade along the avenue, with its 60-foot-high granite columns, movable chairs and wooden planters, would be enclosed and turned into shops.


Yo La Tengo Between Two Stages
When Yo La Tengo got started in 1984, it played level-headed, guitar-driven songs that leaned toward folk-rock.
Gradually, however, a more fearsome side emerged: howling, squealing, grinding, feedback-edged guitar solos played by Ira Kaplan, the band's main songwriter and singer.
Eight years along, Yo La Tengo can move from finely observed songs about domestic life, sometimes accompanied only on acoustic guitar, to tornadoes of existential rage like the new "Mushroom Cloud of Hiss" or "Some Kinda Fatigue," in which Mr.
Kaplan sings, "I know it's out there/ one good reason/but I haven't found it yet."
"I'm a little more daring than I once was -- or shameless, maybe," Mr.
Kaplan said by telephone from Champaign, Ill., where the band was on a tour that winds up tomorrow night at the Knitting Factory.


Review/Art; From New York Painters, Work That Takes Time
"Slow Art: Painting in New York Now" is a big, easygoing show that looks pretty good on first encounter but gets worse the more you think about it.
Ambitious in size, it fills nearly 20 big galleries at the P.S. 1 Museum in Long Island City, Queens, with canvases by more than 100 New York City artists, which makes it the biggest contemporary painting show here in many years.
It is also exceedingly well timed, coming at the end of a season in which the so-called "return" of painting has been a hot topic and the subject of several gallery shows and panel discussions.
The title suggests that painting is a slow, contemplative tradition, and that the show will provide an antidote to those supposedly speedier art forms -- sculpture, photography and Conceptualism -- which have dominated the New York scene for the past few seasons.
It has been organized by Alanna Heiss, the founding director of P.S. 1, and the painters she has chosen span several generations, numerous styles and nearly every degree of reputation, from world-famous artists like Jasper Johns and Roy Lichtenstein to virtual unknowns, both old and young.


Democrat Won't Give Up on Commuter Tax Issue
A decision by Senate Republicans to call off a threatened commuter tax war with New York City has touched off a fight with a Democratic state senator who wants to proceed with a retaliatory tax.
"Why should New Jersey pull its punch now?" said Senator Robert Menendez, a Democrat whose Hudson County district lies in the shadow of Manhattan's skyline.
"We shouldn't let our guard down."


Over, Under and All Around Judy Garland's Rainbow
There it is, under glass: Judy Garland's actual makeup case from 1967, complete with rat-tailed teasing comb and cocktail napkin from the St.
Moritz.
And there on the wall is an autographed picture she signed for a Munchkin in "The Wizard of Oz." Another corner boasts the 1938 legal agreement whereby Garland agreed to promote Maxwell House coffee by saying the words "Never before have I tasted in any coffee such mellow flavor, such real richness as I enjoy in the new Radiant Roast Maxwell House. . . . Yes, Sir! Here's the kind of drip coffee men really like."
And here's the kind of exhibition Garland's most ardent fans should really like.
But from other standpoints, it appears to be slightly over the rainbow, or at least over the top.
Currently in a gallery off the Amsterdam Avenue entrance to the New York Public Library at Lincoln Center, this one-room show -- which commemorate's the star's birth 70 years ago -- is relatively limited but nonetheless intense, especially in its display of beautifully ornate Garland costumes accompanied by movie stills of the actress in these same clothes.
The mannequins, like the faceless, wigless figure modeling the wedding dress from "The Harvey Girls," have none of the Garland panache, but the glamour lingers on.


IHOP Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Safety Net Savior
In his two-story house in one of Albany's most comfortable suburbs, Michael J. Dowling keeps a scale model of the thatch-roofed cottage that was his boyhood home in Limerick, Ireland.
He built the model several years ago as a reminder of humble beginnings.
A large cooking fireplace provided the only heat in the three-room house, and a ditch in the yard served as the toilet.
At night, rats would crawl out of the thatch to warm themselves by the embers.
When it rained, water would seep through the thick mud walls, forming inch-deep puddles on the dirt floor.


House Votes Lean Budget But Short of Weicker Plan
Connecticut's House of Representatives tonight approved a budget that imposes deep cuts in welfare, education aid to municipalities and other social programs, but that stops short on many of the more ambitious spending overhauls proposed by Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr.
The vote was 85 to 66.
Majority Democrats said that the compromises were a key to passing a budget at all, and that cutting any more would have ravaged the poor and the already troubled cities that would have had to pick up the burden.
Republicans, who supported Mr.
Weicker's initial proposal, called the revised budget a betrayal.


Mattingly's Maladies Add to Lineup Muddle
Someday soon, the Yankees will have a healthy bunch of players.
Danny Tartabull, Mike Gallego, Pat Kelly and Don Mattingly, the latest casualty, will all be ready to play.
At least the Yankees think so.
Mattingly, who missed Wednesday night's game, could return as early as tomorrow.
The Yankees said Mattingly has tendinitis in the little finger on his right hand, and Mattingly said doctors told him he has carpal tunnel syndrome, a nerve disorder, in his fingers.
He will be examined by a hand specialist today.
The ailment has bothered Mattingly since the spring, and his expectations of playing this weekend could be optimistic.


Quotation of the Day
"I'm worried about fires. I'm worried about everything. I want my inventory to be saved." -- MIA KIM, owner of a small clothing store in Los Angeles, which she was hastily closing.  [ A21:4 ]


Cognitronics Corp.(X) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Judge's Order Delays a Vote On Drivers' Pact With Times
A Federal judge has issued a temporary restraining order delaying a ratification vote by newspaper delivery truck drivers on contracts involving The New York Times and several newspaper wholesale operations.
The vote had been scheduled for yesterday.
Some of the contracts, which extend to the year 2000 and beyond, have been strongly opposed by some union members.
They represent significant concessions in work rules and overtime in exchange for enhanced severance and lifetime job security for members of the Newspaper and Mail Deliverers' Union of New York and Vicinity.


Diner's Journal
Halcyon
Halcyon, the no-expense-spared luxury dining room at the Rihga Royal Hotel on West 54th Street in Manhattan, has been vying to enter the top ranks of New York City dining since it opened two years ago.
A recent dinner for four demonstrates, however, that it barely qualifies for boot-camp graduation.
And food is not the major problem.


No Brawlers Are Suspended
On the morning after, there were no suspensions, and no apologies.
After a brief review, the National Hockey League announced today that there would be automatic $25,000 team fines for both the Rangers and Devils but no suspensions resulting from the game-ending brawl on Wednesday night at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.


Corrections
A brief article by The Associated Press in Business Day yesterday about the Eastman Kodak Company's earnings referred incorrectly to the company's inclusion of two extra months of sales revenue in its first-quarter earnings report.
The inclusion was part of a "routine accounting adjustment," according to a company spokesman.


Cutler in Contempt Case for Gotti Remarks
John Gotti's longtime lawyer, Bruce Cutler, has been ordered to appear in court on May 15 to face an unusual charge of criminal contempt for public comments that he made before the recent Gotti trial.
Judge I. Leo Glasser, who conducted Mr.
Gotti's racketeering-murder case, ordered Mr.
Cutler to show why he should not be put on trial for criminal contempt in Federal District Court in Brooklyn.
The order, signed on Monday and made public yesterday, provides for a non-jury trial of Mr.
Cutler.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League
CLEVELAND INDIANS -- Purchased the contract of Craig Worthington, third baseman, from Colorado Springs of the Pacific Coast League.
Optioned Jesse Levis, catcher, to Colorado Springs of the Pacific Coast League.


TVWeekend; Waldo Salt, From Blacklist to Spotlight
Was the screenwriter Waldo Salt, who died in 1987, an American master?
He must have been, because he is the subject of tonight's offering from "American Masters," at 9 on Channel 13.
"Waldo Salt: A Screenwriter's Journey" is worth watching for the scenes from "Midnight Cowboy," which is up there with Salt's few memorable works, and for the recollections of the director John Schlesinger, the actor Jon Voight and Mr.
Salt himself about his part in turning James Leo Herlihy's novel into an Academy Award-winning movie.


Corrections
An entry in the Executive Changes listing in some editions of Business Day yesterday misstated the new position of Bruce T. Karpas at Request Television, New York.
He was named president of the company, not chief executive as well.


Selling in Japan, With Japan's Help
Takashi Tanji knows a thing or two about exports.
As a child in Japan during the 1950's, he recalled, the essence of elementary-school economics was that Japan must export to survive.
After graduating from college, he joined the Kanematsu Corporation, a big trading house, where he spent most of the next 25 years selling Japanese steel abroad.
For the foot soldiers in Japan's export-led economic miracle, like Mr.
Tanji, the work was often hard and humbling.
He remembers trying to sell steel pipe to oil-patch suppliers in Texas and Louisiana in the 1970's, staying in cheap hotels, scouring the Yellow Pages for prospective customers, and making cold calls with decidedly mixed results.


Nipsco Industries reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Electrocom Automation Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Critic's Choice/Music; Premieres Of 2 Works
In 1986, an unusual recording turned up on the Erato label, a soundtrack for "Police," a French film starring Gerard Depardieu.
In the United States, the film disappeared with hardly a ripple.
But the recording excited considerable interest.
It included only one work, the Symphony No. 3 by Henryk Mikolaj Gorecki.
Mr.
Gorecki (pronounced go-RETZ-kee), a Polish composer born in 1933, was virtually unknown here.
But his symphony -- a compelling amalgam of neo-Romantic lushness, open tonality with a bitter, modal edge and a gradual way of unfolding that seemed an expansion of Minimalist techniques -- sent both listeners and performers searching for more of his work.


Clark Tippet Memorial
American Ballet Theater will present a memorial service for Clark Tippet, the choreographer and dancer, at 11 A.M. today at the Joyce Theater, 175 Eighth Avenue, at 19th Street.
The service, which is free and open to the public, will include excerpts from Mr.
Tippet's ballets performed by Kevin McKenzie and other members of Ballet Theater and "The Dying Swan" performed by Martine van Hamel.
Mr.
Tippet died on Jan. 28 at age 37.
Information: 477-3030.


A Look at France's Future Etoiles
One of the great surprises of the 1988 dance season was the triumphant success of the Paris Opera Ballet school when it performed in New York City at the Juilliard School.
Critics raved about the young dancers' discipline and freshness.
Balletomanes flocked to the school's programs of little-known French ballets.
Even more popular was a daylong exhibition of the Opera Ballet schooling.
The petits rats, as the children have been called for more than a hundred years, are back again this weekend, starting today at 10 A.M. with seven hours of onstage ballet class by the young dancers, aged 10 to 18, at City Center (131 West 55th Street in Manhattan).
Three performances will follow, tomorrow at 2 and 8 P.M. and Sunday at 1, also at City Center.
The program will be seldom-seen ballets created by former company stars: "Le Prisonnier du Caucase," by Georges Skibine, "Entre Deux Rondes," by Serge Lifar, and "Arcades," by Attilio Labis.


Bic's Boys Pull Pranks, Fall in Love and Finally Sing
"Who Shot Patakango?" means to be a fond look back to what it was like to be in the senior class at Alexander Hamilton Vocational School in Brooklyn in 1957.
Yet the film, the first feature by Robert and Halle Brooks, a husband-and-wife team, is so amateurishly conceived that it's difficult even to look at the screen.
The Brookses have made documentaries, industrial films and commercials, which are very different from fiction.
"Who Shot Patakango?" is efficiently if antiseptically photographed, but the Brookses don't have a clue about how to write characters and shape a screenplay.


Hot Air, Coming Straight From Horse's Mouth
In the sweet hush of the drowsy afternoon, the French wonderhorse turned in his stall and gave me a cockeyed glance.
Emboldened, I said, "So, uh, nescafe anglay?"
Arazi snorted. "That'd be an upset. I was born here."


Yanks Give Perez Something to Savor
Melido Perez might have been thinking about bringing silverware and napkins to the mound.
Or he could have made noises like a stomach growling so his teammates would get the hint: Perez was starving for runs.
Before last night, the Yankees had scored four runs while Perez was on the mound in his last three starts.
He allowed five earned runs in 21 innings during that span and had two losses and a no-decision.
Hungry?
Definitely.


Arts Endowment Panel Recommends Grants
The National Endowment for the Arts advisory council, meeting today for the first time with the new acting chairman of the endowment, approved recommendations for 1,122 grants totaling $66.1 million to artists and organizations throughout the country.
The grants ranged from $12,200 for the Mills College Art Gallery in Oakland, Calif., to more than $200,000 to the American Repertory Theater in Cambridge, Mass.


A Missed Chance to Rule the Roost
Eliminating the Rangers in a playoff series to earn respectability in the metropolitan area was one of the reasons John McMullen paid $33 million 10 years ago to bring the Devils to his native state.
The Devils did engage the Rangers in a playoff series for the first time, but last night they suffered a severe setback in their drive to draw recognition and greater fan support in the area.


RIOTS IN LOS ANGELES: Eruption; Some Violence On the Streets of New York
Scattered violence erupted in New York City last night as roaming crowds leaving Rodney G. King protest rallies attacked two truck drivers in Harlem, stormed into Madison Square Garden in midtown Manhattan and shattered scores of windows on a bottle-hurling march through Greenwich Village.
There was also trouble in New Rochelle.
About 20 people were injured, two seriously, and 89 were arrested on disorderly conduct and other charges during the day, more than 60 of them last night as the police dispersed a throng of 1,000 protesters at Tompkins Square Park on the Lower East Side.


Ousted Time Warner Officer Gets a Platinum Parachute
Ousted as president and co-chief executive of Time Warner Inc. in February because of poor performance, N. J. Nicholas Jr. is getting a parting deal from the company that almost makes losing one's job an enviable proposition.
"It's a very generous amount, and probably one of the largest that we have seen," said Joseph E. Bachelder, a New York lawyer who specializes in senior management compensation matters.


An Upset in Kentucky Oaks
Two of the country's star fillies were outrun today when the long shot Luv Me Luv Me Not survived a tight photo finish to win the 118th Kentucky Oaks, the premiere race for 3- year-old fillies at Churchill Downs.
Luv Me Luv Me Not, owned by Philip Maas and trained by Glenn Wismer, ran second under Fabio Arguello Jr. for half a mile, then took the lead and held it against a closing rush by the two favorites: Pleasant Stage, who won the Breeders' Cup Juvenile Fillies last November and finished half a length back today, and Prospectors Delite, the 1-2 favorite, who finished half a length farther back in third.
It was the first defeat in six races for Prospectors Delite, widely ranked as the best 3-year-old filly in the country.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY A CITY GRIPPED BY PANIC


Quotation of the Day
"People, I just want to say, you know, can we all get along? I mean, we're all stuck here for a while. Let's try to work it out." -- RODNEY KING.  [ 6:1. ]


Jerry Jones on Panel
When it comes to monoitoring competition on the field and grappling with complex issues of playing rules, the National Football League generally lets the experts carry the ball.
As a result, the N.F.L.'s seven-member competition committee is dominated by coaches and general managers, but not totally.
WELLINGTON MARA of the Giants and AL DAVIS of the Raiders are among the owners who have served on the committee, and Paul Brown of the Bengals was a member until his death last year.


CHRONICLE
When MICHAEL I. SOVERN, the president of Columbia University, throws out the first ball at the New York Yankees-Minnesota Twins game at Yankee Stadium this afternoon, it will be an event of many Columbia coincidences.
A ceremony at the game will honor Lou Gehrig, the legendary Yankees first baseman, who was a Columbia student and baseball player from 1921 to 1923.
After the game, Mr.
Sovern will present the Columbia University Award for Distinguished Achievement to a Twins player with a Columbia connection: GENE LARKIN, class of '84, who drove in the only run of the deciding game of last year's World Series.


Henderson Gives Oakland a Leg Up
Athletics 7, Tigers 6
DETROIT, May 1 (AP) -- Rickey Henderson stole his 1,000th career base to set up a run in the first inning and Mark McGwire's 11th homer of the season broke a tie in the eighth, sending the Oakland Athletics over the Detroit Tigers, 7-6, tonight.


Sports of The Times; Messier's Brand-New Skates
Half an hour after the Rangers had finished practice Thursday for last night's seventh-game showdown with the Devils in the Stanley Cup playoffs, most of the other Rangers had showered, dressed and departed.
But at his locker the Ranger captain was lacing on a brand new pair of skates.
"New skates?" somebody asked him. "For a seventh game?"


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article in Science Times on Tuesday about the value of medicinal plants in tropical rain forests misstated the equivalents of the kilogram quantities of the plants harvested from two plots.
Eighty-six and four-tenths kilograms is about 190 pounds, and 358.4 kilograms is about 790 pounds.


RIOTS IN LOS ANGELES: The Police Chief; As Los Angeles Storm Swirls, Chief of Police Is Oddly Quiet
As Los Angeles sank into chaos the day after the acquittal of four white police officers charged with beating a black motorist, Chief Daryl F. Gates was contemplative through a strategy meeting at City Hall, a block from his headquarters at Parker Center.
Deferring to subordinates, he said little until the meeting on Thursday neared an end, an official who took part recalled today.
Then Chief Gates seemed to come alive.
"I don't want any demonstrations at Parker Center," the official quoted Mr.
Gates as telling the group.
"It's demeaning to me."


Blues Fire Sutter and Hire Plager
You've coached longer (four years) and won more games (153) than any other coach in the St.
Louis Blues' 25 seasons, and you were named the National Hockey League coach of the year barely a year ago.
But that was last year, BRIAN SUTTER, when the Blues finished strong with 105 points.
Now the question is what have you done for us lately?
Limp home with 85 points followed by first-round elimination from the playoffs, that's what.
Sorry, Brian.
Yesterday, St.
Louis named a new coach to fulfill its dream of winning the Stanley Cup, or at least getting past the second round of the playoffs, a hurdle Sutter never cleared.


Dr. Wilfred Dorfman, Academy Founder, 82
Dr.
Wilfred Dorfman, a Brooklyn physician who helped found the Academy of Psychosomatic Medicine, died April 12 at the Brooklyn Hospital Center.
He was 82 years old.
He died of a heart attack, a daughter, Jane Dorfman, said.


Bridge
Although the historic Cavendish Club closed its doors 11 months ago, the name lives on in two major events being contested this weekend.
A total of 36 expert pairs are entered in the 18th Cavendish Invitational Charity Pairs, to be played today and tomorrow at the Young Men's Philanthropic League, 4 East 80th Street, Manhattan.
There is less international participation than in former years, with just seven players coming from Europe and none from other continents.
Many of the contestants warmed up by taking part in a preliminary event, the Cavendish Cup Teams, which was played Thursday and yesterday.
Going into the final round, the leaders in the field of eight teams were Russ and Shiela Ekeblad of Providence, R.I.; Barry Goren of Chicago and Peter Weichsel of Encenitas, Calif.


Review/Dance; Harlem Troupe in a Stylistic Range
The note of festivity on which the Dance Theater of Harlem opened at the Brooklyn Academy of Music continued on Thursday night when the company presented the second of four programs to be danced during its two-week Brooklyn season.
The program offered four varied styles of dance, opening with a work by George Balanchine, closing with one by Michel Fokine, and featuring two very different kinds of eloquent abstraction in between.
The music, conducted by Dr.
Leslie B. Dunner and David LaMarche, rolled majestically out of the orchestra pit.
And the dancers performed with their usual combination of verve, commitment and classicism.


Key Player? Rodman
What National Basketball Association player helped his team the most this season?
Probably a dominating center like PATRICK EWING of the Knicks or DAVID ROBINSON of the Spurs, wouldn't you say?
Or maybe a high-scoring power forward like CHARLES BARKLEY of the 76ers or KARL MALONE of the Jazz?
Nah.
Based on a complex -- and not necessarily infallible -- computer evaluation of key offensive and defensive statistics, Detroit's DENNIS RODMAN, who averaged only 9.8 points a game, made the outstanding individual contribution to a team's success.


Corrections
A headline in Business Day on Tuesday about possible staff reductions at the Bell Atlantic Corporation misstated the way in which they would be made.
Any cutbacks would occur through early-retirement incentives, not through layoffs.


Classical Music in Review
Razoumovsky Plus Larsen Quartet Kathryn Bache Miller Theater


Classical Music in Review
New York Festival of Song Walter Reade Theater Lincoln Center


Guidepost; Spring Cleaning for Profit
Tag sales can raise cash in a tight economy, remove clutter, reduce moving costs and help the environment by promoting recycling and re-use.
Here are some tips on how to organize a tag sale to achieve the best results.
PREPARATION
Use a porch, garage or driveway to prevent strangers from wandering through the house.
The sale price should be about a third of the current purchase price of a similar new item.
Group sales with neighbors mean more things to sell.
Hot sellers this year include LP's, vintage linens, and Victoriana.


Thomas Helps Pistons Reconjure Glory Days
At the very least, the regular sellout crowd of 21,454 did not pay all that money to witness the Detroit Pistons being eliminated in their own building.
Instead, the 194th straight capacity crowd in the Palace saw the kind of brave and creative rally that had marked the grand years, the double championships in 1989 and 1990.
The fans saw Isiah Thomas once again spark a stunning 28-4 rally in the second period that disheartened the Knicks and set up an 86-82 victory, with the inevitable tension at the end.


Canadiens Need Two Overtimes to Topple Whalers in Game 7
Canadiens 3, Whalers 2
MONTREAL, May 1 -- (AP) -- Russ Courtnall's goal at 5 minutes 26 seconds of the second overtime gave the Montreal Canadiens a 3-2 victory over the Hartford Whalers tonight in the seventh and deciding game of their Adams Division semifinal series.


Review/Music; An Evil Era's Scrapbook In Song
In the waning days of the Weimar Republic in Germany, the Comedian Harmonists, a highly polished vocal sextet modeled after the popular American group the Revelers, achieved a kind of superstardom before being forced to disband in 1935 because three of its members were Jewish.
In a two-hour music-theater piece, "In the Time of the Comedian Harmonists," the Hudson Shad, a talented vocal sextet from New York City, re-creates the original group's refined vocal blend with impressive fidelity.
The group's performances of everything from the Overture to "The Barber of Seville" to Duke Ellington's "Creole Love Call" are the center of a theatrical collage, one of whose running threads is a taped interview with Roman Cycowski, the Comedian Harmonists' only surviving member.


Penguins Oust Tight-Throated Capitals
In an excruciating finish to a series that bordered on the implausible, the defending Stanley Cup champion Pittsburgh Penguins outlasted the Washington Capitals, 3-1, tonight to win their first-round playoff series, 4 games to 3.
Mario Lemieux scored one goal and set up another for the Penguins, who didn't seal the victory until the final minute when Ron Francis scored into an empty net after the Capitals had pulled their goalie for an extra attacker.


Charles M. Bogert, 84, Is Dead; Studied Reptiles and Amphibians
Charles M. Bogert, a leading expert on reptiles and amphibians and curator emeritus of the herpetology department at the American Museum of Natural History, died on April 10 at his home in Sante Fe, N.M.
He was 84 years old.
He committed suicide, said his wife, Martha Bogert.
She said he had a stroke four years ago, had difficulty getting around and feared having to go into a nursing home.


McCall and Fernandez Face a Board of Frustration
One year after Mayor David N. Dinkins moved to control a divided Board of Education by replacing its president, mistrust and bickering persist, members say, slowing their efforts to take action on almost any issue.
School officials say Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez believes his efforts to reform the city's troubled public schools are being hobbled by the tensions on the board -- which sets policy on all major issues from academic standards to such matters as the distribution of condoms to students.


CHRONICLE
The north lawn of the United Nations will be blanketed with 500,000 carnations on Friday, two days before Mother's Day, for an event meant to draw attention to the deaths caused by pregnancy or childbirth of half a million women a year.
Organized by the International Planned Parenthood Federation's Western Hemisphere Region, a procession of 120 dignitaries, including 50 United Nations ambassadors, will file past the carpet of flowers, flown in from Colombia, and hear speeches about the issue.


A Double Reunion, 2 Decades Later
It isn't all fun and reminiscence, putting together a joint reunion after nearly 20 years.
"When I rehearse with Elaine, I keep forgetting what's next," Mike Nichols said about dusting off the old Nichols-and-May comedy routines with his former partner, Elaine May.
"It's amazing we're still funny. At least, I think we are."
"It's kind of tricky," said Paul Simon about rehearsing with Art Garfunkel, his one-time partner.
"Our voices have changed. We don't blend the way we used to -- so automatically. We have to really
listen
to one another."


Ms. Kelley Has Wedding
Elisabeth Morse Kelley and Milton Jeremy Trexler were married in New York yesterday.
The Rev.
Thomas D. Bowers performed the ceremony in the chapel of St.
Bartholomew's Episcopal Church.
Mrs.
Trexler, who is 43 years old and is known professionally as Lisa Carling, is the special services coordinator of the Theatre Access Project, which interprets productions for the deaf.
She received a master's degree in drama from Yale University.
She is the daughter of the late Dr. and Mrs.
Sylvester B. Kelley of Duxbury, Mass.
Her father was a urologist in Boston.


G.M. Dealer's Many Ties to L.I. Officials
It was an environmentalist's nightmare: a plan to turn a wild pine woods and rolling meadow at the edge of a state forest preserve into 550 condominiums, threatening to snarl traffic, crowd schools and change the character of a neighborhood on Long Island Sound.
The plan would more than triple the number of housing units that the developer, John M. McNamara -- a car dealer, philanthropist and Republican stalwart -- was permitted to build on the site, and in July 1988, more than 500 angry, protesting residents filled an auditorium where the Brookhaven town board was meeting on the proposal.


Plea Bargain in Howe Case, Prosecutor Says
United States Attorney Kris McLean said yesterday that he and the lawyers for Yankee relief pitcher Steve Howe had reached a plea agreement on two Federal misdemeanor drug charges that would prevent the case from going to trial if the agreement is approved by a Federal judge.
But it remained unclear what the two sides had decided and what effect the agreement would have on the baseball future of Howe, who has been suspended six times for drug and alcohol abuse.


Buckle Up, Volvo Says, In the Back Seat, Too
If you are not wearing a seat belt and your car is in a serious accident, then the back seat is just as dangerous as the front passenger seat, according to an analysis of 2,000 crashes involving Volvos in Sweden.
The analysis was made by the Volvo Car Corporation and the Swedish Road Safety Office.
Rear-seat passengers who are not wearing belts are far more likely to be hurt in a crash than belted passengers, the study confirms.
But Volvo safety experts add that unbelted passengers in back are a hazard not only to themselves but also to people in the front seats.
In an accident, Volvo said, unrestrained rear passengers can hit the front seats hard enough to injure people seated in the front.


MORE ON THE UNREST
Waves of Anger Ripple From Coast to Coast
Across the nation, angry demonstrators protested the acquittal in the California case -- peacefully in many cases, violently in others.
The National Guard was called into Las Vegas; injuries and arrests were reported in several other cities.
Page 10.
The Morning After
As relative calm was restored in much of South-Central Los Angeles, a growing sense of sadness and futility emerged there.
Page 7.
When the Voters Speak
Race and crime have opened sores in American politics and changed its direction before, and there is little reason to doubt they will again this year.
News analysis, page 9.


William S. Hirschberg; Civic Servant Was 102
William S. Hirschberg, who helped found the Charles A. Dana Foundation for higher education and medicine and was its secretary-treasurer and a board member for many years, died of cardiac arrest last Sunday at his home in Greenwich, Conn., a son, William R. Hirschberg, said.
He was 102 years old.
Born in Glenbrook, Conn., and educated at Colgate University and New York Law School, Mr.
Hirschberg combined a distinguished legal career with a broad involvement in public service.


Boy Scouts on the Urban Frontier of East Harlem
"Scouting is a fine game, if we put our backs into it and tackle it well, with real enthusiasm," Lord Baden-Powell, founder of the Boy Scouts, wrote in 1908.
"As with other games, too, we will find that we gain strength of body, mind and spirit from the playing of it."
The man who called himself Chief Scout of the World would have been mightily pleased to attend the weekly meeting of Troop 103 in East Harlem Thursday evening.
Following some good-natured carousing, there was a remarkably solemn recitation of the Scout Oath, a reprise of last weekend's camping trip, Morse code practice and, finally, some awesomely energetic game-playing.


Tainted by Chromium, With No Cleanup Money
No one will be playing ball this year at Metro Park, the latest place found to be full of toxic chromium waste in the worst single cluster of hazardous-waste sites in the state.
But that is little reassurance to those concerned about the thousands of young athletes and their coaches and umpires who have used the field in the past.
"We eat, drink and sleep this dirt," said Gary DeFilippo, the coach of Our Lady of Victories in the C.Y.O.
Baseball League.
He said his sons, Gregory, 14 years old, and Jonathan, 10, played ball at Metro Park at least once a week last summer, and both had rashes last year.


Review/Music; Strauss and Beethoven by Dresden Group
For one listener, an all too rare encounter with the Dresden Staats kapelle last summer, in a choreographed version of the Mozart Requiem at the Salzburg Festival, carried a tinge of disappointment only because the music, grand as it was, did not fully exploit the splendid orchestra's resources.
The Staats kapelle's program at Carnegie Hall on Thursday evening quickly compensated, with a first half consisting of two lavishly orchestrated tone poems by Richard Strauss: "Don Juan" and "Death and Transfiguration." And the ensemble responded with richly sonorous yet superbly refined performances under the itinerant American conductor Andre Previn.
This is a time of transition for the Staatskapelle, which traces its ancestry back to 1548.
The orchestra has been without a music director since Hans Vonk departed in 1988; Giuseppe Sinopoli takes over in the fall.
But more crucially, the Staatskapelle, like many another eastern European institution, faces radically altered economic conditions in a competitive free-market setting.


New York City Maintains Its Credit Rating
A major Wall Street credit-rating service expressed increased confidence yesterday in Mayor David N. Dinkins's fiscal plans by maintaining New York City's current credit rating.
"The city's single-A-minus rating on $17 billion in general obligation debt is affirmed," the Standard &amp; Poor's Corporation rating service announced in a press release.


If the Nets Feel Alone It's Likely They Are
There were 6,978 empty seats at Byrne Meadowlands Arena on Thursday night, a distressingly high number, as the New Jersey Nets fell to the Cleveland Cavaliers, 98-89, and ended their 1991-92 season in a four-game playoff.
One of the 13,071 fans to attend, the National Basketball Association commissioner, David Stern, had to notice the huge gaps in the upper sections of the stands.


INSIDE
Election Law Changes
Legislative officials said today that lawmakers have reached a tentative agreement on the first significant steps in years to revise New York's arcane election laws.
Page 25.
Bickering on School Board
A year after efforts to unite a divided New York City Board of Education, mistrust persists, slowing action on almost any issue.
Page 25.
Rangers Gain on Cup
The Rangers won Game 7 and eliminated the Devils, 8-4, to move into round 2 in their quest for their first Stanley Cup in 52 years.
Page 29.
The New Kentucky Home
Bending with the times, the Kentucky Derby is mixing some modern tones with the mint juleps of a 118-year institution.
Page 34.


Holocaust Observance Is Held in the Senate in Connecticut


For Draft Pick, Prosperity Is Just Around the Corner
As a football player at Arizona State, Phillippi Sparks was a sophisticated cornerback.
He covered receivers tightly.
He hit them hard.
He supported the run.
As a world traveler, he was not sophisticated.
Until today, he said, he had never been in the East or anywhere near it.
But as the Giants' second choice in the 1992 National Football League draft, he flew here today for a weekend minicamp for rookies.


Getting More Bounce For the Buck on the Court
The best basketballs, those used by the 27 teams of the National Basketball Association, are made of leather.
But now Spalding Sports Worldwide, the company whose founder, A. G. Spalding, created the first basketball nearly a century ago, has come up with a ball that, it says, performs better than leather ones and is more durable.
Spalding contends that its new Top-Flite 1000 basketball feels like a top-quality leather ball but will cost a third less.
The basketball will be available to coaches by July, but it will not be available to individual buyers at sporting-goods stores until a year from now, at the earliest.


Corrections
The Weather Report each day from April 11 through April 30 misstated the normal precipitation for April in New York City.
It is 3.75 inches.


Corrections
An article on April 23 about ticket prices for the Henri Matisse retrospective at the Museum of Modern Art in the fall misstated the admission policy for special exhibitions at the Metropolitan Museum of Art.
The Metropolitan has not used advance ticket arrangements since 1988.
Special exhibitions are included in the suggested contribution for admission to the museum.


Regional Update
FUNDS FOR ROADS: A bill that would increase the New Jersey Transportation Trust Fund's spending limit by $200 million to help road construction projects has won final approval in the Assembly.
The bill, passed on Thursday, would raise the trust fund cap to $565 million.
The fund is backed by state gasoline taxes.
The measure was first proposed by Gov.
Jim Florio as a way to help the state recover from the recession.
MURDER-SCHEME INDICTMENTS: Five people have been indicted in a conspiracy that ended with the shooting death of a New Jersey Institute of Technology campus police officer.
The indictments, returned on Thursday, stem from the Nov. 23 slaying of Revell Quince, 43 years old, as he returned home from work.
Prosecutors say Mr.
Quince's stepdaughter, Cynthia Gregory, 22, said she engineered the plot because Mr.
Quince had sexually abused her.


Cuomo Says the Schools Should Get M.A.C. Funds
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo put pressure on the Dinkins administration yesterday to use $200 million it hopes to get from the state Municipal Assistance Corporation for special school programs.
The Governor said that the Schools Chancellor, Joseph A. Fernandez, had persuaded him that the best use for the M.A.C. money would be programs to lengthen the school day in middle schools, help troubled youngsters avoid being placed in special education and establish more computerized courses over the next three years.
Mr.
Fernandez has been lobbying for those programs since February.
They would cost $70 million a year, the Governor's aides said.


The Bets May Be Hedged: The Forecast Is Hinting at Rain for the Roses
On the eve of the main event, Arazi walked and stretched his legs, Technology galloped a quarter-mile "to open his pipes," A.P.
Indy galloped a mile and a quarter, Pine Bluff galloped a mile and three-eighths, West by West galloped a mile and a half, Pistols and Roses did exactly the same and Dr Devious strolled under the shed.
And most everybody prayed that thunderstorms would not drench the 118th Kentucky Derby and scramble the odds and the chances.
The race is scheduled to begin at 5:40 P.M.
Saturday at Churchill Downs with Arazi still the 6-5 favorite, A.P.
Indy next at 7-2 and 19 colts in all shooting for the first prize of $734,800 and the bragging and breeding rights that go with winning the run for the roses.


Classical Music in Review
New York New Music Ensemble Merkin Concert Hall


Rangers Vanquish the Devils and the Demons
There were moments in the third period last night when the Rangers got sloppy, when they gave up a short-handed goal and when their Stanley Cup curse came alive like an extra Devil skater on the Madison Square Garden ice.
A five-goal lead had shrunk to a two-goal lead, with nearly 10 minutes left on the clock.
Plenty of time for mischief, and for mean-spirited ghosts.


Knicks and Pistons Shove Series to Sunday Showdown
The first-round playoff fight between the Knicks and the Detroit Pistons will go the distance.
Holding off a furious fourth-quarter rally, the Pistons survived tonight with an 86-82 victory at the Palace of Auburn Hills.
That tied the three-of-five-game series at 2-2 and forced a fifth game to be played at 1 P.M.
Sunday at Madison Square Garden.


Banks Expand Their Range of Services
Walk into many banks or savings institutions these days and most likely there will be experts on hand to offer mutual funds, annuities and other investment or insurance products.
The traditional services, including checking and savings accounts and certificates of deposit, are still there, of course, but today about half of the nation's 1,600 savings and loan associations and many banks, both large and small, are also selling an array of securities and the like.


New Help Is Offered In Choosing a Charity
With human need so palpable everywhere -- from third world countries to the streets of urban America -- most people feel compelled to help.
Now, in the wake of financial scandals at the United Way of America, local affiliates of the national charity report that many donors are cutting back, fearful that their hard-earned money will go to high-living officials, rather than to those in need.
But is there a better response, a way to give and make sure the money is used as intended?


High Levels of Toxic Chromium Waste Are Found in Jersey City's Soil


America3's 7th Victory Ousts Conner From Cup
The America
team accomplished today what it has been struggling to do for more than four months of America's Cup defense trial races: depose Dennis Conner as the defender for the first time in his 18 years of cup racing.
The seemingly indomitable Conner caved in today to Bill Koch's more heavily financed multiboat America  campaign.
The faster speed of America  , the third of four yachts Koch had built for the defense trials, finally proved too much for Conner's single-boat Stars &amp; Stripes campaign.


McCall and Fernandez Face a Board of Frustration
One year after Mayor David N. Dinkins moved to control a divided Board of Education by replacing its president, mistrust and bickering persist, members say, slowing their efforts to take action on almost any issue.
School officials say Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez believes his efforts to reform the city's troubled public schools are being hobbled by the tensions on the board -- which sets policy on all major issues from academic standards to such matters as the distribution of condoms to students.


Results Plus
HOCKEY  Finland Routs LeBlanc and Team USA


Bureaucratic Dispute Halts Bus Service for Disabled Preschoolers
Thousands of young children with disabilities were unable to get to private preschool programs throughout New York City yesterday after contracts between the city and the private bus companies that transport the children expired at midnight Thursday.
Many of the preschool programs, which offer classes to about 14,000 3-to 5-year-olds, reported absentee rates of 80 to 90 percent, according to the Inter-Agency Council, a private nonprofit group that represents about half the programs.


'High Rollers' to Close
"The High Rollers Social and Pleasure Club," a musical revue by Allen Toussaint, is to close after this evening's performance at the Helen Hayes Theater, 240 West 44th Street, Manhattan.
The show, directed and choreographed by Alan Weeks and featuring Lawrence Clayton, Deborah Burrell-Cleveland, Tarik Winston and Keith Robert Bennett, will have run for 14 performances and 18 previews.


F. X. McQuade, 68, A Retired Executive In Shipping Industry
Francis X. McQuade, a retired shipping executive and a leader in that industry, died on Sunday at his home in Darien, Conn.
He was 68 years old and died of cancer, his family said.
Mr.
McQuade was a past president of the General Stevedoring Council, an international organization.
He helped reorganize the New York Shipping Association and served on its Labor Grievance Committee, the Mayor's Committee on Port Congestion, the New York Terminal Conference-Tariff and National Association of Stevedores.


Susan Brewster, 41; Helped to Stabilize Yonkers's Finances
Susan N. Brewster, the executive director of the State Financial Control Board for the City of Yonkers for the last six years, died on Tuesday at the Westchester County Medical Center in Valhalla, N.Y.
She was 41 years old and lived in Ossining.
She died of complications of leukemia, her husband, Charles Eisenmann, said.


'In the Time of the Comedian Harmonists'


Rout Becomes a Squeaker for Mets
There had been tension all afternoon because of the unrest, complete with tear gas and sirens, in the nearby streets.
There had been a bomb scare right before the game.
There was the disturbing experience of having a 7-0 lead become a 7-7 nightmare.
But the exhausting, unnerving night came to a close for the Mets with an 8-7 victory, a draining, dizzying triumph over the Braves, their fourth straight victory.


A New Kentucky Hum at the Old Kentucky Home
Robert Clay, president of the Thoroughbred Owners and Breeders' Association and a descendant of the patriarch Henry Clay, considered the question: When was the last time the owner of a Kentucky Derby horse was the headliner at a rock concert on the eve of the race?
Without hesitating, he countered: "When was the last time the president of Churchill Downs had tickets to a rock concert the night before the Derby -- and intended to use them?"


Classical Music in Review
Pinchas Zukerman Carnegie Hall


Albany Takes Step to Revise Election Laws
Legislative officials said today that lawmakers have reached a tentative agreement on the first significant steps in years to revise New York's arcane election laws.
The accord would impose new -- albeit relatively high -- limits on campaign contributions and would remove many of the technicalities that have been used to keep insurgents off the ballot.
The agreement could be a major factor in Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo's decision on whether to sign or veto a legislative redistricting bill.
Mr.
Cuomo, who must announce that decision by midnight Monday, reiterated today that significant changes in the state's election laws could help convince him to sign the redistricting bill.


Changes Recommended
The National Rifle Association should adopt new rules to keep politics out of sport shooting, a United States Olympic Committee panel recommended yesterday, after five sport shooters complained that the N.R.A., which governs the sport under Federal charter, uses it for political, fund-raising and recruitment purposes.
"The N.R.A. has turned an Olympic sport into a private office for lobbying, patronage and public relations," said KENT CORRELL, a New York lawyer representing the athletes.


Small Boy, Big Secret: Mother Held
On a solid, tree-lined Queens block, Helena Piccininni, a schoolteacher, kept to herself and lived a life of desperately held secrets, neighbors and the police say.
And, the police say, she kept her biggest secret -- her small son, now nearly 3 years old -- from her husband and her sister, both of whom live elsewhere, for most of the child's life.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 2-4 TROUBLE IN GERMANY
Two years ago, Chancellor Kohl was the most powerful leader of a resurgent Europe and acted as if he knew it.
Today, a year and a half after German unification, he seems much less self-assured, his authority at home and abroad shaken by political and social turmoil.  1


The Reality Box
UNSILENT REVOLUTION
Television News and American Public Life, 1948-1991.
By Robert J. Donovan and Ray Scherer. 357 pp.
New York: Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars/ Cambridge University Press.
Cloth, $49.95.
Paper, $17.95.


The Longshot Lil E. Tee Wins Kentucky Derby


Voyage to U.S. By Gorbachev Tests His Role
Having shepherded Communism toward extinction, Mikhail S. Gorbachev, last President of the Soviet Union, arrived in the United States today to test the capitalist possibilities of his new role as a roaming strategist on world problems.
Mr.
Gorbachev emerged here from the corporate jetliner of Forbes magazine -- "Capitalist Tool" printed in big letters on its fuselage -- and was greeted with a hug from former President Ronald Reagan and cheers from a crowd of several hundred.
He left immediately for a weekend stay at the corporate estate of the Arco oil company before embarking on an entrepreneurial tour of the nation.


Job Recovery In New York Called Slowest
Amid scattered signs that the nation is beginning to recover from the recession, the states in the New York region remain mired in such a deep slump that economists say they will not regain their previous peak employment levels until much later in the decade.
"Morale is very bad among business people," said Irwin Kellner, chief economist for the Chemical Bank Corporation, who does not expect the New York region to reach the bottom of its slump until late this year.
He said prospects for recovery were dim.


The Year Of the Ribbon
EVERYTHING was, at first, handmade.
Painters, curators, museum administrators, they stood at work tables in a costume studio crafting their memorials.
Some cut the narrow red grosgrain from spools; others folded the strips of fabric and stitched gold safety pins to the backs.
They talked all the while, caught up with each other as at a quilting bee, tedious and comforting.
And amazingly efficient.
After four and a half hours of elegy and dish, that first bee last May produced 3,000 ribbons, enough for the satin lapels and glittering bodices at the Tonys a week later.
Consistency had not been a priority.
Jeremy Irons's came out looking like basset-hound ears; Willa Kim's was the size of a pinkie.
But they were enough alike to make a statement; the question was, what statement?
Viewers of the telecast were never told that the pert red inverted V's were meant to symbolize awareness of AIDS; and so, in their debut, the ribbons actually came to symbolize
ignorance
of the awareness of AIDS. It was not the last of the ironies.


A Guide to Housing Values in the Region Around New York City
Newly released data from the 1990 Census shows the median value of houses for each tract in the New York region.
New York City will appear next Sunday.
Housing value is generally considered an indicator of wealth, although the connection is not as strong in areas like parts of Manhattan with high numbers of renters who may be wealthy.


Mutual Funds; The Equity-Income Alternative
For investors who like the idea of combining relatively high income with growth potential, convertibles are not the only possibility.
A close alternative is the equity-income fund, which invests mainly in stocks paying high dividends.
In terms of risk, the two types of funds are about equal.
While convertible funds own lower-quality securities, they do have steady income, and at worst the securities trade like regular bonds of comparable quality, maturity and coupon.
While common stock is riskier than bonds, the equity-income funds tend to focus on the less-risky blue chip issues.


Pornography and the New Puritans: Letters From Andrea Dworkin and Others
To the Editor:
As a woman determined to destroy the pornography industry, a writer of 10 published books and someone who reads, perhaps I should be the one to tell John Irving ("Pornography and the New Puritans," March 29) who the new Puritan is.
The old Puritans wouldn't like her very much; but then, neither does Mr.
Irving.


Joe Namath Receives a Brand-New Pair of Knees
IN a corner room overlooking the East River that he crossed so often going to Shea Stadium as the Jets quarterback, Joe Namath eased himself off his bed at the Hospital for Special Surgery and clutched a metal walker.
Time for therapy.
Time to rehab each leg that received a metal-and-plastic knee replacement in four hours of surgery on Wednesday.
"All right now," a therapist, Dan Donato, said softly.
"Move the walker first. Then the right foot. Then the left."


Armed by Sutcliffe, Orioles Fly Into First
Orioles 4, Mariners 2
BALTIMORE, May 2 (AP) -- Brady Anderson hit a three-run homer and Rick Sutcliffe pitched five-hit ball for seven and two-thirds innings tonight, giving Baltimore a 4-2 victory over Seattle and propelling the Orioles into first place in the American League East.


Conversations/Joachim Lehmann; Living, and Living With Oneself, In the Grip of East Germany
But even for such a man, it became clear in a recent talk at his home, it would have been impossible to maintain concepts of good and evil without the gifts of wit and deception.
"Anyone with a public position had contact with the Stasi" -- the secret police -- he said.
"I myself am probably listed somewhere as a Stasi informer.


Family of Detained Nobelist Flies to Burma
The husband of Daw Aung San Suu Kyi, the detained Nobel Peace laureate, flew to Myanmar, formerly Burma, today to see his wife for the first time in more than two years.
Michael Aris, a Briton who is visiting professor of Tibetan studies at Harvard University, declined to meet with reporters before leaving here today for Yangon, the Burmese capital previously called Rangoon.


August Wedding For Ms. Kahn
Mr. and Mrs.
Jeffrey H. Kahn of Rye, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Heather Fay Kahn, to Sean Talmage Gallagher, the son of Mary Louise Gallagher of Fort Lauderdale, Fla., and John L. Gallagher of Darien, Conn.
An August wedding is planned.
Ms.
Kahn, 24 years old and a graduate of Roanoke College, is pursuing a master's degree in education at Bank Street College.
Her father is the director of retail services and a senior executive vice president of Kemper Securities Group, a brokerage in Chicago.


Hotel Deals For Families
LOOKING over their shoulders at the empty rooms they endured last year, some big hotel chains are gearing up for summer with special offers for families.
This roundup of major programs for families going to visit friends, theme parks or the like covers downtown hotels and motels as well as ones along the roadside, and a few resorts.
Some chains have not completed their plans yet.
Bear in mind that all hotels are competing for guests and if the place you prefer to stay is not on this list, ask that place if it will match what other hotels may be offering.
Sometimes this is easier to do on the phone, particularly if your children are like mine and think that bargaining is grim, embarrassing and gross.
If you get a phone offer of a better price or a discount or free meals for children, make a note of the name of the person making the offer if you cannot get a reservation number.


'A Touch of the Poet' At the Long Wharf
THE Long Wharf Theater opened and is closing its season with variations on the one-man show.
But not on purpose.
In October, "Booth Is Back," a flawed play by a dabbling playwright about a fallen man, was overtaken by an outsized Frank Langella performance that remains the Connecticut season's singular display of acting pyrotechnics.


Hemlines Of the Oracles
If you believe that what you wear is a mirror of what you're thinking, you should know that some of the most influential fashion magazine editors are not discarding their above-the-knee skirts for the low-calf hemlines that many designers are featuring.
Observed during New York fashion week in April:
Vogue's editor-in-chief, Anna Wintour, wore her spring suit skirts on both sides of the knee -- though always with high heels.
Monday's hem was 26 inches from the ground; Tuesday's hem dropped to 19 inches above the ground; Wednesday's hem moved back up to 21 inches, while Thursday's and Friday's hems were at Monday's length -- 26 inches from the street.


Libya Said to Seek Pope's Aid On Sanctions in Air Bombing
As he confronts a United Nations embargo devised to force him to hand over the suspects in the bombing of Pan Am Flight 103, the Libyan leader, Col.
Muammar el-Qaddafi, has apparently renewed an effort to enlist Pope John Paul ll in his efforts to evade Western pressures.
The Vatican, however, has played down possible involvement in the affair, saying it has received no Libyan request for help.


General and Troops Have Domestic Mission
The general in command of the military forces sent to quell the Los Angeles riots, Maj.
Gen.
Marvin L. Covault, helped develop the Army's use of light infantry, units extablished to react quickly to emergencies around the world.
Reached by telephone today, he said the Los Angeles riot presented classic conditions for the use of such a force.
As of late this afternoon, the troops had not been deployed.


All About/Ginger Ale; A Dowdy Soft Drink In Search of a New Age Remake
Ginger ale has an image problem.
Older people drink it.
You mix it with rye or bourbon, drinks of a bygone age.
Ginger ale is served in hospitals, not mod bars.
Ask someone the last time they had a sip.
As often as not, it was years ago, lying in bed with an upset stomach.
These are not exactly the sort of associations soft drink marketers hire Michael Jackson or Elton John to create.


RIDING UGLY
Coplon's article on rodeo bull riding is aptly titled.
The faces of the bulls featured in the photos speak of pain and fear.
And that's ugly.
DAVID ROCKWELL
New York, N.Y.


Pachysandra Shows Signs of Winter Stress
HOW soon we forget.
Nature is in charge, but when some kind of odd phenomenon is seen on the landscape, most gardeners are quick to analyze it and look for other explanations.
Consider, for instance, pachysandra, an ubiquitous ground cover.
It covers the ground around suburban houses, under trees, around shrubbery and even thrives in many woodland regions.


Harsh Judgments Abroad
Europeans and Japanese reacted strongly to the violence in Los Angeles, seeing it as evidence of deep-rooted flaws in this country.
Page 26.


Dollar Down On L.A. Riots
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen
132.58
134.50
138.85
per Dollar
German Mark
1.6405
1.6509
1.7482
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar
1.1888
1.1871
1.1513
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound
1.6405
1.6740
1.6935
U.S. Dollar per British Pound
Gold
$338.25
$336.30
$353.50
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


EAST GERMANS FACE THEIR ACCUSERS
Kinzer reports that the premier of Brandenburg state, Manfred Stolpe, was a Stasi informer for more than 25 years.
Stolpe insists that his dealings with the Stasi were motivated by a desire to benefit the East German citizenry.
Former West German Chancellors Willy Brandt and Helmut Schmidt have been outspoken in their support.
Yet the case remains a matter of controversy, and Stolpe himself has said publicly that he was too naive about the devil's pact in which he found himself involved with the G.D.R.'s secret police.


Hemlines Of the Oracles
If you believe that what you wear is a mirror of what you're thinking, you should know that some of the most influential fashion magazine editors are not discarding their above-the-knee skirts for the low-calf hemlines that many designers are featuring.
Observed during New York fashion week in April:
Vogue's editor-in-chief, Anna Wintour, wore her spring suit skirts on both sides of the knee -- though always with high heels.
Monday's hem was 26 inches from the ground; Tuesday's hem dropped to 19 inches above the ground; Wednesday's hem moved back up to 21 inches, while Thursday's and Friday's hems were at Monday's length -- 26 inches from the street.


THE GUIDE
'MAGIC MELODIES'
The Pro Arte Singers will present a concert in Stamford today that combines the music of Leos Janacek and Aaron Copland, the cries of European street vendors and illustrations by schoolchildren from Stamford, New Canaan and Darien, which will be flashed on a screen during the performance.


U.S. WARNS INDIA OVER MISSILE DEAL
The United States has threatened trade sanctions against Russia and India if the Russians sell missile technology that can help the Indians develop long-range weapons, Indian and Russian officials say.
Moscow and New Delhi say the technology, for giant rockets to launch satellites into space, is entirely for peaceful purposes.
But Western diplomats here say the sale would violate the 1987 Missile Technology Control Regime, an agreement adopted by the United States and other Western countries to block the spread of medium- and long-range missiles that are able to carry nuclear warheads.


America -- Environmental Dictator?
Down by the docks here, where Caribbean accents mingle with a sharp scent of fish, more and more tuna boats are tied up, and more and more sailors and canners are out of work.
With American consumers inspecting tuna cans for "Dolphin Safe" labels, the United States has imposed a series of embargoes on imports of yellowfin tuna from Venezuela and Mexico.
Boats from these countries kill dolphins at twice the rate of American tuna fishers.
Sealed off from the world's largest tuna market since August 1990, Venezuela's tuna fleet has shrunk to 34 boats, from a high of 118 just four years ago.


Pop's Bequest
My parents donated their bodies to medical science.
For the survivors, this final gift evokes a bittersweet feeling.
The myriad of normal emotions one feels at the death of a loved one are complicated by the knowledge that closure and acceptance are delayed while the all-important research is performed.


Bridge; One-Hand Penalty From Expert Bidding
THE biggest penalty ever recorded at a North American Championship apparently occurred during the National Men's Pairs in 1964 in Toronto, when seven no-trump redoubled failed by seven tricks for a penalty of 4,000.
This, however, is far from a world record.
That is believed to have been set a decade ago in Kharkov, Ukraine, which was then part of the Soviet Union.
After a slight misunderstanding, a player landed in six no-trump redoubled, down 12 for a penalty of 7,000.
The biggest penalty reported so far this year occurred in England in late January and should have been bigger.
The scene was the Portland Club in London, which is known for its 170-year history, its traditionalism and its lawmaking function.


Letting Mother Enjoy Breakfast in Bed
ONE way to look at the calendar is not week by week or month by month but from one holiday or special occasion to another.
Once the Easter and Passover celebrations are over, the next on the agenda is Mother's Day, next Sunday.
Mother's Day often involves breakfast in bed for the lady in question, a more G-rated affair than Valentine's Day perhaps, but also with the idea of giving the recipient a holiday from the kitchen.
Brunch, lunch or dinner in a restaurant is another way of going about it.
And if the plans involve a restaurant meal for mothers, grandmothers or even aunts, when there are children in the house serving breakfast in bed is still a lovely gesture.
The children may not be up to paying for dinner at a nearby country inn, but they might certainly be able to present gifts in the morning along with breakfast.
So long as there is another adult to supervise, even toddlers can help squeeze orange juice, put frozen waffles in a toaster and spoon jam from a jar into a dish.
They can also help set the breakfast tray.


Cartier Riches In Russia
An exhibition of jewelry, watches, clocks, lorgnettes and other precious objects created by the House of Cartier in Paris between 1847 and 1955 will open at the Hermitage Museum in St.
Petersburg May 13.
The exhibition comes 85 years after the first Cartier exhibition in Russia, also in St.
Petersburg.
The new show, "The Art of Cartier," consists of 216 pieces, including 48 sketches of jewelry designs from the Cartier archives.
One of the most spectacular pieces is the "Tutti Frutti" necklace and earring set made in 1936 of sapphires, emeralds and diamonds.
Cartier bought it back last year at auction.


Backlash Blames Feminism for Sins of Sexism; Feeling Good Is Better
To the Editor:
Re "The Backlash Myth" (Op-Ed, April 20) by Georgette Mosbacher:
I am 34 years old.
I believe in equal pay for equal work, equal protection under the law, and that women should be able to go to work without being propositioned by their bosses.
I don't wear makeup, but I like to shop, and sometimes I even get a facial.
I have no trouble identifying myself as a feminist.
A friend, who is 29, wears a little makeup and likes to shop, also believes in the above, but says she's not a feminist.
However, what she disassociates herself from is the label, not the goals.
Why, in the space of five years, has feminist become a dirty word?


The Russians Set Out Under Capitalists' Rules for Change
No other nation today seems to have Russia's natural potential to burst forth as a great economic power.
It's got oil reserves, vast forests and mineral deposits, proud and capable people, rich culture and traditions.
It could become a mighty producer and consumer of goods of the 21st century.
The problem -- the eternal Russian problem -- is how to get to there from here.
Russia's centuries-old pursuit of wealth is a history of dead ends.
In the Middle Ages, trade routes from the East that had brought prosperity shifted to the Mediterranean, and Russian towns withered.
Peter the Great brought an 18th century revival by importing Western ways, but at the price of allowing an even more pernicious system of serfdom.
And Communism in this century achieved huge breakthroughs in heavy industry and space technology -- until the Soviet economy collapsed.


Neither Desert nor Cave Nor Alp Shall Stay. . . .


Murder of Rookie Officer Inspires Anti-Drug Drives
On Feb. 26, 1988, a rookie New York City police officer, Edward Byrne, was shot in the head five times as he sat by himself in a patrol car outside the Queens home of a drug-case witness he was guarding.
The South Jamaica killing stunned the city, sparked major police drives against drug dealers and led to the arrests of four members of a drug-dealing ring.
The four were charged with executing the 22-year-old rookie at the order of their jailed leader, Howard Mason, who prosecutors said wanted to retaliate for his own conviction in a weapons case.


World Leaders: Mickey, et al.
A few years ago, an amazed Japanese girl asked an American visitor, "Is there really a Disneyland
in America
?"
That should be music to the mouse ears of Euro Disneyland's management, beleaguered by charges that they are defiling the Frenchness of France.
Ah, to convince the French that Mickey and Donald belong to Marne-la-Vallee as they do to Anaheim, Orlando and Tokyo.
Sensitive to the charge that Euro Disneyland amounts to what the theater director Ariane Mnouchkine, in a widely quoted assessment, called a "cultural Chernobyl," the company tried for months to persuade Europeans that, in the words of a Disney spokesman, "It's not America, it's Disney."


To Give Life To Art
American Academy in Rome dinner. Metropolitan Club. April 30, 7:30 P.M.


THE SLUGGER NOBODY WANTED
Our family attended the All-Star Game in Toronto last July and what impressed me most was seeing the kids swarm around Cecil Fielder in the lobby of the hotel where the players were staying.
Fielder signed autographs in a quiet, receptive manner.
His diamond "51" pendant worn around his neck said it all.
BOB POTVIN
West Brookfield, Mass.


Networking; Public Access Databases
When seeking technical support from vendors, many network administrators complain that telephone hotlines are, at best, lukewarm.
The phones are busy, or a caller is left in hold limbo, or when the caller does get through the technician says, "I'll have to call you back on that."
Increasingly, administrators and vendors alike are seeking an alternative to the telephone support bottleneck: the public access database services that are available to anyone with a computer and a modem.
The services generally charge for each minute a caller's computer is connected to the service's computers.
H. &amp; R Block's Compuserve Information Service, for example, charges 20 cents a minute.


Short and Timman Win Their Semifinals
NIGEL SHORT and Jan Timman will meet in the final candidates match to decide which will challenge Gary Kasparov for the world championship in Los Angeles in the fall of 1993.
Short, a 26-year-old English grandmaster, won Game 10 in his semifinal match in Linares, Spain, on Tuesday to defeat Anatoly Karpov, a former champion, 6-4.
Timman, a 40-year-old Dutch grandmaster, won his 10th Linares game Monday to defeat the German (formerly Russian) grandmaster Artur Yusupov, 6-4.


April 26-May 2; 'Six Degrees': Legal Fiction
In 1983, David Hampton posed as the son of the actor Sidney Poitier to get inside the homes of prominent New Yorkers, from whom he took money and property, a ruse that inspired John Guare's play "Six Degrees of Separation."
Claiming his personality deserved the same protection as copyrights, trademarks or patents, Mr.
Hampton, who served time for attempted burglary, sued. .


Granada's Gardens
To the Editor: Caroline Seebohm's article, "Summer Gardens of Granada's Kings" (March 22), was a delight both in itself and because my wife and I had just visited the Alhambra and Generalife in late January.
While the gardens can only be lovely and perhaps overpowering in summer, they are a traveler's reward even in winter.
That the deciduous trees were leafless was not a deterrent in Granada; this provided unparalleled vistas of the city and of the nearby snow-capped Sierra Nevada.
We were chilly but enthralled.


Life on the Fringe, Where It's Best Not to Think Big
The rock-and-roll dream used to be simple: plug an individual vision into the electronic media and shake the world.
But in the teeming precincts of homemade, independent-label collegiate rock, where any basement can be a recording studio and any post-office box a business address, diminished expectations have taken over.
Forget about heavy rotation on the Top 40; it's better to hope that the local college radio station will squeeze a song into its 2 to 6 A.M. slot.
And don't even think about rallying the masses; the song will be lucky if it reaches fellow fringe-dwellers.
Yet a surprising number of listeners will rouse themselves to find out just what that three-minute conundrum was, if it has the right balance of tune and noise, coherence and mystery.
With the wider public out of reach, replaced by an attentive microcult, songs can become secret musings, made not so much to be broadcast as to be overheard, then shared with a select few who are willing to track down vinyl singles and EP's.
The music is wayward, cryptic, diffident, defensive: the sound of private tantrums and preoccupations.


Topics of The Times; Eating Fast on Broadway
A big evening in New York City used to mean dinner and the theater.
Came the 80's and it meant just dinner.
No longer was it hot stuff to have two seats on the aisle for a hit show.
Hot stuff was a table in a hit restaurant.
To look back at the decade is to see blackened redfish and pinkish duck, the green of cilantro and the purple of Peruvian potatoes.
It is to remember fewer hangovers and more indigestion.
It is to burp.


Mambo Madness
MONDAY, Mambo Monday.
Again the pink flamingos are out on the sidewalk in front of S.O.B.'s in TriBeCa, a signal that, for the next hour or two, the Latin dance club is offering free lessons to would-be Mambo Kings and Queens.
The scene inside is dark, tropical, ripe.
At the bar, men and women are drinking Coors, smoking Camels and looking sultry.
They know how to mambo.
They learned last Monday.
At a table near the dance floor, a couple in business suits seem to be in the getting-to-know-you mode.
She's Joni Ruller, 29 years old.
He's Philip Oths, 33.


CORRECTION
An answer in the Q &amp; A column on April 19 about the bequest of a co-op apartment misidentified a court decision affecting the matter.
It was Lincoln Guild Housing Corporation v.
Stuckelman, not Lincoln Guild v.
Wendt.


Quotation of the Day
"I just came out to help the community. This is not just a black community, this is everybody's community. People want to help." -- JACKIE TROST, a white woman from Beverly Hills helping to supervise cleanup activities in South-Central Los Angeles.  [ 22:2. ]


Ms. Chamberlain Has Wedding
Heidi Marie Chamberlain, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Ronald Chamberlain of Wayne, N.J., was married there yesterday to John Stephen Clark Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Clark of Bronxville, N.Y.
The Rev.
George Hundt performed the ceremony at Our Lady of the Valley Roman Catholic Church.


T.E. Bixby to Wed Heather J. Myers
Mr. and Mrs.
Gary D. Myers of Lancaster, Pa., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Heather Jean Myers, to Timothy Edward Bixby, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward K. Bixby of Edina, Minn.
A June wedding is planned.


Katie Danziger Is a Bride
Katherine Block Danziger, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard M. Danziger of New York, was married last night to Steven Gilbert Horowitz, the son of Norman Horowitz of Los Angeles and Florence Horowitz of New York.
Rabbi Daniel Wolk performed the ceremony at the Pierre.
Mrs.
Horowitz, 28 years old and known as Katie, graduated from Vassar College.
She is the promotion supervisor at Viewer's Choice, a division of Pay-Per-View Television Network in New York.
Her father is of counsel to the New York law firm of Richards &amp; O'Neil.


5th Livery-Cab Driver Is Killed Within 2 Weeks
Two days after livery-cab owners urged the Police Department to treat violence against livery drivers as an "all-out emergency," a 21-year-old man from Queens yesterday became the fifth driver to be killed in New York City in two weeks.
The victim, Fabian Moreno, was shot in the head early yesterday in Woodside, Queens, apparently during a robbery attempt.


Abroad at Home; A Lost Country
The acquittal of the policemen who clubbed Rodney King, and the violent reaction in black communities, showed us an American society that has lost its way.
There were sophisticated explanations for the jury verdict in Simi Valley, Calif.: The prosecution made mistakes, the defense was shrewd . . .
But no one can really doubt what happened.


A Model English Garden
HOW often have I wished for a third dimension and perfect color reproduction while browsing the pages of nursery catalogues?
Will a particular shrub prove dense enough to hide an unsightly pipe?
Will the pinks of clusiana tulips sit well beside the blue of an established ceanothus?
And how quickly can I expect a new hedge to protect me from the neighbor's wolfhound?
The British, passionate gardeners that they be, have an answer: Wisley Garden.
This extraordinary resource is a growing catalogue of much of the dazzling range of plants suited to Britain's temperate climate.
Maintained by the dean of gardening fraternities, the Royal Horticultural Society, Wisley is 28 miles southwest of Hyde Park Corner in London and is open to all comers.


Evidence Links '88 Bush Campaign to Effort to Silence an Accuser of Quayle
In a peculiar footnote to the 1988 Presidential campaign, a Federal prisonertried to step forward four days before the election to assert that he had once sold marijuana to Dan Quayle.
His accusation was never substantiated and he returned to the obscurity of his cell.
But now evidence collected in connection with a lawsuit by the inmate, Brett C. Kimberlin, indicates that the Bush-Quayle campaign was involved in a decision by the highest official of the Bureau of Prisons to silence Mr.
Kimberlin and place him in solitary confinement.


Ms. Brookins Has Wedding
Stephanie Leale Brookins, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Dale C. Brookins of Wayne, Pa., was married there yesterday to Anthony Joseph Manzella 2d, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles M. Manzella of North Hampton, N.H.
The Rev.
Rudolf A. Moore performed the ceremony at St.
David's Episcopal Church.
Ms.
Brookins, who is 26 years old and is keeping her name, graduated from Hamilton College, as did her husband.
She also received a master's degree in history from Stanford University, where she is a research assistant.
Her father is the president of American Visual Art Associates, a graphics design firm in Malvern, Pa.


Rewarding Postscript to a Restaurant Invitation
A RESTAURANT in Floral Park, C. P. Michael's Cafe and Grill, is as honest and appealing as the letter that brought it to our attention.
That letter, handwritten on lined paper, came from Paul Markowski, the chef and co-owner of this corner cafe at 41 Covert Avenue.
Mr.
Markowski wrote that he and his partner, Corey Marcolini, had opened a restaurant that had been "well received in the area." He said his previous cooking experience was "at the River Cafe and Quatorze in New York and Le Manoir aux Quat Saison, a two-star restaurant listed in France's 'Michelin Guide.' "


Pornography and the New Puritans: Letters From Andrea Dworkin and Others
To the Editor:
As a former adviser to the pornography squad at Scotland Yard, I was distressed that such a distinguished writer as John Irving could write as he did.


Hawaii Cemetery To Ban Buses From Unloading
Hawaii's most visited tourist site, the National Memorial Cemetery of the Pacific, at Punchbowl Crater on Oahu, will prohibit tour buses, vans and other commercial vehicles from dropping off passengers there, for six months beginning June 1.
The vehicles will be allowed to drive through the cemetery in what G. E. Castagnetti, the cemetery director, calls a "windshield tour," but they will not be permitted to stop.
People in private or rental cars will still be allowed to park, however.
The ban is designed to reduce congestion and noise at the cemetery, where about 36,000 veterans from World War I to the Vietnam War are buried.
The sweeping view of Honolulu and the coast draws about 130 buses and 700 other vehicles daily to the 112-acre cemetery.
About six million people visited in 1991.


Johnny Cash, An Enduring American Icon
At the rock-and-roll hall of Fame dinner in January, there was some grumbling behind the scenes that Johnny Cash, an inductee this year, didn't really deserve to be included.
Mr.
Cash was a country singer; what was he doing in the Rock-and-Roll Hall of Fame?
If there was one moment that confirmed Mr.
Cash's status as a bit of an outsider, it came during the evening's closing jam session, when Neil Young, Keith Richards, John Fogerty and other icons plowed through a version of Jimi Hendrix's "Purple Haze." As the song began, Mr.
Cash, who had already led the jam in a couple of his own tunes, looked around helplessly.
He didn't know the chords.


Front Offices Are Making Room for Some New Ideas
The system of player acquisition in the National Football League has been an ever evolving one.
It's a challenge for teams to integrate the four primary ways to obtain players -- Plan B, the draft, trades and other free-agent signings -- and just when they appear to be getting the hang of it, the system could soon be overhauled.
The Freeman McNeil free-agency case that is scheduled to be tried in June and the fact that this was the last year the college draft was held under contract with the players' union will force changes, either through the courts or in a new agreement between the league and its players.
Either way, N.F.L. teams are holding onto their 1993 draft picks.


RIOTS IN LOS ANGELES: What to Say; THE HARSH LESSONS FACED BY CHILDREN
One of the most worrisome long-term effects of the verdict in the beating of Rodney G. King is likely to be the moral and emotional lessons children learn from it, therapists say.
While the jury did not find it persuasive, the videotape of Los Angeles police officers beating Mr.
King was repeatedly played on television, giving it a place in the common culture of childhood.
And its raw, real-life violence adds to its power in shaping moral and emotional attitudes, experts say.


Q and A
D-Day Tours in Normandy
Q.
Is there an organization that offers guided tours to the beaches and other sites related to the Normandy invasion?
Is it possible to join them in France? -- George Winnett Jr., Washington


Caller ID
TECHNOLOGY -- Bad news for obscene callers and scam artists: if they dial someone who has caller ID, their number lights up on a little window.
In some communities, so does their name.
Right now, caller ID works only with local calls; it cannot track long-distance calls.
Caller ID figures out the number from codes in telephone signals: computer-language in an inaudible stream of data transmitted with the call.
New Jersey was the first state to approve caller ID, in 1987; 20 other states now have it.
In New York, Poughkeepsie will get caller ID soon; New York City will have to wait a year or more.
WHAT IT COSTS -- The phone here, an A. T. &amp; T. Model 764, can display the time and date of up to 64 incoming calls along with the number.
It costs $149.99, plus a local phone company charge of about $7 a month for residential customers, $9 for businesses.


Devils Pack Up and Carry Baggage of Playoff Loss
The pain and agony from losing to the Rangers in the seventh game of their playoff series will stay for the summer with the Devils, whether they are on the golf course or fishing on some isolated lake.
The 10 team records, including the 87 points from a mark of 38-31-11, that were set or tied in the regular season will not erase the memory of the franchise's failure to gain greater recognition in the metropolitan area.


Silly Policies Make OTB's Lose Money
"Sell OTB? Cuomo Study Forces a Delay"  [ April 19 ]  made some salient points.
But I can't fathom OTB's losing money.
They even have an edge which no bookmaker ever enjoyed -- a surcharge on winning bets.
If OTB wants to encourage more betting revenue and attendance to upgrade its operation, then it should lobby in Albany against the unfair takeout on exotic wagers, which is estimated from 25 percent to 35 percent.
Why should a bettor be taxed more on exotics when chances of winning are less.
And most of all, eliminate the silly surcharge tax and the Uncle Sam tax on daily doubles above $600.


POSTINGS: $100 Million Rebuilding; Ferry Terminal Contest
The fire that damaged the Staten Island ferry terminal last year provided what the stagnant economy could not: a spur to reconstruction.
Known formally as the Whitehall Ferry Terminal, the structure was supposed to have been renovated as part of the South Ferry Plaza commercial development, forming the base of a 60-story office tower.
But that project fell through in January 1991.


Anne Groer Wed To M. D. Mosettig
Anne Lee Groer, the daughter of Aron Groer of Silver Spring, Md., and the late Hannah Kessler Groer, and Michael David Mosettig, the son of the late Dr.
Erich Mosettig and the late Ann Nelson Mosettig, were married yesterday evening in Bethesda, Md.
The Rev.
William McD.
Tully, an Episcopal minister, and Rabbi Harold White officiated at the home of Steven and Cokie Roberts.
Ms.
Groer is a Washington correspondent for The Orlando Sentinel.
She graduated from the University of Maryland and was a Russell Sage graduate fellow at the University of Wisconsin.
Her father, now retired, was a taxi driver in Washington.


Oratorio Recalls Hundreds of Years of Jewish Exile
THE last time Louis Barbanel spoke before a congregation in a synagogue was 13 years ago at his bar mitzvah at Congregation Beth Shalom in Long Beach.
In a return engagement today at 4 P.M. in the synagogue, he helps narrate an oratorio, "Ever Since Babylon," to be performed by the C. W. Post College Choir.
He is appearing because of the 500th anniversary of two events close to him, the expulsion of the Jews from Spain and the discovery of America, and the religious freedom it would offer Jews.


IN SHORT/REFERENCE BOOKS
VARIETY MOVIE GUIDE Consulting editor, Derek Elley.
Prentice Hall General Reference, $20.


Mexican officials jailed for sewer explosions


Backlash Blames Feminism for Sins of Sexism
To the Editor: I couldn't decide if Georgette Mosbacher was willfully misreading backlash theories about feminism in "The Backlash Myth" (Op-Ed, April 20) or didn't analyze the debate.
To discuss the "backlash" against feminism is to acknowledge the book "Backlash: The Undeclared War Against Women" by Susan Faludi.
Yet nowhere in Ms.
Mosbacher's commentary is one pertinent refutation of a backlash argument as posited by Ms.
Faludi or anyone else.
Ms.
Mosbacher presents her own version of what the backlash theory is and rebuts her invented arguments.
The result is facile, pseudo-feminism.


Insect-Resistant Grasses
Anyone putting in a brand-new lawn should consider grass varieties that are not only disease-resistant and drought-tolerant, but also repel insects.
They are called endophytic grasses, because they contain endophytes, or fungus, which are intolerable to ground-feeding insects, like the loathsome chinch bug, sod webworm, cutworm, billbug, weevil and aphid. (Grubs are not affected, because they feed on roots.)
Turf-type ryegrasses and tall fescues, as well as fine fescues, harbor endophytes, said Richard Hurley, who earned his doctorate in breeding grasses at Rutgers University, where he now teaches.
He has also developed a number of endophytic grasses for Lofts Seed Inc. of New Jersey.


Preston R. Bassett, Flight Expert, 100; Was Head of Sperry
Preston Rogers Bassett, a former president of Sperry Gyroscope Company and the chief engineer in the development of the first automatic pilot and other flight instruments, died on Thursday at his home in Ridgefield, Conn.
He was 100 years old.
He died of cardiac arrest, a son, Preston R. Bassett Jr. of Wyckoff, N.J., said.


UP AND COMING: Ralph Fiennes; In the Footsteps Of Olivier And O'Toole
For an actor who cut his teeth on stage as an ensemble member of the Royal Shakespeare Company, Ralph Fiennes (pronounced Rafe Fines) is making a heady bid to become a leading man on screen.
On Wednesday, he treads bravely into Peter O'Toole territory, playing T. E. Lawrence in "A Dangerous Man: Lawrence After Arabia," a "Great Performances" presentation at 9 P.M. on PBS.
This fall he follows in Laurence Olivier's charismatically moody wake as Heathcliff in Paramount's film remake of "Wuthering Heights" -- known as "Emily Bronte's Wuthering Heights" to avoid confusion with the 1939 version.
O'Toole and Olivier are daunting precedents by anyone's standards, especially when the sum total of your screen experience is a bit part in the British TV series "Prime Suspect." But Mr.
Fiennes, who is 29, thinks his two new projects are distinct enough from their predecessors to minimize inevitable comparisons.
"A Dangerous Man," for instance, is concerned less with deserts than diplomacy; in it, Colonel Lawrence and the Arab prince Feisal come together at the 1919 Paris Peace Conference to determine the shape of the Middle East in the aftermath of World War I.


Love or Chemicals Smother Lawns
SOME people just love their lawns.
They fertilize them.
They cut them.
They water them.
They hover over them.
They nuke them with pesticides and herbicides.
I knew a man who wouldn't even let his wife walk on the lawn.
"Some folks think of lawns as animate objects, a living thing like a dog or a cat, and they feel pain if their lawn doesn't feel good," said Eliot C. Roberts, director of the Lawn Institute in Pleasant Hill, Tenn.
"They want to do something. And it's hard for us to say, 'Leave the lawn alone for a while; it'll probably take care of itself.' "


Ascending The Slippery Slope Of Allegories
Allegory.
The very word can make dance audiences shudder.
Over the years, there have been innumerable choreographic effusions in which personifications of Good and Evil, War and Peace or Capital and Labor wave their fists at one another with all the naivete of performers in a Sunday-school pageant.
No wonder, then, that the Joffrey Ballet's decision to revive "Les Presages" has sparked apprehension as well as anticipation.
This grandly scaled work for a large ensemble will be featured on Friday night, the opening performance of the Joffrey's spring season at the Wiltern Theater in Los Angeles, and will be repeated during the monthlong engagement.


Technology; From the Voice-Mail Acorn, a Still-Spreading Oak
At the sound of the tone: Call me, Ishmael.
With little fanfare, voice mail has spread throughout American business, if not literature.
More and more people encounter voice mail, a kind of answering machine on steroids, whenever they call a travel agency, a bank, a car dealership or, especially, a co-worker down the hall.
Market research indicates that 70 percent of a typical company's phone traffic is internal.
Thus, the thick handbooks of voice-mail instructions are mostly designed to send a message to Harry down the hall.


Australia Visas From Qantas
Qantas Airways has begun issuing visas to Australia in its ticket office in San Francisco and plans to start issuing visas tomorrow in its Los Angeles office.
Only United States citizens with valid United States passports can use Qantas's service.
For Qantas passengers, there is no cost for the service; for others, there is a $25 fee.
The airline's offices expects it will take one or two days to issue a visa, and will mail it attached to the passenger's passport.


At Floriade, Tulips Are Just a Start
NEVER go to the Netherlands in April without your woolies.
It may be 80 degrees one day (the day before you arrive) and 40 degrees and raining the next, with an icy wind blowing off the North Sea.
Like the one that blew my umbrella inside out as I stood, groggy from seven hours on the plane, trying to get my bearings outside Amsterdam's Central train station. (Leave the umbrella home; it's useless.)


On Experimenting With Animals
Thank you for raising the issue of animal experimentation with Angi Metler's interview (New Jersey Q &amp; A, "A Leader in the Battle for Animal Rights," March 22).
However, Norman Fine's response, in a letter to the New Jersey editor on April 12, erroneously claims that animal experimentation is a benefit for humans.
Despite his claims, penicillin is actually lethal to guinea pigs.
A veterinarian would use a sulfa antibiotic like Ditrim, not penicillin, to treat a guinea pig.


BEST SELLERS: May 3, 1992
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
8
THE PELICAN BRIEF, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $22.50.) A woman law student seeks to discover the truth about the murder of two Supreme Court justices.
2
3
2
ALL AROUND THE TOWN, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $22.) The plight of a college student accused of killing her professor, and the part a childhood experience plays in it.
3
2
2
"I" IS FOR INNOCENT, by Sue Grafton. (Holt, $18.95.) Kinsey Millhone investigates the case of a man once charged with murdering his rich wife.
4
5
3
JAZZ, by Toni Morrison. (Knopf, $21.) A couple in the Harlem of the 1920's learn again and again that life does not keep its promises.
5
4
12
RISING SUN, by Michael Crichton. (Knopf, $22.) The mysterious death of a young woman leads to an investigation in which technology and the American-Japanese rivalry play major roles. (LP)
6
6
2
FOR LOVE ALONE, by Ivana Trump. (Pocket, $22.) The experiences of a Czechoslovak-born skier married to a wealthy entrepreneur from an old New York family.
7
9
19
DISNEY'S BEAUTY AND THE BEAST. (Gallery Books/Penguin USA, $6.98.) A retelling of the classic fairy tale in words and pictures.
8
7
8
THE ELF QUEEN OF SHANNARA, by Terry Brooks. (Del Rey/Ballantine, $22.) The third volume in a series about a fantasy land.
9
8
10
THE ROAD TO OMAHA, by Robert Ludlum. (Random House, $23.95.) A retired general and a lawyer scheme to take possession of Nebraska on behalf of an obscure Indian tribe. (LP)
10
12
106
OH, THE PLACES YOU'LL GO! by Dr. Seuss. (Random House, $12.95.) Verse and pictures.
11
10
11
VOX, by Nicholson Baker. (Random House, $15.) A man and a woman learn about each other through a telephone conversation on an "adult party line."
12
11
5
ACTS OF FAITH, by Erich Segal. (Bantam, $23.) The stories of three Brooklyn natives, one of whom rises high in the Roman Catholic hierarchy, two who break with their traditional Jewish heritage.
13
14
30
SCARLETT, by Alexandra Ripley. (Warner, $24.95.) The sequel to "Gone With the Wind."
14
2
SILENT PREY, by John Sandford. (Putnam, $21.95.) A retired cop and a New York policewoman join hands to track down an escaped serial killer.
15
1
FRENCH SILK, by Sandra Brown. (Warner, $18.95.) The ordeal and romance of a New Orleans businesswoman suspected of killing a television evangelist.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
14
REVOLUTION FROM WITHIN, by Gloria Steinem. (Little, Brown, $22.95.) The reflections of a feminist on the struggle to achieve self-esteem.
2
4
7
ROGUE WARRIOR, by Richard Marcinko with John Weisman. (Pocket, $22.) The memoirs of the retired commander of a counterterrorist unit.
3
7
2
GIVE WAR A CHANCE, by P. J. O'Rourke. (Atlantic Monthly, $20.95.) Satirical essays on recent social and political developments.
4
3
9
DOUBLE CROSS, by Sam Giancana and Chuck Giancana. (Warner, $22.95.) Two relatives of the late Sam Giancana recall his life in the Mafia.
5
2
24
BACKLASH, by Susan Faludi. (Crown, $24.) A journalist describes a war against women's rights.
6
12
2
HIGH TREASON 2, by Harrison Edward Livingstone. (Carroll &amp; Graf, $25.95.) Charges of a cover-up after the death of John F. Kennedy.
7
6
29
DEN OF THIEVES, by James B. Stewart. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $25.) Plunderers on Wall Street.
8
9
4
REINVENTING GOVERNMENT, by David Osborne and Ted Gaebler. (Patrick/Addison-Wesley, $22.95.) How government should operate.
9 *
8
5
THE DISUNITING OF AMERICA, by Arthur M. Schlesinger Jr. (Norton, $14.95.) A historian considers the current emphasis on ethnicity.
10
10
24
MOLLY IVINS CAN'T SAY THAT, CAN SHE? by Molly Ivins. (Random House, $23.) Political essays.
11 *
1
TWO NATIONS, by Andrew Hacker. (Scribners, $24.95.) A political scientist discusses the way racism affects American life, keeping blacks and whites separate, hostile and unequal.
12
16
13
MAUS II, by Art Spiegelman. (Pantheon, $18.) An Auschwitz survivor's story, in comic-book form.
13
14
3
BARCELONA, by Robert Hughes. (Knopf, $27.50.) The story of the Spanish city through 15 centuries.
14
11
22
MEMORIES, by Ralph Emery with Tom Carter. (Macmillan, $19.95.) The autobiography of a country-music broadcaster.
15 *
15
5
EARTH IN THE BALANCE, by Al Gore. (Houghton Mifflin, $22.95.) The Tennessee Senator discusses factors affecting the environment.
16 *
9
THE TEXAS CONNECTION, by Craig I. Zirbel. (Texas Connection/Ingram, $21.95.) An attorney says L.B.J. was involved in the death of J.F.K.
17 *
1
WHO WILL TELL THE PEOPLE, by William Greider. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $25.) A journalist's account of how powerful monied interests and elite groups dominate the Federal Government.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
1
11
A RETURN TO LOVE, by Marianne Williamson. (HarperCollins, $20.) Ways to replace feelings of fear with feelings of love in daily life.
2
2
THE JUICEMAN'S POWER OF JUICING, by Jay Kordich. (Morrow, $15.) A program for staying healthy and trim by consuming fresh juices.
3
2
22
MORE WEALTH WITHOUT RISK, by Charles J. Givens. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) Financial advice.
4
3
22
HOW TO SATISFY A WOMAN EVERY TIME, by Naura Hayden. (Bibli O'Phile/Dutton, $14.95.) Sexual counsel for married couples.
5
4
17
AWAKEN THE GIANT WITHIN, by Anthony Robbins. (Summit, $20.) Taking control of your life.
BROTHER EAGLE, SISTER SKY: A Message From Chief Seattle, illustrated by Susan Jeffers (Dial), previously listed as nonfiction, has been recategorized as advice, how-to and miscellaneous.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,050 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 28,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.
And Bear in Mind
(Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)
TURTLE MOON, by Alice Hoffman. (Putnam, $21.95.) Ms.
Hoffman's lovely novel insists that there is magic in our lives; its chief characters, two damaged adults and a troubled child, not only believe in happy endings, they are willing to work for them.
HEAD TO HEAD: The Coming Economic Battle Among Japan, Europe, and America, by Lester Thurow. (Morrow, $25.) A professor and cogent analyst of economics argues that other societies, operating by other rules, are likely to leave the United States behind; his probable winner is Europe.
A COMPLICATED WAR: The Harrowing of Mozambique, by William Finnegan. (University of California, $25.) A brilliant, sometimes devastating eyewitness report of the civil war, sponsored by South Africa, that has killed a million Mozambicans.
LIFE FORCE, by Fay Weldon. (Viking, $21.) The author, a generous satirist and feminist student of modern mores, delivers a sex comedy that is also a parable about the act of creativity itself.
ONLY MAN IS VILE: The Tragedy of Sri Lanka, by William McGowan. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $25.) How the people of a terrestrial paradise (still remembered as Ceylon) turned it, with the assistance of India, into a hell on earth in barely a decade.
ON MOZART: A Paean for Wolfgang, by Anthony Burgess. (Ticknor &amp; Fields, $19.95.) Mr.
Burgess, himself a skilled composer when not novelizing, sets his homage in heaven, where the departed utter truths about music that are not easily available on earth.
BEGINNING WITH MY STREETS: Essays and Recollections, by Czeslaw Milosz. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $30.) The 1980 Nobel laureate discusses a variety of themes: time and ephemerality, nationalism and religion, the cardinal sins, his literary friends.
May 2, 1992, Sunday The nonfiction best seller list on page 32 of The Times Book Review today omits "Brother Eagle, Sister Sky: A Message From Chief Seattle," which was carried for 17 weeks in the nonfiction category.
The change was made because of evidence, reported in a news article on April 21, that the contents of the book do not reflect words spoken by Chief Seattle, but have as their source a speech written for a 1971 movie by Ted Perry, a screenwriter.
"Brother Eagle, Sister Sky" has been reclassified under "Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous." Because that category lists only five entries a week and the book is not among the top five, it does not appear.


RIOTS IN LOS ANGELES: World View; Europe Is Aghast, Fearing Unrest There; Japan Takes Moral High Ground
The terrifying images of racial violence in Los Angeles have hit people in both Europe and Japan with an intensity that similar scenes in the Balkans, Afghanistan and South Africa never did.
Europeans had persuaded themselves that those places were in a different world, but America and American mass culture are not.
They know that what has gone wrong in the United States could go just as wrong in Europe.
Racial, ethnic and social tensions have erupted into violent conflict in Britain, France and Germany, though on a lesser scale, and could do so again.


Jackson's Condition Is Legitimate Concern for Knicks
With point guard Mark Jackson hindered by a painful left-thigh injury, the Knicks face a decisive Game 5 playoff battle today against the Detroit Pistons.
Either the Knicks' or the Pistons' season will end.
And neither team is ready to give in.
"This team is not ready to go on vacation until June," said Knick forward Xavier McDaniel.


This Week's Numbers
Consensus
Last Period
Estimates*
Tuesday
Late April car sales, millions
5.5
6.3
Wednesday
Wholesale trade, March
0.5
0.3
Thursday
Jobless claims
404
400
Change in Consumer credit, in millions
-$200
-$100
Friday
Change in nonfarm payroll, thousands
19
50
Unemployment, percent
7.3
7.3
Tuesday: Presidential primaries in Indiana, North Carolina and Ohio *
Three-year Treasury note auction *
Productivity and costs  Wednesdayz: Federal Reserve releases its beige book *
Ten-year Treasury note auction  Thursday: Bundesbank Council meeting *
April chainstore sales *
Thirty-year Treasury note auction  (Source: I.D.E.A. Inc.)


Jacqueline Reiss Plans to Marry
Mr. and Mrs.
Peter Reiss of Westport, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Jacqueline Kendrick Reiss, to James Patrick Bebon, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard Bebon of Fairfield, Conn.
A September wedding is planned.
Miss Reiss, 26 years old, graduated from St.
Michael's College and is a graduate education student at the University of Bridgeport.
Her father is a vice president of the Westport investment firm of Pendrick Reeves.


Deidre Chamales Has Wedding
Deidre Ann Chamales, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John Chamales of Ridgewood, N.J., was married yesterday to Bruce DeWitt Merritt, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward G. Merritt of Whitestone, Queens.
The Rev.
Gene Hendricks performed the ceremony at Our Lady of Mount Carmel Roman Catholic Church in Ridgewood, assisted by the Rev.
Robert A. Perless, a minister of the Reformed Church in America.
Mrs.
Merritt, 26 years old, is an account executive with Metromedia Paging, a division of Southwestern Bell, in Boston.
She graduated from Lynchburg College.
Her father is the first vice president of underwriting for the Connie Lee Insurance Company in Washington.
Her mother, Jean Chamales, is a real-estate agent with Tarvin Realtors in Ridgewood.


Hastings, He Wrote?
THIS is the story of a book with a plot that takes place in the fictional village of Quarryville-on-Hudson, which bears -- in the view of more than one resident here -- a strong resemblance to the real village of Hastings-on-Hudson.
The problem in telling this story is that no one is willing to go on record about who they think is who (it is a small village, after all), and the author himself is being coy.
"Tell me who people are saying they think is who," asked David Willis McCullough from his Hastings home.


Bookshelf
Additional titles of interest:
THE RAG COAT.
Written and illustrated by Lauren Mills.
Little, Brown. $14.95 (Ages 5 to 9) Minna is old enough and wants to go to school, but she is embarrassed that she has no coat.
Mama's quilting group makes her a coat out of scraps, and when the children tease her she shows them the patches that transform the "rag coat" into a coat of many stories -- indeed, stories of their lives.


Canada's Northwest to Vote on New Eskimo Land
Eskimos in Canada are about to take a big step toward formal political control of the icebound land mass that has been their home for centuries.
Residents of the Northwest Territories are to vote on Monday on a proposed western boundary for the new territory of Nunavut, meaning Our Land in the native Inuktitut language.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Democrats; Centrist Council Exults In Success of a Member
In some quarters, the Democratic Leadership Council has been denounced as a reactionary group of white, male, Southern politicians who would ruin the Democratic Party by rejecting its traditional constituencies and embracing Republican thinking.
But when Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas returned here today to speak to his old colleagues, it was as the leader of a newly matured movement that has now all but hijacked the rest of the party, forcing it onto a centrist policy track that its leaders hope will take the Democrats back to the White House this year.


France Rethinks Its Wink at Sex Harassment
For decades, the gap between French and American cultures could be measured through sex -- the French made saucy movies, kissed in public and boasted of extramarital affairs, while Americans treated sex as something between a secret ritual and an embarrassing necessity.
That, at least, was how many of the French saw things.
Indeed, as recently as last fall, when the problem of sexual harassment dominated Judge Clarence Thomas's confirmation hearings for the Supreme Court, a good many French men viewed the scandal as a display of, if not puritanism, certainly hypocrisy.


Marilyn in Fantasy
QUEEN OF DESIRE
By Sam Toperoff. 276 pp. New York: HarperCollins Publishers. $20.


A Question of Life
On a bitterly cold January night five years ago, I bundled up and went to visit a friend in the hospital who had just given birth to her second child.
Hovering nervously near the foot of the bed, I hesitated when my friend asked me to come closer.
In a moment, she thrust her newborn daughter into my arms and I trembled, trying to turn and hide the tears that began streaming down my face.
I was 30 years old.
Single.
Childless.
And only four days before I had heard the word that would change everything: cancer.


Making a Difference; Sheraton's Marketer Packs Them In
Robert F. Cotter first worked for the Sheraton hotel chain as a pool-side short-order cook in Boston during the summer of 1969.
"Some people suggest it was the last job I handled well," jokes Mr.
Cotter, now the company's senior vice president for marketing.
But his work devising Sheraton's new "Sure Savers" promotion will probably eclipse his early burger-flipping achievements.
After last Monday's launch of the simplified pricing structure -- designed to eliminate the uncertainty over room rates that many Sheraton customers said they loathed -- the ITT Sheraton Corporation started booking rooms at volumes not seen in five years.


Opposition Grows to Incinerator Planned for Brooklyn Navy Yard
About 100 residents of Fort Greene, Brooklyn, yesterday attended the latest in a series of town meetings to voice opposition to New York City's plans to place a large garbage incinerator in the Brooklyn Navy Yard.
Several other communities have opposed the incinerator, an essential part of the Dinkins administration's efforts to deal with its garbarge-disposal crisis.


Foreman's Harvard Fun
GEORGE FOREMAN received the 1992 Acclaim Entertainment Harvard Lampoon Man of the Year Award yesterday at Harvard University.
He also received a special medal normally given only to members of the humor magazine.


Yanks Come Up Short on Launching Pad
Though it may have looked like miles and miles of prodigious fly balls going over the outfield walls of Yankee Stadium, the actual measure was only 3,085 feet.
That is, 3,085 feet combined for the eight home runs hit by the Minnesota Twins and the Yankees in an onslaught of slugging yesterday that saw three major league records tied: most bases-empty home runs in a game (seven); most bases-empty home runs by a team in an inning (four), and most homers allowed in an inning (four) by one pitcher (Scott Sanderson).


That Hoe, That Sod, That . . . Look
C.
Z.
Guest doesn't want people planting zinnias wearing just any old big hats.
The syndicated gardening columnist, who appears in such publications as The New York Post and The Palm Beach Daily News, is planning to bring out a line of clothing for horticultural enthusiasts by next spring.
"It will have a classic look," she said. "A look that I like."


EAST GERMANS FACE THEIR ACCUSERS
Why would anyone wreck the lives of his own countrymen, his neighbors, his family?
Was it for power?
Because of a personal grudge?


RIOT IN LOS ANGLES: Pocket of Tension; A Target of Rioters, Koreatown Is Bitter, Armed and Determined
The nation's largest Korean-American community is grim, armed and determined to repel racial violence in its riot-scarred corner of the city.
A vigilante Korean security force, wearing white scarves, is patrolling the burned and looted shops of Koreatown, the economically vibrant enclave just north of the sad streets of South-Central Los Angeles, where black and Hispanic residents struggle with poverty and crime.


Stepfather Charged in Girl's Death in Fire
A 9-year-old girl died early yesterday in a fire in her Brooklyn apartment, and the girl's stepfather was arrested because he had left her home alone, the police and fire officials said.
The fire broke out about 11:30 P.M.
Friday on the top floor of a seven-story building at 950 Rutland Road, in Brownsville, a Fire Department spokesman, Tom Kelly, said.
The girl, Devena White, died of smoke inhalation at Brookdale Hospital at 12:30 A.M.


The Recession Snips Off a Chicago Hotel
While it is not exactly what the developer had in mind, a building is finally going up on North Michigan Avenue at Chestnut Street.
Delayed for a year, the steel and concrete framing at 840 North Michigan outlines a structure less than a quarter the size of the one first planned.
Until late in 1990, the developer, U.S.
Equities of Chicago, had envisioned a 28-story, 400,000-square-foot building with four stories of retail space topped by a 288-room Park Hyatt hotel.
But Japanese financing from the Mitsui Trust and Orix was withdrawn in 1990 and other lenders refused to consider a project including a hotel in Chicago's overbuilt and under-occupied market.


Pequot Casino Faces Challenges of Success
The Mashantucket Pequot Indians opened Connecticut's first gambling casino here in February and have not closed the doors since, with between 10,000 and 16,000 people a day from around the Northeast streaming through around the clock.
On a busy day, dealers say, 5 A.M. is a good time to get a seat at a low-stakes poker table; otherwise, take a number and wait.
But now the tribe is beginning to face some of the first implications of its own success.
Last week, the state Senate in Hartford approved, 24-to-11, the legalization of 5,500 slot machines off the reservation -- in Bridgeport, Milford, Hartford, New Haven, Windsor Locks, and Plainfield -- as a way to compete directly with the tribe for gambling dollars and lift the sagging fortunes of the state's jai-alai frontons and betting tracks.


April 26-May 2: Afghanistan; Jockeying for Power Is the Sequel to Victory For the Islamic Rebels
After 14 years of battling Soviet invaders and an indigenous Communist regime, a broad but vaguely formed coalition of Islamic rebel groups swept into Kabul last week to take charge of Afghanistan.
But the sense of jubilation was dampened by competing claims to power, long-repressed feuds, and the maneuverings of prominent commanders and their political allies.
Sibgatullah Mojadedi was named President, but his claim to the post was revealing: His very lack of real power on the battlefield had persuaded the strongest commanders that he, of all the rebel leaders, might best be able to bring the various groups together.
That doesn't stop the senior commanders from arguing that they deserve a substantial say in running the country, of course, and thus Mr.
Mojadedi's own freedom of action is sharply limited.


Golden Age Near, Michigan Scholars Are Told
The president of the University of Michigan, James J. Duderstadt, told the students, faculty members and parents at the start of the university's commencement exercises yesterday that the opportunities for change had never been so rich.
"The end of the cold war, transformation of our economy, emerging global society, technological revolution and spread of democracy," Mr.
Duderstadt said, were part of the miracles "made possible by revolutionary advances in learning."


Laureen Arrigoni Weds Peter Cassoli
Laureen Ann Arrigoni, a daughter of Edward F. Arrigoni of Harrison, N.Y., and the late Helen Arrigoni, was married yesterday in New Rochelle, N.Y., to Peter Carlo Cassoli, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Carlo P. Cassoli of Wellesley, Mass.
The Rev.
Timothy Conlon performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the chapel of Iona College.
Mrs.
Cassoli, 29 years old, graduated from Boston College.
She is a benefits manager at New York Bus Service Inc. in the Bronx.
Her father is the company's chairman.


Tyson Seeks New Trial
The lawyers for MIKE TYSON have asked the Marion County Superior Court in Indiana for a new trial on the ground that new evidence shows that the jurors who convicted him of rape in February had become prejudiced against him by the fatal fire that drove them from their hotel rooms during the two-week trial.
Among other things, the lawyers argued that some jurors, believing that the fire had been set by the Mafia or others, feared for their lives; that the fire had caused an uncommonly close bond among the jurors; that women on the jury felt indebted to or coerced by male jurors who helped them escape from the fire and that some jurors had later lied when they told the trial judge the fire had not affected their ability to render an impartial verdict.


Those Who Benefit From the Injury List
Derek Bell played two games and landed on the disabled list.
Jim Thome and Reggie Jefferson didn't even get to do that.
They ended spring training with injuries worthy of the list.
Gary Scott's psyche probably should be on the disabled list.
Andy Stankiewicz, on the other hand, has no problems or complaints.
Nor does Rich Amaral.
They have benefited from injuries to other players, and they have become two rookies to watch.
Gary DiSarcina, Reggie Sanders, Donovan Osborne, Anthony Young and Pat Mahomes have also shown they are worth watching.


Blue Dots, a Drum Corps And Great Production Values
It could be the hottest activist scene since Act Up formed five years ago, and members of this new group sport almost as many black leather jackets.
Every Tuesday night, 300 to 400 women -- mostly artists, including Cindy Sherman, Laurie Anderson, April Gornik and Elizabeth Murray -- jam the Drawing Center on Wooster Street for the meetings of the Women's Action Coalition, also known as WAC.


Miss Vanterpool, Singer, Is Wed
Yvette Susan Vanterpool, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Stanley Vanterpool of New York, was married yesterday to Carlton Long, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Quint Long of Gary, Ind.
The Rev.
John E. Brandon performed the ceremony at the Salem United Methodist Church in Manhattan.
Mrs.
Long, 35 years old, is a soprano who most recently appeared with the Deutsche Oper in Berlin.
She graduated from the University of Hartford and received a master's degree in music from the State University of New York in Binghamton.
Her father, who is retired, was the assistant director of the New York office of the Virgin Islands Department of Tourism.
Her mother, Gloria Vanterpool, who is retired, was the Manhattan director of recreation for the New York City Department of Parks and Recreation.


Claudia Tashjian Wed in Queens
Claudia Tashjian, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward Tashjian of New York, and Guido Rodriguez, the son of Amanda Henriquez of Los Angeles and Guillermo Rodriguez of South Bend, Ind., were married yesterday at St.
Sarkis Armenian Apostolic Church in Douglaston, Queens.
The Very Rev.
Anoushavan Tanielian performed the ceremony.


Kalikow Blames Yacht Envy For Montauk Pier Pressure
Peter S. Kalikow, the developer and publisher of The New York Post, has been trying for four years to build a pier on the shore in front of his country home in Montauk, L.I.
Not just any pier.
A huge pier, 127 feet long, for his 137-foot yacht, Eastwind.
For Mr.
Kalikow, the pier would be the perfect complement for his $6 million, 16,000-square-foot house -- roughly the size of 13 two-bedroom apartments in Manhattan -- on 11 acres, with two tennis courts and two pools, one indoor, one outdoor.


Public &amp; Private; Across The Divide
They say that one way the defense attorneys won the case was by playing that videotape over and over, freezing the frames so that after a while it was no more than a random collection of points of light, highlighting the movements of the suspect instead of the batons of the police.
But no matter how many times I watch the four police officers beat up Rodney King, it still looks indefensible to me, and to the 8-year-old, too.
Three times he watched the videotape and three times he brought his arms over his head in a double arch, as though to ward off baton blows.
And finally he said, "Are they really allowed to do that?"


Jumping for Jetes
New York City Ballet benefit.
New York State Theater, Lincoln Center.
April 27, midnight.


April 26-May 2; Broadway Lights Up
As the curtain rang down, the fabulous invalid was up and capering -- singing and dancing to an ovation from audiences, the praise of critics and the jingle of cash registers.
Broadway wrote finis to its 1991-92 season last week.
In that final week, marking the cutoff for Tony Award candidacy, 27 productions pulled in over 220,000 customers, more than in any single week since Christmas 1981.
And in the concluding month of its season Broadway attracted more than 830,000 theatergoers, and box-office receipts for the four-week period -- reaching $30,108,322 -- surpassed any in New York theater history .


Grand Central Owner Seeks Broader Use Of Air Rights
WHILE travelers can no longer reach far-away points from Grand Central Terminal, the owners of the mid-Manhattan landmark envision some distant destinations for its unused development rights.
As the latest step in a real estate struggle that has lasted a quarter of a century, the Penn Central Corporation, which owns the terminal, has proposed a zoning subdistrict from Third to Fifth Avenue, 38th to 48th Street, within which Grand Central's air rights could be transferred to development sites.


Sense and Sensuality
Aveda offered Love.
Then came Bliss.
Origins created Peace of Mind.
Elizabeth Arden just introduced Tranquilities.
And at his recent fall collection, the designer Gordon Henderson distributed small muslin sacks filled with ayurvedic beauty products, designed to "soothe, calm and relax overactive personalities."
Beauty, it seems, is more than skin deep these days.
From aromatherapy to urban yoga to salons with on-premises healers, treatments rooted in new-age philosophies and ancient lore have been filtering into the mainstream for the last few years.


Lenses Reflect Back to the U.S.S.R.; 'Adam's Rib' Finds Hope Amid Pain
Open the door to any apartment in Moscow, St.
Petersburg or Kiev, and chances are you will find three generations of women living claustrophobically in two or three small rooms.
Their lives are as entangled as the laundry hanging over the shower bar.
They love one another, but they are sick of one another.
They yell, they hug and they laugh; and, with one of them invariably pregnant, they wonder how many more generations like them will continue this exhausting pattern.
Vyacheslav Krishtofovich opens such a door in his movie "Adam's Rib," a portrait of a middle-aged woman, her paralyzed and mute mother and her two restless daughters who struggle together for a balance of privacy, sanity and fun in their inextricably tied lives.


Give Shape to Summer
The tickle of warm grass under bare toes . . .
The taste of lemonade sipped in the shade of a tree . . .
The heft of a ripe, red tomato just plucked from the vine . . .
A secret wish on a shooting star.
The summers of childhood are never forgotten.
As much as schoolbooks and spinach, they shape the adults we become.
This summer, as it has for 115 summers, the Fresh Air Fund hopes to give shape to summer for children who have no other outdoors than New York City's meanest streets.


Bare-Fisted Violence or Subtle Threats?
John Gotti's taste in clothing runs to what might be called the full Broadway look -- expensive double-breasted suits and silk ties of bright, bleeding colors complemented, of course, with matching pocket squares.
Thomas Gambino dresses with the tailored restraint of the English or Milanese aristocracy, in dark, demure suiting made all the more understated by deep, monochromatic ties and French-cuffed white shirts.


Pornography and the New Puritans: Letters From Andrea Dworkin and Others
To the Editor:
John Irving's essay is essential reading.
The point that all efforts have failed to establish any causal link between the publication of sexual material and rape or other sex crimes was confirmed for me again last year when I taught in Japan.
Daily Tokyo newspapers are full of depictions of nude women.
Yet there is little street crime, and sex crimes are a rarity in Japan.


Elise Hillman Plans to Marry
Mr. and Mrs.
Howard B. Hillman of Greenwich, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Elise Hillman, to Andrew Burnet Rhett Whitaker, a son of Mrs.
Donald Stewart of Bloomfield, Conn., and Francis C. Whitaker of Southampton, England.


Ms. Celentano Has Wedding
SueAnne Celentano, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John A. Celentano Jr. of New York, was married yesterday to Robert John Robinson, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert H. Robinson of Deerfield, Ill.
The Rev.
Charles Temple, an Episcopal minister, officiated at the Church of the Transfiguration in Manhattan.
The Rev.
John Connolly, a Roman Catholic priest, assisted.
Mrs.
Robinson, 30 years old, was until recently a program assistant at the Rockefeller Foundation in New York.
She graduated from Colgate University.
Her father is a partner with Celentano, Stadtmauer &amp; Walentowicz, a law firm in Clifton, N.J.
Her mother, Marion Celentano, formerly owned Marie Claire, a women's clothing boutique on Nantucket, Mass.


Learning to Stand Tall On America's Tall Ship
America's tall ship, the Eagle, slipped her winter berth here last week to shake the wrinkles out of a a new suit of sails and a new set of Coast Guard Academy cadets.
Cadets muster to their sail stations as the ship points her bow down the Thames River.
The deck crew confronts the confluence of lines that control the sails and the spars towering above them.
Hesitantly, coils of rope are laid free along the deck.
Other cadets scramble up rope ladders that scale the Eagle's 148-foot masts.


Uncle Sam's Groceries: How Dietary Recommendations Have Changed
The Department of Agriculture last week settled on a pyramid of food groups as the appropriate graphic to teach healthful nutrition.
If the prescribed balance of foods makes sense today -- and it is widely agreed that it does -- it also made sense nearly a century ago, when Willard O. Atwater of the U. S. D. A. set out strikingly similar advice, including limited consumption of fats.
In between, of course, many things happened that made little sense, except politically.
Mr.
Atwater's advice got lost sometime in the early 1900's, and after that the Agriculture Department tailored its recommendations so as to sell certain foods whose producers brought heavy pressure to bear.


Wellington in War
To the Editor: "What's Doing in Wellington" (March 1) brought back 50-year-old memories of a cursory visit there as a marine in World War II.
In the spring of 1942, elements of the First Marine Division sailed for Wellington, scheduled for some six months of training prior to opening a counteroffensive against the advancing Japanese forces.
The successes of the Japanese forced the schedule to be moved up, however, and the ships of supplies were unloaded, not for training camps, but only to be reloaded for combat.


To Give Life To Art
American Academy in Rome dinner. Metropolitan Club. April 30, 7:30 P.M.


Mayors Often Judged by Handling of Riots
Coping with civil unrest is nothing new for mayors of New York City.
John Lindsay had to.
So did Abe Beame.
Even Fiorello La Guardia.
And how well they did it often helped define their images as leaders.
Under Mayor Lindsay, the city had a comprehensive strategy to stifle civil unrest, said Barry Gottehrer, Mr.
Lindsay's chief trouble-shooter.
It was built on a network of neighborhood intelligence-gathering -- itself rooted in Mr.
Lindsay's personal political machine -- and an imaginative menu of social and political responses that were aggressively ordered up.


CULTURAL BAGGAGE
I wholeheartedly respect Barbara Ehrenreich's choice in raising her children with a culture and ethnicity of "none" (Hers: "Cultural Baggage, April 5). But I did object to the many assumptions that she made about other people and their choices in adhering to a religious or ethnic heritage.


Short and Timman Win Their Semifinals
NIGEL SHORT and Jan Timman will meet in the final candidates match to decide which will challenge Gary Kasparov for the world championship in Los Angeles in the fall of 1993.
Short, a 26-year-old English grandmaster, won Game 10 in his semifinal match in Linares, Spain, on Tuesday to defeat Anatoly Karpov, a former champion, 6-4.
Timman, a 40-year-old Dutch grandmaster, won his 10th Linares game Monday to defeat the German (formerly Russian) grandmaster Artur Yusupov, 6-4.


CULTURAL BAGGAGE
With a bit of ethnic research, Ehrenreich might have been able to answer the question she posed about her Scottish ancestors: "As for clans: Why not call them 'tribes'?"
In fact, those "bands of half-clad peasants and warriors" that she wrote about did use the word
treubh
(borrowed from the Latin
tribus
) in much the same way as the Romans did, but the Gaelic word
clann
(from the Old Irish
cland
) had a different meaning. It is beyond the scope of a short letter to explain fully the emotional and cultural nuances of the word, but clann, meaning children or descendants, came to embrace an entire extended family that shared common travail and success.


The Lemmings Who Love Total Quality
Like lemmings marching to the sea, many North American corporations are rushing headlong to a destination called "total quality." Many of these corporations are heading for a nasty surprise because the popular approaches to total quality are flawed by four self-defeating characteristics:
*
All-or-nothing orientation.
Companies simultaneously launch dozens of quality activities, superimposed on each other and on the other activities of the company.
The result is no observable link between cause and effect.
It is like researching a cure for a disease by giving a group of patients 10 different new drugs at the same time.


Bridge; One-Hand Penalty From Expert Bidding
THE biggest penalty ever recorded at a North American Championship apparently occurred during the National Men's Pairs in 1964 in Toronto, when seven no-trump redoubled failed by seven tricks for a penalty of 4,000.
This, however, is far from a world record.
That is believed to have been set a decade ago in Kharkov, Ukraine, which was then part of the Soviet Union.
After a slight misunderstanding, a player landed in six no-trump redoubled, down 12 for a penalty of 7,000.
The biggest penalty reported so far this year occurred in England in late January and should have been bigger.
The scene was the Portland Club in London, which is known for its 170-year history, its traditionalism and its lawmaking function.


Protests in Buffalo Fade Into a Footnote to Abortion
Awkward tides of human events can sometimes test a city's mettle in unexpected ways.
Los Angeles will have to meet that test in coming weeks as it grapples with the rage triggered by the Rodney G. King verdict.
Buffalo has just faced a less dramatic one and emerged largely intact.
Last January, when Operation Rescue announced that Buffalo would be the target of a series of anti-abortion protests, residents nattered about "another Wichita," and fretted that their city would sink into disgrace.
"I pictured a community gone mad and held hostage," said one abortion-rights supporter, Susan Gaska, executive director of Buffalo's Young Women's Christian Association.


London Theater Disabled Guide
Most of the theater in the West End of London are old buildings that, because of their architectural importance, need government permission for alterations, so introducing changes to assist disabled theatergoers is often difficult.
But theater managers have taken one initiative with publication of "The Disabled Access Guide to London's West End Theaters," a 40-page booklet that describes facilities at every major London theater.
It lists those with sound amplification for the hearing impaired, information about wheelchair access, details of bathroom facilities and the nearest parking and nearest Underground station.
The guide also cites discounts for wheelchair users and their escorts, which some theaters extend to all disabled.
Useful contacts for disabled visitors to London are also listed.


Backlash Blames Feminism for Sins of Sexism; Diversity on the March
To the Editor:
Georgette Mosbacher in "The Backlash Myth" (Op-Ed, April 20) writes about feminism as if there were a politically correct dress code.
Mainstream feminism has never turned away a fashionably dressed woman who wears make-up.
If Ms.
Mosbacher had been in Washington on April 5 for the march for women's lives she would have seen a tremendous diversity in the people who attended and the ways in which they were dressed.


New, Virulent Strains of Hatred in the Balkans, and Beyond
When the battle for Bosnia and Herzegovina reached Sarajevo last month, one of the first buildings damaged was the old block on the embankment of the Miljacka River beside which a 19-year-old Bosnian Serb nationalist stood on June 28, 1914, when he fired the shots that killed Archduke Franz Ferdinand of Austria and his wife Sophie.
In those days, nobody doubted that events in the Balkans crucially affected the stability of Europe, and it was Gavrilo Princip's shots, prompting war between Serbia and Austria-Hungary, that led directly to World War I.
Now, with European security anchored in the diplomatic and military alliances that grew from World War II, the consequences of Balkan conflicts are less obviously dire, to all except those who suffer and die in them.
Still, the artillery and mortar fire that Serb paramilitaries have rained down on Sarajevo, and the communal fighting that has killed at least 10,000 people and made 1.2 million others homeless elsewhere across Croatia and Bosnia, have broad implications for the stability of the modern world.
The ghost of Princip is abroad, and those it threatens may include millions who know nothing of the historic grievances of Bosnian Serbs.


In New Milford, Reminders of Tastes Past
WALKING from the street into Charles Bistro in New Milford is like stepping into a time warp.
This is a French restaurant like those remembered from 20 to 30 years ago in Manhattan.
Even the cutout figure of a French chef outside the door is a reminder of times past.
The decor contributes to a sense of welcome and homeyness: dark green wainscoting, floral pattern wallpaper with a deep rose-red background, pine floors, crisply starched white tablecloths, a rear cupboard full of colorful pottery plates, old-fashioned glass wall sconces with a soft glow, gleaming copper pots clustered above the small service bar.
Even the plants hanging above the lace-curtains in the front windows and lining the window ledge are familiar touches.


Margot O'Mara To Wed in June
Mr. and Mrs.
John M. O'Mara of Greenwich, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter Margot Courtney O'Mara to Guy Knowlton Bush, the son of Mrs.
William M. Bush of Naples, Fla., and the late Dr.
Bush.
A June wedding is planned.
Miss O'Mara, 28 years old, is a private dealer in antiques and fine art in Washington.
She graduated from Middlebury College.
Her father is the chairman of the executive committee of Quality Care Systems Inc., a health care cost-containment company in New York.


After the Riots, Washington May Be Helpless
As Los Angeles burned last week, it appeared that the nation might once again be prepared to look at the issues of economic growth and fairness and at the reality that the 1980's boom did not spread to the growing underclass of American cities.
There is no simple relationship between economic growth and inner-city rage.
From 1963 through 1965, the year of the Watts riot, there was significantly better growth than in any similar period for almost a decade before.
Now, the situation is reversed.
Through the first three-plus years of his term, George Bush has presided over less economic growth than any President since World War II, even with last week's report of a mild revival in this year's first quarter.


EAST GERMANS FACE THEIR ACCUSERS
Kinzer says that the Stasi's sordid work was conducted "with a meticulous efficiency almost unknown outside Germany." Yet these techniques, though perhaps not as ubiquitous in our country, are surely familiar to thousands of antiwar and civil rights activists who have gained access to their F.B.I. and police files over the past 20 years.
"Those who have read their files often marvel at the Stasi's voracious appetite for trivia." Yet our own extensive internal political police maintained exactly this sort of obsessive surveillance on millions of Americans.


Through Athens With Freud
THE HONEY AND THE HEMLOCK
Democracy and Paranoia in Ancient Athens and Modern America.
By Eli Sagan. 429 pp.
New York: Basic Books. $27.


Correction
An article last week about the film "Hear My Cry" misstated the name and year of a suicidal protest by a Czechoslovak student.
He was Jan Palach, and the year was 1969.


House-Hunting Israelis Now Scan Government Ads in the Territories
With less than two months left before a national election that is likely to focus on the future of the occupied territories, hundreds of Israelis are responding to a Government-backed sales campaign promoting subsidized housing in the West Bank and the Gaza Strip.
The drive, which began a few weeks ago, is organized by the Housing Ministry and by an umbrella group on settlements called the Council of Jewish Communities in Judea, Samaria and Gaza.


Let a Thousand Lipsticks Bloom
Few Chinese houses have doorbells, but that has not stopped the emergence here of a growing army of 10,000 women who are called "elegant and fragrant ladies."
That is what the Chinese call their Avon Ladies, and they are peddling cosmetics with a determination that has made Avon one of the most successful and best-known companies here in southern China.


Focus: Chicago; Recession Snips a Hotel Off a Complex
WHILE it is not exactly what the developer had in mind, a building is finally going up on North Michigan Avenue at Chestnut Street.
Delayed for a year, the steel and concrete framing at 840 North Michigan outlines a structure less than a quarter the size of the one first planned.
Until late in 1990, the developer, U.S.
Equities of Chicago, had envisioned a 28-story, 400,000-square-foot building with four stories of retail space topped by a 288-room Park Hyatt hotel.
But Japanese financing from the Mitsui Trust and Orix was withdrawn in 1990 and other lenders refused to consider a project including a hotel in Chicago's overbuilt and under-occupied market.


27 COUNTRIES SIGN NEW ATOM ACCORD
A group of 27 nations has signed an agreement intended to help halt the spread of nuclear arms, which some arms-control experts are calling a potentially major step toward that goal.
For the first time, the agreement, reached in Warsaw on April 3, sets out detailed international rules meant to limit the sale of machinery and material that can be used either for peaceful purposes or for making atomic bombs.
Such items include robots, special furnaces, computerized machine tools and high-strength steels.


How Dinkins Strove to Keep the Peace
At 6:30 Wednesday night, Mayor David N. Dinkins received a telephone call in his private quarters at Gracie Mansion, his official residence.
The message was urgent.
A jury had just acquitted four white Los Angeles police officers in the beating of Rodney G. King, a black motorist.
The danger was obvious, recalled Leland T. Jones, the Mayor's press secretary.
The King case had been a well-publicized symbol of police brutality to many, whites as well as blacks.
The acquittal of policemen, often a flashpoint for violence in urban communities, had brought Los Angeles to the brink.
Could New York be next?


The Osaka Decision
Of all the media mergers in the last few years, none seemed to have a greater chance of success than the Matsushita Electric Industrial Company's $6.1 billion acquisition of MCA Inc. in 1990.
The marriage was free of many of the blights on other deals.
While the Sony Corporation is thought by many in the industry to have overpaid for both Columbia Pictures and a new management team, and Time Warner has been digging itself out of debt since its merger, Matsushita is thought to have paid reasonably for MCA -- and it did so without relying much on leverage.


RIDING UGLY
The great weakness of bull riding, bronco riding and bareback riding as macho sports, as Jeff Cop lon's article "Riding Ugly" (April 12) reveals, is that the scoring system is borrowed from such sissy pursuits as synchronized swimming, gymnastics and figure skating.
Thus, any rider can lose if he happens to draw a bull or horse who is too weak and wary to buck after spending days breathing exhaust fumes in the back of a truck, en route from one rodeo to the next (while the human performers fly).


Single-Minded


Joe Namath Receives a Brand-New Pair of Knees
IN a corner room overlooking the East River that he crossed so often going to Shea Stadium as the Jets quarterback, Joe Namath eased himself off his bed at the Hospital for Special Surgery and clutched a metal walker.
Time for therapy.
Time to rehab each leg that received a metal-and-plastic knee replacement in four hours of surgery on Wednesday.
"All right now," a therapist, Dan Donato, said softly.
"Move the walker first. Then the right foot. Then the left."


Pirates Parlay Team Effort and Talent to Be the Best in the Majors
The job, he said, is simply to keep the ship afloat.
With that bloodless declaration, the captain of the enterprise propped his sweat-socked feet upon his desk and lit a cigar, which appeared to make his black mustache smoke.
This was Jim Leyland, the manager of the Pittsburgh Pirates, whose team has also been hot.
The fact that the Pirates have the best record in baseball, 16-6, has been a somewhat unlikely development, even at this early stage of the season.
After all, it lost two of its best players from last year's National League East champions: the slugger, Bobby Bonilla, who departed as a free agent, and the 20-game winning pitcher, John Smiley, who was traded before he could become a free agent.


Commercial Property: Irvington Offices; Converted Warehouses Offer 'SoHo in Westchester'
WHEN Joseph M. Kessler was thinking about moving his management consulting business from midtown Manhattan to waterfront offices in the Village of Irvington in Westchester County, everyone advised him against it.
"The so-called experts said my clients would balk about my being out of Manhattan, but it never happened," Mr.
Kessler said.
"Nobody seemed to care and the move helped us out enormously with lower overhead. I also improved my life style by cutting my commute by two-thirds."


RIOT IN LOS ANGLES: At the Epicenter; Decades of Rage Created Crucible of Violence
Large flakes of ash drifted to the ground as the basement of a church in the city's South-Central section began filling up Thursday evening with refugees from the fear and the fire sweeping through the streets.
Michael Ming, a 23-year-old college student, stood outside in the falling dusk and watched a building burn to the ground a block and a half away.
It had been burning for 12 hours.
Gunshots echoed through the dimness, and a little girl asked her mother if they could go home.
Their home, her mother said, was in flames.


The Struggle to Ease Jail Overcrowding
AS the inmate population in state and county jails inexorably rises, officials are increasingly focusing their energies and hopes on ways to send fewer offenders to jail.
With little prospect for building the thousands of jail cells needed to relieve the overcrowding, correction officials are looking to such sentencing alternatives as weekends in prison, and community service, and to work-release and home-confinement programs for inmates.
But even though the alternative programs are generally considered successful, they have been limited in scope by a number of factors.


RIDING UGLY
Shame on you for not exposing the real truth behind rodeos.
They operate on the level of fantasy.
Rodeos are ritual enactments of the domination of nature by man.
Of course, the rodeo cowboys voluntarily risk injury.
The animals have no choice but to be forced into this obscene ritual.
BATYA BAUMAN President, Feminists for Animal Rights
New York, N.Y.


'The Kid' in Charge at Town Hall
WHEN Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas visited Clinton, Conn., during the state's Democratic presidential primary campaign, he was forced to improvise on one of his standard talks to young people.
He was at Morgan High School, saying to the students that everyone in government was middle-aged, when he glanced over at his chief host in the community.
"Except your First Selectman," he added quickly.
The exception was 25-year-old Paul W. Austin, the youngest person now serving as head of a Connecticut municipality, and probably the youngest ever.
During his own campaign last fall Mr.
Austin was commonly referred to as "the kid" or "Doogie," for the adolescent doctor in the television show "Doogie Howser, M.D."


For Outsider Perot, Some Inside Help
The political outsiders who are trying to put together Ross Perot's Presidential campaign in New York have turned to a consummate political insider for help.
The Perot Petition Committee, the group seeking to get the Texas billionaire on the November ballot as an independent, recently asked for a lengthy memorandum on New York's notoriously arcane election laws from Thomas J. Spargo, a former counsel to the state Republican party and the State Senate Elections Committee.


Helen G. Collier To Wed in Fall
Mr. and Mrs.
William J. Collier Jr. of Stamford, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter Helen Gaffney Collier to Richard Kevin Mauch, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
A.
Richard Mauch of Rockville Centre, L.I.
An October wedding is planned.
Ms.
Collier is an associate in the law firm of Farer Siegal Fersko in Westfield, N.J.
She graduated from Boston College and received a J.D. from Fordham University.
Her father is a partner in the New York law firm of Collier, Cohen, Shields &amp; Bock.


Making a Difference; The Thelma and Louise of Gay Greeting Cards
Rare is the product that can leap the marketing chasm between niche flash and national success.
And rare is the social message that sells.
So the task two Yale-educated sisters have set for themselves, to take their year-old gay and lesbian greeting card company mainstream, should be daunting.
Yet in two weeks, the Not-So-Square Card Company of Norwich, Vt., will make its crossover debut at the National Stationery Show in New York.
And the sisters, Kimberly Ford, 26, and Nannette Ford, 25, will get a shot at cracking the sexual-orientation barrier of an industry that thrives on romantic sentiment.
The goal for now: getting on the racks of the nation's large card shops.


The Year Of the Ribbon
EVERYTHING was, at first, handmade.
Painters, curators, museum administrators, they stood at work tables in a costume studio crafting their memorials.
Some cut the narrow red grosgrain from spools; others folded the strips of fabric and stitched gold safety pins to the backs.
They talked all the while, caught up with each other as at a quilting bee, tedious and comforting.
And amazingly efficient.
After four and a half hours of elegy and dish, that first bee last May produced 3,000 ribbons, enough for the satin lapels and glittering bodices at the Tonys a week later.
Consistency had not been a priority.
Jeremy Irons's came out looking like basset-hound ears; Willa Kim's was the size of a pinkie.
But they were enough alike to make a statement; the question was, what statement?
Viewers of the telecast were never told that the pert red inverted V's were meant to symbolize awareness of AIDS; and so, in their debut, the ribbons actually came to symbolize
ignorance
of the awareness of AIDS. It was not the last of the ironies.


Talking: Down Payment; Saving To Buy a First Home
SAVING for a down payment when living expenses seem to constantly outstrip income is one of the perennial problems facing young couples eager to buy a first home.
Moreover, interest rates on savings are now so low that a small nest egg is unlikely to grow into anything usable for a long time.
"You get nothing from leaving your money in the bank," said Stuart Richardson, a graphic designer who will be married in Glen Cove, L.I., in October.
Even worse, he added, "there are always so many bills coming in."


Results Plus
GOLF Six Straight Birdies and a Lead for Funk  Fred Funk, trying to win his first PGA Tour event, shot a course-record 62 that included six consecutive birdies and took a one-shot lead yesterday after three rounds of the Shell Houston Open at The Woodlands, Tex.
Funk's 10-under-par round gave him a 14-under 202 total and broke the record of 63 set by Mike Sullivan in 1986 on the 7,042-yard Tournament Players Course.
Fulton Allem, the defending champion, shot a six-under-par 66 for a 203.
Funk, who started seven strokes off the 36-hold lead of Greg Twiggs, had four birdies on the front side and started his birdie run on the par-4 No. 11 hole.
Twiggs faded to a 78.
Funk's six consecutive birdies tied a season high on the PGA Tour held by Mark Calcavecchia at the Masters, Ed Fiori at the Phoenix Open and Gil Morgan at the Bob Hope Classic.
The record for most consecutive birdies is eight. (AP) Neumann Leads by One: Liselotte Neumann shot a five-under 67 and forged a one-stroke lead over three other golfers heading into the final round of the $1.2 million Centel Classic in Tallahassee, Fla., the richest tournament on the L.P.G.A. tour. (AP) Victory for Southwick: Rick Southwick of Gardiners Bay won a pair of close matches to capture the William Richardson Memorial Tournament at the Seawane Club in Hewlett Harbor, L.I.
Southwick eliminated the medalist, Ken Bakst of the Atlantic Club, one-up on the 19th hole in the morning semifinals.
He then defeated John Doppelt of Fresh Meadow, also one-up in the final.
The tournament is named in memory of a former golf writer of The New York Times.
ROWING Yale Enjoys a Beautiful Day on the Lake Yale's rowing team had a successful day on Princeton's Lake Carnegie course yesterday.
The Elis defeated Brown and Princeton in both the varsity and junior varsity heavyweight races, while the Yale lightweights overcame Princeton and Harvard to capture the varsity race and the Goldthwait Cup.
The Yale junior varsity lightweights also won.
With a prevailing tailwind that produced fast times for all the contests, all the winning times were under six minutes for the 2,000-meter distance.
Dartmouth and Harvard Win: Dartmouth and Harvard, two of the more successful men's heavyweight crews this season, won again on the Charles River at Cambridge, Mass.
The Green, enjoying its best season in decades, was an easy victor over Wisconsin and Massachusetts Institute of Technology for the Cochrane Cup.
In women's rowing, Boston University defeated a strong Radcliffe crew by three lengths.
TENNIS Sanchez Beats Sabatini to Face Graf Third-seeded Arantxa Sanchez Vicario beat second-seeded Gabriela Sabatini, 3-6, 6-4, 6-4, yesterday in the semifinals of the Citizen Cup in Hamburg, Germany.
Top-seeded Steffi Graf eliminated Anke Huber, 6-3, 6-0, in the other semifinal on the rain-soaked clay courts.
Sanchez Vicario has won only 2 of her 13 matches against Graf, both at the French Open. (AP) TRACK AND FIELD Brooklyn Team Wins 3 Events Shellie Porter, Beverly Pierre and Falasha Spruiell led Boys and Girls of Brooklyn to three victories yesterday in girls events at the New York Relays in Downing Stadium, Randalls Island.
The trio ran on the 400 (49 seconds), 800 (1 minute 41.21 seconds) and 1,600 (3:51.08) meter relays.
Evander Childs of the Bronx took two boys relays, the 400 in 43.37 seconds and the sprint medley in 3:27.86.
Bishop Ford of Brooklyn turned in the second-fastest time in the country this year in winning the 3,200-meter relay in 7:48.79.
Sean James of Evander, who was on both winning foursomes and had a 1:53.65 800-meter split, and Violet Blake of Jamaica, who anchored her school twice to relay victories, were named the outstanding performers of the meet.
DOG SHOW Springer Spaniel Takes Top Honors Ch.
Salilyn's Condor, an English springer spaniel, yesterday was gaited by Mark Threlfall to the best-in-show honors in a field of 3,794 dogs at the 51st fixture of the Bucks County Kennel Club in Tinicum Park in Erwinna, Pa.
The spaniel is owned by Roger and Donna Herzig of Louisville, Ky., and Julie Gasow of Troy, Mich.


First Steps Taken in Revived Use of Breast Implants
Priscilla Mack, a breast cancer patient who had a mastectomy late last year, walked into Georgetown University Hospital on Friday morning, signed a long consent form, was wheeled into an operating room and a few minutes later became one of the first women to receive a silicone gel-filled breast implant under the complex new Federal guidelines regulating the use of the device.
But the return of the controversial device to the operating room hardly represented a triumphant comeback.
The implant, used by hundreds of thousands of women who went shopping for new figures in the 1970's and 1980's, is now on probation, pending proof of good behavior.


Taisa Markus, Lawyer, Marries
Taisa Markus, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Vasyl Markus of Chicago, was married yesterday in Kerhonkson, N.Y., to Dr.
Lionel Bohdan Ivashkiv, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Eugene Ivashkiv of New York.
The Rev.
Hlib Lonchyna performed the Ukrainian Catholic ceremony at Holy Trinity Church.
Mrs.
Ivashkiv, 31 years old, is an associate at the New York law firm of Simpson Thacher &amp; Bartlett.
She graduated from Loyola University of Chicago and received a law degree from the University of Illinois.
Her father is a professor of political science at Loyola, where her mother, Daria Markus, is a lecturer in education.


April 26-May 2: National Politics; Another Angry Woman Wins Senate Nomination
Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas and President Bush won the Pennsylvania primary with no great difficulty last Tuesday, virtually clinching the Democratic and Republican Presidential nominations.
That had been expected.
What had not been expected was the sweeping triumph of Lynn H. Yeakel, a 50-year-old newcomer to elective politics, in the hard-fought contest for the Democratic senatorial nomination.


Ms. Nalty Wed In New Orleans
Mathilde Mary Nalty, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Paul A. Nalty of Metairie, La., was married yesterday in New Orleans to Joshua Grayson Geraghty Mellon, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
W.
Giles Mellon of Brooklyn.
The Rev.
Thomas E. Chambers performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Louis Cathedral.
Mrs.
Mellon, 28 years old, is a vice president of the Bankers Trust Company, in Jersey City.
She graduated from Georgetown University and received a master's degree in international studies from Johns Hopkins University.
Her father is a lawyer in New Orleans.


Quarterback Is Stabbed
PAUL WATSON, the starting Kansas State quarterback last fall, was stabbed four times Friday night, according to the police in Manhattan, Kan., who said a gang of youths had jumped Watson after he tried to help a doorman keep the youths out of the Last Chance Saloon in the city's Aggieville entertainment area.


Lenses Reflect Back to the U.S.S.R.; 'Raspad' Peers Into the Hell Of Chernobyl
History galloped through Mikhail Belikov's country last year.
It gave Ukraine new life and trampled the detritus of the old totalitarian regime, which had brought it Chernobyl.
That was the good news.


Room for One More


Troubles in Sports Are Not So New
To the Sports Editor:
The problems of improper association with the opposite sex, gambling and even designated smoking areas, which are so prevalent in today's news is not new to professional athletics.
The 1954 Los Angeles Rams camp brochure manifests a less-than-subtle respect for what obviously was as much a problem four decades ago at the Rams' training site on the campus of the University of Redlands as currently exists:


In the Action With 'Star Wars' Sound
When George Lucas was presented with the prestigious Irving G. Thalberg Memorial Award at the Oscar ceremonies in March, he was cited for pioneering work in film technology.
In the classic "Star Wars" of 1977 and later films, Mr.
Lucas created a genre whose allure depended largely on spectacular images and sound generated through special-effects technology.
Not many theaters were equipped to show these technically demanding films to full advantage.
To assure the proper presentation of his work, Lucasfilm -- Mr.
Lucas's production company -- created THX, a new approach to achieving the ultimate level of image projection and sound reproduction.
So far, about 600 theaters throughout the world (including Loews Orpheum and Loews Village Theater VII in Manhattan) have been outfitted to meet the strict performance standards set for THX by Lucasfilm.


That Hoe, That Sod, That . . . Look
C.
Z.
Guest doesn't want people planting zinnias wearing just any old big hats.
The syndicated gardening columnist, who appears in such publications as The New York Post and The Palm Beach Daily News, is planning to bring out a line of clothing for horticultural enthusiasts by next spring.
"It will have a classic look," she said. "A look that I like."


This 'Deli' Thrives On Its Blender
With its graceful but shameless slapstick humor, "Delicatessen" is the closest thing to an impossible genre: a silent film with sound.
That paradox merely hints at all the warring elements blended together in this strange and inventive French cult film, which has crossed over to mainstream success.
Crossbreeding genres is this movie's wise esthetic premise.
The cockeyed story is set in a post-nuclear future, but the scene looks amazingly like the aftermath of World War II, from the bombed-out buildings to the women's 1940's fashions.
The central characters live in an isolated apartment building covered in a murky brown smog.
For these survivors, cannibalism is a political choice.
The butcher who owns the ground-floor deli takes what meat he can get, which usually means sacrificing a recently hired handyman; a vegetarian underground group tries to thwart him.


On Sunday; A Tense City Shows Unity In Its Fear
There was mainly only fear itself to fear in New York City Friday, but people feared it.
"I figure, let's go home early," said Steve Darios, a furrier waiting for his train at Penn Station.
Like tens of thousands who had left jobs in the afternoon, he was heading to the suburbs in case of the Rodney King thing.
"I'll be looking around all the way home," he said.
Herve Gilles, a taxi driver, felt fear in the back seat.
Midday, fares wanted to be left off at the entrance to the Port Authority bus terminal, the corner wouldn't do.
Many who feared most were farthest from the streets, people in high-rises, people in suburbs.
Joseph Landi listened to the radio all afternoon in Massapequa, L.I.
His wife was retiring after 37 years with the Veterans Administration and the office was having a little party.
He was riding the train into the city while everyone else was riding out.
"I don't think it's going to happen in New York," he said.
"People get along in New York, hopefully."


Amy Moskowitz, Lawyer, Weds
Amy Ann Moskowitz, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Harvey D. Moskowitz of New York, was married yesterday evening in White Plains to Harry Isacoff, the son of Norman Isacoff and Sharona Eisemann, both of Brooklyn.
Rabbi Jeffrey Sirkman performed the ceremony at the Metropolis Country Club.


Display Honors the State's Sports Heroes
STANDING before a display case at the Aetna Gallery in Hartford, Walt Dropo stared at an old baseball shirt with "Connecticut" on the front.
The shirt, which Mr.
Dropo once wore, brought back memories of his days in the 1940's as a baseball, football and basketball player at the University of Connecticut.
Also in the case is the first-baseman's glove that Mr.
Dropo, a native of the Moosup section of Plainfield, had used at UConn, and a Boston Red Sox warm-up jacket that he wore in 1950, when he was named the American League Rookie of the Year.
"It's nice to see that stuff here," said the 6-foot 5-inch Mr.
Dropo, who at the age of 69 looks capable of belting a few balls over the wall at Fenway Park in Boston known as the Green Monster.
"It's very nostalgic."


THE GUIDE
'EVITA' IN YORKTOWN
A production of "Evita" by the nonprofit Yorktown Regional Theater Company opens at the Yorktown Performing Arts Theater Friday for seven performances.
The musical by Andrew Lloyd Webber traces the rags-to-riches story of Eva Duarte, the low-born Argentine dancer-actress-radio personality who became the First Lady of her country.


Q and A
A Noisy Backyard Cafe Question: Last summer a restaurant opened a backyard cafe adjacent to the backyard of the building where I rent an apartment.
The cafe is approximately 20 feet from both my bedroom and living-room windows.
When the weather is warm, business does not end on weekdays until 11:30 P.M. and on weekends until after midnight.
After the patrons leave, the staff makes noise stacking chairs, moving tables and sweeping.
The noise has become quite a bother.


Chinese Hard-Liner Gives the Nod to Freer Market
Chen Yun, one of China's most powerful octogenarian leaders, has made his first public appearance in a year to offer a tepid endorsement of the current campaign for more rapid economic change.
Official Chinese newspapers all gave prominent front-page display today to Mr.
Chen's remarks, which he apparently made sometime this week.
National television showed the 86-year-old official Friday night looking frail but not deathly ill.


EAST GERMANS FACE THEIR ACCUSERS
In his article "East Germans Face Their Accusers" (April 12), Stephen Kinzer reports that "Many German commentators have compared the Stasi legacy to that left by the Nazis in 1945." The German compulsion to keep extensive and efficient records was alive and well in both regimes.
The eagerness to "follow orders" didn't miss a beat in the short span between the two eras


Making a Difference; M.B.A. in Reality
B MINUS.
That's the mark that B. Joseph White, dean of the University of Michigan Business School, gives other business schools for their efforts in preparing what he calls competent business leaders for tomorrow's challenges.
Dean White, a business school teacher and business executive who has been in his current post since July, sees some serious gaps in the education of M.B.A.'s.
They may learn corporate strategy and finance, he says, but they don't learn operational effectiveness -- how to achieve world-class quality, for example.


For Flier People, Peskiness Is a Virtue
When Mohamed Zayed, an Egyptian immigrant, wrote home recently to his wife about his progress in America, he held some things back.
"I wrote her only that I could not find a job in my specialty, and that I have taken a temporary position in the field of distribution," he said.
Mr.
Zayed, who was a chemist in his country, was standing in the field, in front of the Marriott Marquis Hotel at the southwest corner of Broadway and 46th Street, distributing fliers for a topless club on Eighth Avenue.


Two Strangers Meet Through an Actor
Rarely has an actor undergone such a dramatic metamorphosis in the course of an evening as Ron Vawter in his one-man show "Roy Cohn/Jack Smith." Dressed in a purple smoking jacket and speaking in a nasal New York twang, he does an eerie impersonation of the celebrated lawyer Roy Cohn denouncing homosexuality.
When Mr.
Vawter reappears after intermission -- attired in bogus Ali Baba finery and sequined eye makeup and a mustache that make him look like a raccoon on acid -- it is hard to imagine that the same actor is now portraying Jack Smith, the eccentric creator of the landmark 1962 film "Flaming Creatures."
Even though Cohn and Smith both lived in New York and were roughly contemporaries, it is unlikely that they ever met.
But as Mr.
Vawter points out, Cohn, the ultraconservative uptown power broker who died in 1986, and Smith, the downtown avant-gardist and pioneer of gender-bending performance art who died in 1989, shared a common fate.


Tall Oaks From Little Acorns Grow


Sarajevo's Center Erupts in War, Weakening Yugoslav Truce Effort
A fierce battle involving tanks, machine guns and rocket-propelled grenades erupted today in the center of Sarajevo, the capital of Bosnia and Herzegovina, raising fears that efforts at achieving peace there may be swept away by Serbs fighting to consolidate gains made in a monthlong offensive for Bosnian territory.
For weeks, the center of Sarajevo, a city where Muslim Slavs outnumber Serbs, has been the scene of sporadic sniper exchanges and mortar and artillery attacks from the surrounding hills.
But at lunchtime today, the cobbled streets and alleys erupted into what a Yugoslav Army spokesman in the city described as "all-out war."


Miss Sepahpur Has a Wedding
Hayedeh Christine Sepahpur, the daughter of Marylin Duffy of Palo Alto, Calif., and Bahman Sepahpur of Teheran, Iran, was married in New York yesterday to Bahman Robert Kosrovani, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Khosrow Khosrovani of Teheran and New York.
The Rev.
Dr.
John Andrew performed the ceremony at St.
Thomas Episcopal Church.
The bride's stepmother is Halleh Sepahpur of Teheran.
Mrs.
Kosrovani is a vice president of Autranet, an institutional-brokerage subsidiary of Donaldson, Lufkin &amp; Jenrette Inc., in Jersey City.
She graduated from Lehigh University.
Her father is a landowner.
Her mother, now retired, was a cartographer for the United States Geological Survey in Menlo Park, Calif.


Abandoned Oil and Gas Wells Become Pollution Portals
From the Louisiana bayous to the arid plains of Texas and Oklahoma, thousands of oil and gas wells, abandoned at the end of their productive life, have become conduits for noxious liquids that bubble up from deep below the earth's surface to kill crops and taint drinking water.
For state governments in America's oil patch, these abandoned wells have become an expensive legacy left by a fading industry.


British TV Station Defies Order to Identify Source
A television station's defiance of a court order demanding the identity of a man who took part in a broadcast about terrorism in Northern Ireland has become a major test of how far British journalists can go in protecting the confidentiality of their sources.
Executives at the London-based station, Channel Four Television, said on Friday that they would continue to resist the court order, which was brought by the Crown Prosecution Service at the request of the police last fall under the 1989 Prevention of Terrorism Act.
They said that to surrender the name of the man would put his life, and perhaps the lives of others, at risk.


Flash, Trash and Genius
INVENTING TIMES SQUARE
Commerce and Culture at the Crossroads of the World.
Edited by William R. Taylor.
Illustrated. 467 pp.
New York: Russell Sage Foundation. $39.95.


Love or Chemicals Smother Lawns
SOME people just love their lawns.
They fertilize them.
They cut them.
They water them.
They hover over them.
They nuke them with pesticides and herbicides.
I knew a man who wouldn't even let his wife walk on the lawn.
"Some folks think of lawns as animate objects, a living thing like a dog or a cat, and they feel pain if their lawn doesn't feel good," said Eliot C. Roberts, director of the Lawn Institute in Pleasant Hill, Tenn.
"They want to do something. And it's hard for us to say, 'Leave the lawn alone for a while; it'll probably take care of itself.' "


Mutual Funds; Convertibles' Fish-and-Fowl Charm
In today's particularly uncertain market, investors waffling between stocks and bonds might consider convertible securities funds.
Convertibles are hybrids that can give investors the best of two worlds.
The funds' average yield in the past 12 months was a respectable 5.62 percent, and last year, the group returned 30.1 percent, just 1 percentage point below stock funds, according to Morningstar Inc., a fund research group.
This year may also be good, according to Thomas A. Desmond, a Morningstar analyst.
Low interest rates will help issuers improve their credit ratings.
This sign of improving financial health, in turn, enhances the stock price.
Furthermore, the group is heavily invested in cyclical stocks, which could surge as the economy picks up.


Koch Gears Up His Armada for Italy
In the aftermath Friday of the America's Cup defense trials, Bill Koch went over to Dennis Conner's boat dock and congratulated him.
Yet it wasn't until later that evening that Koch paid Conner his highest tribute.
The 51-year-old Koch, who was born and raised in Wichita, Kan., often draws on his prairieland past, and he did Friday night.
"The Kansas Indians had a saying," said Koch, "that the greatness of your tribe is determined by the greatness of your enemy. And we think Dennis Conner is probably the greatest sailor that's ever, ever been."


Rail and More In Europe
Passes that combine European rail travel with other forms of transportation are becoming increasingly popular.
One new pass, for travel in Norway, Sweden and Denmark, is called the Scanrail 'n' Drive pass.
The pass provides 4 days of unlimited train travel and 3 days' rental of a Hertz car to be used within 15 days; the cost ranges from $225 a person, based on two people traveling together, for second-class rail travel and an economy car, to $295 for first-class rail and intermediate-size car.
A pass for 9 days of rail travel and 3 car rental days to be used in 21 days is $319 to $419 a person.
A Scanrail Pass, good for unlimited rail travel in the three countries, costs $145 in second class and $179 in first class for four days' use out of 15; $299 and $239 for 9 days out of 21, and $359 for 14 days out of a month.


Alas, We Had the Hype Right Here
THE wonder horse always looked somewhat delicate to carry racing into the millennium, skinny legs and all.
Arazi was surprisingly small for such a macho star, Paul Newman encountered on the street, but then after all the hype we did see the finely tuned muscles appear under the vibrant skin and the clear eyes shine.
He did have an easy grace.
"He's almost feminine," said D. Wayne Lukas, the trainer, who enjoys being provocative.
He won this race in 1988.
"Secretariat and Seattle Slew looked like stud horses, big, arrogant. If you didn't know it was Arazi, you would never say, 'Who was that little chestnut horse?' "


Topics of The Times; Presidential Name-Calling
When Jerry Brown started started applying the nickname "Slick Willie" to Bill Clinton, his opponent for the Democratic Presidential nomination, he lowered the campaign's vocabulary and lowered himself.
Such unworthy name-calling demeans politics.
Now Marlin Fitzwater, President Bush's spokesman, has taken up the practice.
Traveling with his boss in Columbus, Ohio, the other day, he took the low road in replying to Mr.
Clinton's criticism of White House statements about the rioting in Los Angeles.
"I notice that Slippery Bill chose to treat this as a political opportunity," Mr.
Fitzwater complained.


Who Gets to Tell Their Stories?
What can it mean to go one-on-one, white on red, with the large number of important recent works by and about American Indians?
Putting the question in that snug way focuses once more on the heart-shredding (uplifting) dilemmas of sensitive (guilty) whites (me) -- Kevin Costner among the noble savages -- but it can also be a wedge into disruptive questions about literary and political power.
How do our stories of what is past, passing or to come get to be manufactured, circulated and understood?
Whose stories are they?
Who gets to make and tell them?
Who is listening -- and how well?
American Indian writing and experience may offer much more to all of us than the excuse for one more bout of maudlin self-examination or an invitation to join Jane Fonda and Ted Turner for tomahawk chops.


A Terrible Chain of Events Reveals Los Angeles Without Its Makeup
Among the myriad layers of conflicting images that the City of Los Angeles conjures worldwide, none has been more cherished by its leaders than that of the vibrant fast-growing metropolis, the premiere world model of a harmonious and economically vigorous multi-cultural mix, a place built by optimists who came from other places to make a new life.


Immigrants' Tales
"VAGABOND STARS," a musical at the Queens Theater in the Park in Flushing Meadows Corona Park, takes a look at the Yiddish immigrants of the early part of the century and chronicles their trials and tribulations.
It is a well-worn theme, but like the "boy meets girl, boy loses girl" plot that propels so many stories, its retelling is satisfying in part because it is so well known.


The Curse of the Statehouse
It is not unusual for Pete Wilson, the Governor of California, to stay up half the night writing speeches at the Governor's residence in Sacramento while state workers sleep.
And according to his wife, Gayle, he toiled until 4 in the morning before his address to Stanford University's centennial convocation last Oct. 1.
This was no routine speech, because it was his first major public appearance after vetoing a bill giving homosexuals state protection against discrimination in the work place.
Feeling betrayed that the centrist Republican Governor had vetoed the bill after signaling he would sign it, enraged gay protesters in San Francisco had smashed up a state building a day earlier.
The Governor's security people urged him to cancel, but he went to Stanford anyway, scarcely looking up while delivering his 15-minute speech against a thunderous barrage of shouts from 300 demonstrators straining against police lines.
At one point, an orange flew out of the crowd toward the podium.
Wilson reached up, caught it and threw it back.
Tense bodyguards hustled Gayle Wilson out of the area.
When it was over, George Raine, a political correspondent for The San Francisco Examiner, sought out the Governor and found him shaken, his pale-blue eyes moist with tears.


Scant Support for Verdict or Rioting
A large majority of Americans in a new poll disagree with the acqiuttal of four Los Angeles police officers in the beating of a black motorist, Rodney G. King.
But three-fourths of those surveyed, blacks as well as whites, say the rioting that followed the verdict was unjustified.
The disapproval of both the jury's decision and the violent response to it cut across racial lines, according to the survey, which appears in the issue of Newsweek that goes on sale tomorrow.
About 92 percent of the black respondents and 73 percent of the white respondents disagreed with the verdict; 74 percent of the black respondents and 79 percent of the white respondents said the violence was unjustified.


Away From Home, With Something To Say About It
There are works of art for which house arrest is the only answer.
It's not quite prison, because they are let out on special occasions.
But at other times they live in quiet, seclusion and darkness.
And what are they?
They are works on paper -- drawings and watercolors that die just a little every time they are exposed to the light.
They may be by Leonardo and Durer, Rubens and Watteau, Ingres and Cezanne.
Or they may be by no one in particular.


IN SHORT/REFERENCE BOOKS
THE HARMONY GUIDE TO KNITTING Techniques and Stitches.
Edited by Debra Mountford.
Harmony, Paper, $16.


In Bed With The Lions
HE is America's shadow lover.
People watch him in bed.
He's the last person hundreds of thousands of women think about before they drift to sleep.
If they're in bed with someone, they must unconsciously confuse him, or at least compare him, with their companion.
If they're alone, he's the king of the night, leading the way into the darkness.
They dream about him.
The atmosphere of his show has been an aspect of America's sex life for 30 years.
Whether you watch him or not, he's helped maintain a psychosexual status quo.
In fact, he's been a cultural marker for a certain kind of sexuality -- assisted, of course, by the presence of Ed McMahon as an always visible suggestion of lousy gender politics.
Johnny Carson with a starlet as a guest
is
the American myth, dream, legend, role model in one.
Mr.
Carson's erotic presence, masculine but gentle, libidinous but gentlemanly (in the worst and best senses of the word), has helped maintain the collective belief that desire and ambition can coexist in an attractive way.


POSTINGS: On the Lower East Side; Rehabilitating Tenements
Renovating Nos. 144-150 Ludlow Street, four woebegone tenements between Rivington and Stanton Streets on the Lower East Side, was like a game of pick-up sticks to Lawrence Horowitz, a partner of Horowitz/Immerman &amp; Associates, Manhattan architects.
"If we pulled the wrong piece out, there could have been a collapse," he said.
After eight years of mishaps, including collapses, the $6 million rehabilitation is almost done.
In July, low-income tenants will begin moving into 15 studio, one- and two-bedroom units renting for $300 to $400 a month.
The remaining apartments, 37 one- and two-bedroom units, will rent for $850 to $1,000.


Strong Suit
IT'S the other kind of drag.
Women in pin stripes, starched shirts and neckties ruled the runways from Paris to New York this season.
But like Madonna in "Express Yourself" or Marlene Dietrich in black tie, this is men's wear with an edge, Savile Row with an undercurrent of some new sexual dynamic.


Pornography and the New Puritans: Letters From Andrea Dworkin and Others
To the Editor:
In his essay on "censorial times," John Irving reveals that he knows as little about journalism as about censorship.
He takes me and The Times to task for hammering Bret Easton Ellis's "American Psycho" three months before its publication date.
Perhaps Mr.
Irving forgets that Simon &amp; Schuster's decision to reject the book was an important news event that was written about widely at the time; my commentary in The Book Review, along with others', was appropriate.


Remembering a Judge Who Died for His Work
Four years ago on May 21, the quiet neighborhood of Pelham Heights in Westchester County became the scene of the second assassination of a Federal judge in this century.
Richard J. Daronco, 56 years old, was working in his yard when the father of a disappointed litigant came at him with a blazing revolver.
The father, Charles L. Koster, 67, chased the judge into his house, killed him and then shot himself to death.
Since then, Congress changed the law to make it easier for the widows of assassinated judges to receive survivors' benefits.
Pace University Law School in White Plains, where Judge Daronco taught, has a scholarship in his name.
Pelham, where he was a trustee and town attorney, is to rename its community center for him soon.
And the County Court building in White Plains, where he was a state judge for 17 years, is now the Richard J. Daronco building.
His widow, Joan Daronco, said she stayed in the house where the tragedy occurred for more than a year because she felt he was still there.
She now lives about five blocks away.


THE BEST-SELLING TATTOO DESIGNS
As arms have gotten more sophisticated, so too have their adornments -- those ubiquitous tattoos.
The first flurry is over, and the interlocking Chanel  C's and "Winona Forever" designs have given way to eco-correct symbols of dolphins and tribal imagery.
"If you don't have a tattoo, you're not what's happening," said Lou Sciberras, owner of Tattoos by Lou in Miami.
Here's a rundown of the best sellers from tattoo parlors across the country:
At Tattoos by Lou, the ecologically correct dolphin is a top choice.
The starting price is $50, for the one-inch size.
Equally popular is a tattoo dubbed Tribal -- a sinuous design that looks like lightning bolts or Celtic runes.
Tribal is also the design of choice at Tattoo Mania in Los Angeles, a shop owned by Gill (The Drill) Montie.


A Damage Report; The World's Oceans Are Sending an S.O.S.
As the world prepares for an international conference on the environment in June, signs are emerging that the suffering of the oceans is speeding up.
Red tides are increasing.
Salmon runs are fading and bluefin tuna are threatened.
From the Baltic to Long Island, seals are washing up dead, and PCBs are a major suspect.


Pornography and the New Puritans: Letters From Andrea Dworkin and Others
To the Editor:
John Irving's essay on pornography was a brilliant effort.
I especially enjoyed his comments about cause and effect -- whether there are
fewer
incidents of women being force-fed eels in Canada than elsewhere as a consequence of the film version of "The Tin Drum" being banned in that country.


Planner Offers Russia as Open Market
In his five days of meetings here, Yegor T. Gaidar, Russia's First Deputy Prime Minister, sketched a sweeping yet detailed vision of Russia's economic future, including plans to make the ruble convertible by July 1 and to speed up privatization.
Mr.
Gaidar, who is chief architect of Russia's economic reforms, said he would put an emphasis on increasing oil and agricultural production.


Water, Anyone? The Hollywood Guzzle
In Robert Altman's Hollywood sendup, "The Player," an initial attempt at what the film director calls "crass commercialization" turned into a stream of bottled-water humor, as scene after scene featured yet another designer-water label.
"We did not have a big budget to make this picture," Mr.
Altman said, "so we thought we could get some extra cash by using a couple of brands of bottled water."


Shake-Up in Cleveland? No, Just a Resignation
Ernie Accorsi, Cleveland's executive vice president, survived four head coaching changes in eight years with the Browns, which makes his resignation Wednesday all the more intriguing.
But Accorsi cautioned not to read anything into his resignation, such as there being a rift with Coach Bill Belichick, who was hired last season.


Blue Dots, a Drum Corps And Great Production Values
It could be the hottest activist scene since Act Up formed five years ago, and members of this new group sport almost as many black leather jackets.
Every Tuesday night, 300 to 400 women -- mostly artists, including Cindy Sherman, Laurie Anderson, April Gornik and Elizabeth Murray -- jam the Drawing Center on Wooster Street for the meetings of the Women's Action Coalition, also known as WAC.


Elizabeth Gordon Weds in Florida
Elizabeth Mitchell Gordon, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Theodore E. Gordon of Morristown, N.J., was married yesterday in Vero Beach, Fla., to Everett Lyle Gage 3d, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
E.
L.
Gage Jr. of Bluefield, W.Va.
The Rev.
David E. Mulford, a Presbyterian minister, performed the ceremony at the Gordons' winter home.
Mrs.
Gage, 28 years old, graduated from the University of Colorado in Boulder, as did her husband.
She is an animal rehabilitator at the Wild Life Center in Corte Madera, Calif.
Her father is the chairman of United Publications, a publisher of specialty magazines in Yarmouth, Me.


POSTINGS: Condos in Tarrytown; Restoring a Victorian Mansion
A three-story Victorian mansion in Tarrytown, N.Y., that had fallen on hard times has been restored to its original grandeur and turned into a 13-unit condominium.
The gray clapboard mansion with white trim sits on 1.8 acres at 40 Benedict Avenue.
It was built in 1876 and was converted into a 13-family house during the Great Depression.
It later fell into decline and was bought at a foreclosure auction in 1991 for $350,000 by William Chipley and Dennis Link, who spent another $350,000 to restore it.


Medicad Plan Promotes Nursing-Home Insurance
In an innovative move affecting long-term care for the elderly, New York State plans to encourage middle-income residents to buy nursing-home insurance in a program that would exempt them from onerous Medicaid limits on personal wealth.
Those who buy the insurance, which would also cover care at home, would no longer be forced to impoverish themselves to qualify for state-financed care.
State officials hope the program will help slow steep growth in New York's $6 billion-a-year Medicaid budget for long-term care.


The Arm Fetish
THE ARM.
Framed by a frayed cutoff T-shirt.
Glimpsed through cutouts in a Donna Karan sleeve.
Pumped up and poised over the handlebars of a motorcycle in a Calvin Klein ad.
Straining, as breasts used to against a satin bodice.
A bicep pushes a subtle power message against a well-starched Oxford cloth sleeve.
A raised arm reveals an age-defying tricep.
Reaching.
Pushing.
On display.
Consider the arm of the moment, the one that fashion is obsessed with baring and framing.
Post Pumping Iron.
The long, rippling, name-every-part-of-it arm.
Somewhere between Marilyn Monroe and Madonna.


Love on Trial


Day Can Finally Smell the Roses
At the age of 38, Pat Day has won Breeders' Cup races six times and the Eclipse Award four times, and last year alone he won 430 races, including 60 stakes, and passed $100 million in career purse earnings.
He was also inducted into the Racing Hall of Fame, and he acknowledged publicly that he had overcome a drug habit and found a new religious outlook on life.
But until today, one prize had eluded him as a jockey: the Kentucky Derby.
Starting in 1982, he rode in 10 of them without winning.
He finished as far back as 16th on Vanlandingham in 1984 and as high as second on Forty-Niner in 1988 and on Easy Goer in 1989 and again on Summer Squall in 1990.
Last year, he ran ninth on Corporate Report.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Congressional Races; 2 Strangely Shaped Hybrid Creatures Highlight North Carolina's Primary
They slither from one end of the state to the other, twisting in jagged paths into towns, tobacco fields, melon patches and neighborhoods, leaving confusion in their wake before darting off to the next town.
While many North Carolinians agree that they are ugly and an offense to the sensibilities that crave order, the same critics grudgingly concede that the historical significance of these creatures partly makes up for those shortcomings.
The creatures in question are political creatures: two new Congressional districts in the state drawn to create black majorities.
These districts could, in one fell swoop, produce two black members of Congress in a state that has not had one in 93 years.


Rangers Scurry To Find Solutions
The Rangers tried to switch mindsets in a hurry today, from first gear to fifth gear, from two tough guys named Lemieux and Stevens to two scoring guys named Lemieux and Stevens.
"We're scrambling," Coach Roger Neilson said as he prepared tapes and lesson books on the Pittsburgh Penguins for his players.
"It's not so much a problem for the players. It's for the coaches. We've got to have everything going, so it looks like we actually know what we're doing."


Wall Street; A Slide Into Oblivion for College Bound
Last October, a few skeptics started warning investors to be wary of College Bound, which runs courses to prepare students to take college-entrance tests.
By February, there were news reports that the Securities and Exchange Commission was on the case, but the top executives, George and Janet Ronkin, insisted all was well.
Pity the poor investors who believed them.


Marina Frants Has Wedding
Marina Frants, the daughter of Dina Frants of West Orange, N.J., and Valery Frants of Edison, N.J., was married last evening to Keith R. A. DeCandido, the son of GraceAnne A. and Robert L. DeCandido of the Bronx.
Rabbi Shimon Berris performed the ceremony at Town &amp; Campus in West Orange.
Ms.
Frants, 24 years old, will keep her name.
She is an analyst for Salomon Brothers in New York.
She graduated from Fordham University and received a master's degree in electrical engineering from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
Her father is an associate professor of computer science and information systems at Fordham University.
Her mother is a computer programmer for the Manufacturer's Hanover Trust Company in Livingston, N.J.


The Chinese Hamster Syndrome
The Language maven William Safire is about to take a stand in the controversy over bogus titling.
Why does the previous sentence begin with the word
the
? Because if it started with the words
language maven
, that would be construed as a title, and the style arbiters of the best publications have long said it's bad form to throw false titles around.


Talking: Down Payment; Saving To Buy a First Home
SAVING for a down payment when living expenses seem to constantly outstrip income is one of the perennial problems facing young couples eager to buy a first home.
Moreover, interest rates on savings are now so low that a small nest egg is unlikely to grow into anything usable for a long time.
"You get nothing from leaving your money in the bank," said Stuart Richardson, a graphic designer who will be married in Glen Cove, L.I., in October.
Even worse, he added, "there are always so many bills coming in."


Evidence Links '88 Bush Campaign to Effort to Silence an Accuser of Quayle
In a peculiar footnote to the 1988 Presidential campaign, a Federal prisoner tried to step forward four days before the election to assert that he had once sold marijuana to Dan Quayle.
His accusation was never substantiated and he returned to the obscurity of his cell.
But now evidence collected in connection with a lawsuit by the inmate, Brett C. Kimberlin, indicates that the Bush-Quayle campaign was involved in a decision by the highest official of the Bureau of Prisons to silence Mr.
Kimberlin and place him in solitary confinement.


Trial Will Test Limits of Culpability in a Slaying
On Halloween night 1990, a mob of about 15 teen-agers and young men rampaged across a footbridge from Manhattan to Wards Island and used sticks, bats, lead pipes and a meat cleaver to beat and hack the homeless men who lived there.
At least seven men were injured, and one of them, Carlos Melendez, died.
John Moreno and Leon Robinson, both 18 years old, were members of that mob, prosecutors say.
And the prosecutors contend that even though the two teen-agers were more than 100 yards from where Mr.
Melendez died, they are as guilty of murder as whoever struck the fatal blows.


Any Democrat Will Do
Linda Bloodworth-Thomason and her husband, Harry Thomason, the executive producers of "Designing Women," raised funds for Bill Clinton.
The actress Kim Basinger sang for Edmund G. Brown Jr.
But two entertainment industry heavyweights aren't being personal in their partisanship.
Barry Diller, the former chairman of Fox Inc., and his former colleague Garth Ancier, once the top programming executive at Fox Broadcasting, are advising the Democratic Party on plans for its 1992 convention in July in New York.


Science Fiction
When I was young and had to write my address in a school notebook, I would begin with my street and apartment number and then go on through city, county, state, country and continent in a litany of ever more grandiose place names that did not end until I reached "Earth, Solar System, Milky Way Galaxy, The Universe." In those days, it thrilled me to think that my small corner of the Bronx was just one part of the vastness I could see in the sky at night.
This is the feeling I got from reading A FIRE UPON THE DEEP (Tom Doherty/Tor, $21.95) by Vernor Vinge.
Mr.
Vinge writes what might be called thoughtful space opera.
His setting is nothing less than the galaxy we call the Milky Way.
I don't mean that he simply lets loose a few spaceships and has them chase one another among the stars to act out another old-fashioned shoot-'em-up plot.
The human and nonhuman characters of "A Fire Upon the Deep" live in a complex galactic society that Mr.
Vinge has worked out in admirable if economical detail, and the scope of his story is such that it requires just a background.


Insect-Resistant Grasses
Anyone putting in a brand-new lawn should consider grass varieties that are not only disease-resistant and drought-tolerant, but also repel insects.
They are called endophytic grasses, because they contain endophytes, or fungus, which are intolerable to ground-feeding insects, like the loathsome chinch bug, sod webworm, cutworm, billbug, weevil and aphid. (Grubs are not affected, because they feed on roots.)
Turf-type ryegrasses and tall fescues, as well as fine fescues, harbor endophytes, said Richard Hurley, who earned his doctorate in breeding grasses at Rutgers University, where he now teaches.
He has also developed a number of endophytic grasses for Lofts Seed Inc. of New Jersey.


Tsongas Falls Short In Swimming Race, Too
Moments after PAUL TSONGAS emerged from the International Swimming Hall of Fame pool at Fort Lauderdale, Fla., yesterday, he was surrounded by well-wishers and shutterbugs.
Never mind that the failed Democratic Presidential candidate finished sixth among eight competitors in the 50-yard butterfly for those aged 50 to 54 at the Y.M.C.A. masters national swimming championships.
As Tsongas stood there posing for yet another photograph, someone mentioned to JACK GEOGHEGAN of Westport, Conn., whose winning time of 26.64 seconds was 9.24 faster than Tsongas's, "You win, and they take his picture."


All Those In Favor . . .
To the Editor:
The Digital Audio Recording Technology Coalition -- a broad group representing American consumers, songwriters, recording artists, music publishers, record companies, retailers and consumer electronics manufacturers -- stands united in support of the Audio Home Recording Act pending before Congress.
Our membership was therefore disappointed by the doubts expressed by Jon Pareles concerning the importance of the proposed law  [ "Grabbing for Royalties in the Digital Age," April 12 ] .


Editors' Note
The nonfiction best seller list on page 32 of The Times Book Review today omits "Brother Eagle, Sister Sky: A Message From Chief Seattle," which was carried for 17 weeks in the nonfiction category.
The change was made because of evidence, reported in a news article on April 21, that the contents of the book do not reflect words spoken by Chief Seattle, but have as their source a speech written for a 1971 movie by Ted Perry, a screenwriter.


College Players Testify
The Rhode Island grand jury investigating a purportedly vast college sports gambling ring has taken testimony from three University of Rhode Island basketball players.
According to The Providence Journal-Bulletin, MIKE BROWN became the latest player to testify when he appeared before the grand jury in Warwick on Friday.
Two teammates, CARLOS CORNFIELD and MATT KEEBLER, had testified previously.
None of the three have discussed their testimony, which presumably addressed whether members of the team had bet on their own games and perhaps even shaved points. (AP)


Overdosing On Greatness
To the Sports Editor:
The media coverage of the recent Masters golf tournament and the previews of the Kentucky Derby re-enforces a growing 90's addiction: the need to anoint greatness on athletic competitors, be they teams, individuals or equines.


Susan Rowe Wed To E. R. Schober
Susan Bell Rowe, the daughter of Harriet Leach Bell of Sarasota, Fla., and the late Lewis Jae Bell, was married yesterday to Erhard Rudolph Schober, the son of the late Anna B. Schober and the late Karl F. Schober, at St.
Ann's Episcopal Church in Bridgehampton, L.I.
Rev.
Steven Peverly performed the ceremony.


Nostalgia and Need Conjure Up Thoughts of the W. P. A.
Works Progress Administration: Its bland, ungainly name was strictly Government-issue, but perhaps no other social program has left Americans so misty-eyed with nostalgic recollection.
Speak the initials W. P. A., and the mind's eye turns to the bold posters of brawny workers and the grainy photographs of the things they built -- the bridges, schools, airports, culverts and courthouses that still line the American landscape.
But this is also the program that catapulted the word boondoggle into common political usage.
It inspired two Congressional investigations, set off riots in New York City and brought accusations of Communist infiltration.


Ship to Shore
Some liked the waves, some lubbed the land: From New York Harbor to the Pierre.


In the Region: New Jersey; Recent Sales
Howell 148,000
106 Old Bridge Drive
4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 23-year-old colonial; 2-car garage, c/a, fireplace, family room; taxes $3,567.
Jackson 103,000
702 Begonia Court
3-bedroom, 2-bath, 2-year-old condominium town house; c/a, family room, monthly maintenance $75; taxes $1,775.
Maplewood 300,000
167 Wyoming Avenue
5-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 46-year-old colonial; 2-car garage, deck; taxes $8,033.
Millburn 200,000
18 Mountainview Road
2-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 47-year-old colonial; 2-car garage, fenced yard, eat-in-kitchen; taxes $3,362.
South Orange 375,000
322 Hartford Road
7-bedroom, 5-bath, 65 year-old Victorian; library, 2-car garage, renovated kitchen, full basement; taxes $10,024.
West Orange 199,900
26 Colonial Woods Drive
4-bedroom, 3.5-bath, 33-year-old bilevel; 2-car garage, w/w carpeting, family room; taxes $5,748.
OTHER AREAS South Salem, N.Y. 495,000
Ashwood Road  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, year-old colonial; 2 fireplaces, dining room, family room, Jacuzzi, 7.6 acres; taxes not yet assessed.
Clinton, Conn. 120,000
44 Morgan Park  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 58-year-old bungalow; water views, atrium doors to deck, wood stove, 50- by 162-foot lot; taxes $1,581.
East Islip, L.I. 220,000
12 Dana Lane  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 20-year-old colonial; dining room, eat-in kitchen, den, deck, 2-car attached garage; taxes $5,900.


Melissa Lubell Has Wedding
Melissa Cooper Lubell, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Alan D. Lubell of New York, was married last night to Andrew Scott Goldstein, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Alfred Goldstein of Brooklyn.
Rabbi Daniel Alder performed the ceremony at the Lotos Club in Manhattan.
Mrs.
Goldstein, 25 years old, is a sales manager for the Hotel Macklowe in New York.
She graduated from the University of the Arts in Philadelphia.
Her father is the president of Misty Lane, a New York clothing company.
Her mother, Rosanne Lubell, retired as a senior vice president of Macy's in New York.


Golden Age Near, Michigan Scholars Are Told
The president of the University of Michigan, James J. Duderstadt, told the students, faculty members and parents at the start of the university's commencement exercises yesterday that the opportunities for change had never been so rich.
"The end of the cold war, transformation of our economy, emerging global society, technological revolution and spread of democracy," Mr.
Duderstadt said, were part of the miracles "made possible by revolutionary advances in learning."


Munich
To the Editor: I was surprised and chagrined to read the article about Munich and discover that "places to stay" made no mention of two great hotels, the Vier Jahreseiten and the Bayersrischer Hof.
Almost every reputable guidebook with which I am familiar rates these hotels as among the best in the world.


Young Photographers Get a Crash Course
WHAT happens when 12 inexperienced student photographers are assigned to one of the biggest picture stories in the United States, and then told to fend for themselves against some of the most experienced photojournalists around?
They learn fast.
That's what Boston University's College of Communication discovered during the Presidential primary in New Hampshire in February.


Tackling the Playoffs From All Angles
As his Pittsburgh Penguins packed their bags for a series opener against the Rangers on Sunday, Bryan Trottier paused to put recent events into a perspective that included labor, management and customer.
This was appropriate for Trottier, a 17-year veteran and likely Hall of Famer who is sometimes mentioned as a possible candidate for a future management position.


Teachers Know Their Wines, Too
This letter refers to "Wine Dinners Perking Up Restaurants"  [ April 19 ] .
As an avid oenophile who frequents such wine tastings, I take great exception to your paragraph extolling the virtues of such professionals as doctors, lawyers, dentists, etc., while appropriating the lowly teacher to the "B" category along with our fellow travelers, i.e. store clerks, government workers and, lest we go to seed, gardeners?
Until the world at large deems it appropriate to view educators as the true professionals they are, I fear we will drown in a river of mediocre wine.
MARCIA S. WALDMAN Great Neck


Giants Rookies Reveal They Are People, Too
For the Giants, the start of their rookie minicamp today was an opportunity to see their draft choices and free agents in limited action without pads.
For the would-be Giants, it was a chance to show their wares and tell of their aspirations and fears.
Eleven of the 12 draft choices were here, along with 30 to 35 rookie free agents and Jeff Carlson, the veteran quarterback signed during Plan B free agency.


Impressions of Expo '92
THANKS to earlier visits to the Expo '92 construction site, I had overcome my initial sense of incredulity at the futuristic city rising up beside the medieval towers and palaces of Seville.
I had even stopped questioning the purpose of holding a world's fair because, well, there it was in all its glory.
Some $2 billion had already been spent on it, 110 countries were participating and, on April 20, it opened on schedule, ready for what is hoped will be 18 million visitors through Oct. 12.
Yet, even then, I was unsure what to expect.
Expo '92 is the central event of Spain's celebration of the quincentenary of Christopher Columbus's voyage to the New World and, in a nod to this, its theme is "The Age of Discoveries." But, beyond that, it was a mystery to me how so many countries would show off their contributions to humanity, what strategies they would devise to woo the public into their pavilions, what -- beyond curiosity -- would prompt anyone to pay $38 a day to visit the 540-acre site.


Smaller Companies Grease the Wheels in Hungary
It has been a terrible three years for Eastern Europe.
The economies of the region have shrunk by almost 25 percent since the painful transition to capitalism began.
But in Hungary, where the model that served postwar Italy well appears to be finding favor, the faint outlines of a success story are beginning to appear.


April 26-May 2: Middle East; Syria Gives Its Jews A Chance to Get Out
Syria's unexpected decision last week to lift the longtime ban on travel (translation: emigration) by the country's 4,500 Jews created as much amazement in Washington as it did satisfaction.
But the Syrian President, Hafez el-Assad, one of the shrewdest power merchants in the Middle East, has never been known for giving something for nothing.


RIOTS IN LOS ANGELES: New York Region; Despite Scattered Violence, Most Protests Are Peaceful
New nonviolent protests against the Rodney G. King verdict unfolded in New York City and New Jersey yesterday as authorities in a half-dozen communities across the metropolitan area toted up a night of disorder by ugly crowds that smashed windows, hurled rocks and bottles and engaged in minor looting.
But officials in New York and New Rochelle, where most of the trouble had occurred, noted that the level of violence was far lower than in other cities hit by tremors from riot-torn Los Angeles.
And while the police said there had been no deliberate policy of restraint, some witnesses said officers avoided confrontations where possible and that this may have eased tensions.


Why Delaware, of All Places?
To the Editor:
Edward H. Fleischman says that issues of corporate governance should be left to the states ("The S.E.C. Must Keep on Deregulating," Forum, April 12).


Domi Takes Parting Shots
Before Tie Domi set his sights on Ulf Samuelsson, the Pittsburgh Penguins' agitator, he defended his decision not to shake hands with Claude Lemieux of the Devils during the ritual reception line after Game 7 on Friday night.
Domi offered Lemieux his hand, then pulled it back in a familiar junior-high prank.
Lemieux then refused to shake Joe Kocur's hand.
"Why should I shake his hand?" Domi said today.
"If I shake his hand, that means I'm his friend. He called me a melon head. I never have to be nice to him. He's a jughead.


There's No Season Like Off-Season
WHEN they started hoisting the yachts off their winter slips to lower them into the Mediterranean, we realized that our days as preseason vacationers -- yachtless, too -- were all but over.
Before the big yellow cranes came to hover like giant birds over the ocean cruisers and twin-diesel gin palaces, the Italian resort town of Port'Ercole, a few hours north of Rome, had been a shuttered place, the same place it had been all winter.
People shopped at the alimentari, gossiped -- the men, at least -- at Domenico's, the barbiere, and took their evening stroll huddled against the last of spring's squalls.


Perspectives: New Housing in Chicago; Where Bargains for Renters are 'Terrific'
THE good news, says Christine Williams, is that Chicago's residential developers appear to be holding their fire.
None of the projected market-rate high-rise developments are moving into construction for the moment.
The market neeeds time to absorb what is already built, she says.
Ms.
Williams, vice president of the Real Estate Research Corporation, a consulting firm based here, has figures that show that new "luxury" residential construction has marched along at an average rate of 1,600 units a year over the last four years, recession notwithstanding.
Five new projects with a total of 2,600 apartments have come on the market since the start of last year alone.


Democrats May Demand Inquiry on Loans to Iraq
Democrats in the House of Representatives are considering plans to demand that Attorney General William P. Barr appoint an independent counsel to investigate whether the Bush Administration blocked Federal efforts to investigate fraudulent loans to Iraq.
Four Iraqis and three former officials of the Atlanta branch of the Italian state-controlled bank, Banca Nazionale del Lavoro, were indicted in March on fraud charges involving more than $4 billion in loans to Iraq.
On March 20 two of the former officials pleaded guilty to charges that they had helped funnel illegal loans and credits to Iraq.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball National League  NEW YORK METS -- Placed Vince Coleman, outfielder, on the 15-day disabled list.
Called up D.J.
Dozier, outfielder, from Tidewater of the International League.
Football National Football League  NEW ENGLAND PATRIOTS -- Signed Waldy Clark and Kevin Whitley, cornerbacks; Charles Esty, guard; Greg Lahr, offensive tackle; William Price and Greg Tucker, safeties; Kelvin Means, John Tappin and Jeff Smith, wide receivers, and Troy Wilkes, linebacker.
NEW YORK GIANTS -- Signed Bob Dressel and Kevin Mancini, offensive linemen; Mike Poloskey, linebacker; Micah Haley, nose tackle; and Eric Bruun, punter.
TAMPA BAY BUCCANEERS -- Signed Herbert James, defensive back; Willie McClendon, running back; Todd McGuire, center; and Jeff Parker and Leslie Sheppard, wide receivers.
World League  OHIO GLORY -- Waived Eric Inhat, tight end.
SACRAMENTO SURGE -- Signed Randy Thornton, linebacker.
College  TUSKEGEE -- Announced that the contract of Alfred Barney, men's basketball coach, will not be renewed.


Performances of 'Boheme' Begin in New Haven
"LA BOHEME" is this afternoon's 2 o'clock offering of the Shubert Opera Company in New Haven; it is being staged by James Deblasis, with Katherina Luna and Carolann Page among the featured singers and Anton Coppola conducting the New Haven Symphony.
Performances will also be held the next two weekends in Bridgeport and Stamford (562-5666).
Connecticut Grand Opera and the Stamford Chamber Orchestra are preparing their own full production of "Boheme," which is being directed by Franco Gentilesca, with Sandra Moon and Mark Marriot as Mimi and Rodolfo and Laurence Gilgore conducting.
Performances are at 8 P.M. on Saturday at Klein Auditorium and May 16 at the Stamford Palace (359-0009).


U.N. Chief's First 4 Months: Red Tape Cut, Feathers Ruffled, Funds Exhausted
After four months on the job as the United Nations' sixth Secretary General, Boutros Boutros-Ghali of Egypt has acquired a reputation as an active and formidable diplomat not afraid of ruffling feathers in an organization with a legendary resistance to change.
He moved swiftly in his first eight weeks to overhaul the senior levels of the secretariat in New York.
And he helped push the Security Council into new, high-risk peacekeeping operations in Somalia and Yugoslavia in addition to the demanding and expensive missions it had already taken on in the Western Sahara and Cambodia.


Backlash Blames Feminism for Sins of Sexism; The Myth Perpetuated
To the Editor:
In "The Backlash Myth," (Op-Ed, April 20) Georgette Mosbacher would have her readers believe that feminists think "the press, cosmetics industry, fashion advertisers, lawyers, doctors and, of course, men" hold clandestine meetings in which they plot the subjugation of women.


The Reality Box
UNSILENT REVOLUTION
Television News and American Public Life, 1948-1991.
By Robert J. Donovan and Ray Scherer. 357 pp.
New York: Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars/ Cambridge University Press.
Cloth, $49.95.
Paper, $17.95.


POP'S BEQUEST
I was interested in Glenn Collins's About Men column "Pop's Bequest" (April 12) because I faced a similar situation 20 years ago -- except that the body to be donated was my own.
I was a member of a church in Springfield, Mass., at the time.
Several of us had been faced with deaths in the family.
We were devastated by the personal loss and shocked at the cost of a simple funeral.


Guard Fears Impact of Cuts
FOR 38-year-old Daniel T. Mahon of Warren Township, a technical supervisor at a Federal installation, the loss of his National Guard income, he says, would force him to sell the house he and his wife bought two and a half years ago.
For Donald Hartfield, 28, of Newark, who was laid off from his job as a maintenance man at Giants Stadium seven months ago, it would leave him broke, he says.
State Guard officials say about 30 percent of their members are otherwise unemployed.


No Innocents Here
We are all inside the invisible wire of American life, and the current of responsibility travels its entire length.
Looking at the Rodney King tape or the even more violent actions of those mobs using the trial verdict to justify assaulting, killing, looting and burning for the most self-serving reasons, we see events that should outrage us all.
Is this the best we can expect of our police?
Is the verdict, based on the claim that all those cops were physically threatened by Mr.
King, the best we can expect of juries unless they are "racially balanced"?
Are the rioting street criminals, whose regular involvements are gang warfare and the drug business, really anything more than just another manifestation of barbaric opportunism?


Caller ID
TECHNOLOGY -- Bad news for obscene callers and scam artists: if they dial someone who has caller ID, their number lights up on a little window.
In some communities, so does their name.
Right now, caller ID works only with local calls; it cannot track long-distance calls.
Caller ID figures out the number from codes in telephone signals: computer-language in an inaudible stream of data transmitted with the call.
New Jersey was the first state to approve caller ID, in 1987; 20 other states now have it.
In New York, Poughkeepsie will get caller ID soon; New York City will have to wait a year or more.
WHAT IT COSTS -- The phone here, an A. T. &amp; T. Model 764, can display the time and date of up to 64 incoming calls along with the number.
It costs $149.99, plus a local phone company charge of about $7 a month for residential customers, $9 for businesses.


Coming to Aid of a Homeless Shelter
FOUR years ago, Andrew M. Cuomo offered to buy and renovate the once-proud hostelry that has become the rundown homeless shelter known as the Coachman Hotel in downtown White Plains.
But Mr.
Cuomo set a condition: the White Plains Common Council had to allow Westhelp, his nonprofit housing agency, to build 36 units of transitional housing as temporary quarters for families on welfare on city-owned land on Mamaroneck Avenue.
That, Mr. Cuomo discovered, was the end of that.


Sometimes, Even Models Don't Like Cameras
Models dressing backstage have long been off limits to loitering photographers, but now that privacy appears to be evaporating.
Claudia Schiffer, the German supermodel, is fuming over a series of topless photos that appear in the new issue of R.O.M.E, a downtown magazine.
The shots reveal Ms.
Schiffer changing clothes backstage at a benefit showing of Chanel designs at Industria last fall.


Susan Brom to Marry Jonathan Olick
Mr. and Mrs.
Robert M. Brom of Lake Wylie, S.C., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Susan Brom, to Jonathan Adam Olick, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Philip S. Olick of New York.
An October wedding is planned.
Miss Brom, 30 years old, is an associate at the New York law firm of Bodian &amp; Eames.
She graduated from Hollins College and received a J.D. degree from Georgetown University.
Her parents are the executives of the PHP Company, a concern that markets school lockers in Lake Wylie.


Vivaldi Revisited


April 26-May 2: Remediation; C. U. N. Y. Phasing In Higher Standards
Only 44 percent of students who enter public colleges graduate within nine years, which suggests that for too many, college is a defeating and wasteful experience.To staunch the dropout rate and save costs, 30 states including New York have not only tightened college admission standards but also compelled high schools to toughen the path to graduation.
Students might be asked to take three years of mathematics instead of two, two of a foreign language instead of one.
In New York City, where an "open admissions" college policy is virtually untouchable, the City University's board of trustees voted last week to toughen its admission standards, sort of.
High school graduates who cannot meet the rigorous new standard of 16 year-long courses will still be permitted to enter C. U. N. Y., but they will have to spend part of their college career taking the missing material.
The plan drawn by Chancellor W. Ann Reynolds tightens graduation standards for the university's 200,000 students in phases through the year 2000.
For most, it may mean a course or two more than they might have preferred to take.
The move was choreographed with Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez, who already boosted the mathematics requirement and plans upgradings in science and language.
But Mr.
Fernandez is facing a shortage of licensed teachers, and it is by no means clear that the financially pressed city will be able to supply them.


Israel's Influx From Mideast Nears an End
In Damascus last week there was good news for one of the last significant enclaves of Jews in the Arab world: Syria said it would remove travel restrictions on its 4,500 Jewish citizens, who have endured all manner of discrimination under President Hafez al-Assad.
Expectations are that many will eventually pack their bags and leave.
And although they are still forbidden from traveling to Israel, it seems inevitable that, one way or another, some will wind up here.
That would move Israel closer toward completing its ingathering of Sephardic Jews who by birth or background come from the Middle East and northern Africa; already, such people account for nearly half the country's 4.1 million Jews.
Among the world's 13.4 million Jews outside of Israel there are still a total of 1.3 million Sephardim, descendants of Jews who lived in Spain and Portugal before their expulsion in 1492.
But among Arab lands other than Syria, only Morocco and Tunisia are left with notable Jewish populations -- 12,000 and 5,000, respectively, according to the Jewish Agency here.
Iran has 40,000 Jews and Turkey 20,000, but there are no signs there of imminent emigration.
Except for the 175,000 in corners of the old Soviet Union, in fact, the impetus for mass emigration is not especially strong anywhere.
So it would seem that, barring sudden cataclysm, Israel now has gathered about all the Sephardim it is going to get.


Pornography and the New Puritans: Letters From Andrea Dworkin and Others
To the Editor:
John Irving is wise in his assessment that any form of censorship is far more dangerous than is pornography, but I fear that he may be falling into the new age of feminist bashing.
He writes that it dismays him that some of his feminist friends "are hot to ban pornography," that a few of his pro-choice friends "think that the pornography victims' compensation bill is a good idea" and that "a few of these new Puritans are formerly liberal-thinking feminists." Feminists and censors indeed make strange bedfellows, since without free speech there can be no feminist movement.
However, as Mr.
Irving points out, both the National Organization for Women in New York State and the California chapter of NOW have come out against Senate Bill 1521, the pornography victims' compensation bill.


The Executive Life; Bouncing Off the Moon With Tandem's Jimmy T
A few years ago, when the photographer Carolyn Caddes compiled a book of portraits of the most powerful people in Silicon Valley, she gave each the opportunity to pose in a favorite setting.
Most of the executives, bankers and inventors chose their offices or living rooms.
Jerry Sanders of Advanced Micro Devices, famed for his flamboyance, sat in a giant carved bed wearing silk pajamas.
But one of the most telling of the portraits was that of James G. (Jimmy T) Treybig, who posed in an open-collar shirt, headphones engaged, surrounded by electronic gear and walls covered with ham-radio caller ID cards -- looking exactly like every other middle-aged ham radio operator in the world.


Ms. Siegel Wed To Ziv Haskal
Dina Elaine Siegel, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William Siegel of Wayne, N.J., was married in New York yesterday to Dr.
Ziv Haskal, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Haim Haskal of Brookline, Mass.
Rabbi David Lincoln performed the ceremony at the Essex House.
Mrs.
Haskal, 29 years old, graduated from Vassar College.
She is a freelance television writer.
Her father owns the H &amp; P Equipment Company, a machinery dealer in Montville, N.J.
Her mother, Priscilla Siegel, is an artist who works out of a studio in New York.


In San Francisco, a Gallery Tour of California Crafts
THERE are more than 30 galleries in San Francisco selling contemporary American crafts, ranging from exquisite work by some of the country's finest artisans to remnants of 1960's hippie culture still extant in the Haight-Ashbury district.
Though the galleries display work from around the world, some of their most interesting pieces are created by California residents, giving visitors with limited time a natural focus for a shopping tour.
Such a tour might include the following shops, which are among the city's best:  Virginia Breier
In the Pacific Heights area, this eclectic and jam-packed gallery reflects the energy, eye and idiosyncratic taste of its owner.
Delicate jewelry vies for attention with massive metal sculptures, while brashly colored glasswork competes with subtle ceramics.


Ms. Doyle Weds J. H. Hooper 3d
Katherine Doyle, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William J. Doyle Jr. of Hastings-on-Hudson, N.Y., was married yesterday in Cold Spring, N.Y., to Joseph Henry Hooper 3d, the son of Dr.
Hooper Jr. of Baltimore and Carrington Hooper of Owings Mills, Md.
The Rev.
Gerard T. McCrane performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Chapel of Our Lady.
Mrs.
Hooper, 30 years old, is a special-events producer for Harper's Bazaar.
She graduated from Vassar College.
Her father, who is retired, was the regional manager of the Fire-End and Croker Corporation, a maker of fire-protection equipment in Elmsford, N.Y.
Her mother, Marilou Stannard Doyle, recently retired as an editor of Town &amp; Country magazine.


The Arm Fetish
THE ARM.
Framed by a frayed cutoff T-shirt.
Glimpsed through cutouts in a Donna Karan sleeve.
Pumped up and poised over the handlebars of a motorcycle in a Calvin Klein ad.
Straining, as breasts used to against a satin bodice.
A bicep pushes a subtle power message against a well-starched Oxford cloth sleeve.
A raised arm reveals an age-defying tricep.
Reaching.
Pushing.
On display.
Consider the arm of the moment, the one that fashion is obsessed with baring and framing.
Post Pumping Iron.
The long, rippling, name-every-part-of-it arm.
Somewhere between Marilyn Monroe and Madonna.


INSIDE
Wilbur Mills Dies at 82
Wilbur D. Mills, whose sway over fiscal affairs long made him a dominant figure in the House, died at his home in Kensett, Ark.
Page 53.
Footnote to the '88 Race
Evidence suggests that the Bush-Quayle camp was involved in silencing a prisoner who said he once sold marijuana to Dan Quayle.
Page 30.
Kenyans Fear Civil War
For the first time since independence from Britain nearly 30 years ago, fierce ethnic fighting has raised the specter of civil war in Kenya.
Page 3. 4 Slain at California School
A gunman who had taken scores hostage in Olivehurst, Calif., surrendered, but not before three students and a teacher were killed.
Page 20.


Young at Heart


The Fans Get to Call This Game
NEW YORKERS are a breed that loves a good fight, especially when they can't get hurt.
The presence of two major sporting goods stores, Paragon and Herman's, on Broadway between East 17th and 18th Streets, has consumers bouncing back and forth across the street like tennis balls to see if they can save a dollar.


Patricia Stern Has Wedding
Patricia Stern, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Allan D. R. Stern of Scarsdale, N.Y., was married yesterday evening to Michael D. Frohman, the son of Mrs.
John Vinson of Columbus, Ind.
The Rev.
Shannon Bernard officiated at the Unitarian ceremony at the Century Club in Purchase, N.Y.
Mrs.
Frohman, 28 years old, is a vice president at John F. Murray Advertising Agency, a subsidiary of American Home Products Corporation.
She graduated from William Smith College.
Her father is the president of Haskell &amp; Stern Inc., a human resources consulting firm in New York.


In Bed With The Lions
HE is America's shadow lover.
People watch him in bed.
He's the last person hundreds of thousands of women think about before they drift to sleep.
If they're in bed with someone, they must unconsciously confuse him, or at least compare him, with their companion.
If they're alone, he's the king of the night, leading the way into the darkness.
They dream about him.
The atmosphere of his show has been an aspect of America's sex life for 30 years.
Whether you watch him or not, he's helped maintain a psychosexual status quo.
In fact, he's been a cultural marker for a certain kind of sexuality -- assisted, of course, by the presence of Ed McMahon as an always visible suggestion of lousy gender politics.
Johnny Carson with a starlet as a guest
is
the American myth, dream, legend, role model in one.
Mr.
Carson's erotic presence, masculine but gentle, libidinous but gentlemanly (in the worst and best senses of the word), has helped maintain the collective belief that desire and ambition can coexist in an attractive way.


POSTINGS: For Directors and Managers; Co-op/Condo Seminar
With taxes and operating costs on the rise, the job of maintaining the financial health of co-ops and condominiums has never been more of a challenge for their boards of directors and managers.
For those charged with the task, help is available in the form of a daylong seminar on financial planning next Saturday at the Hotel Macklowe, 144 West 44th Street.
The forum is being sponsored by the Council of New York Cooperatives, the Federation of New York Housing Cooperatives and N.Y.
Habitat, a magazine covering co-op and condominium management issues.


Backlash Blames Feminism for Sins of Sexism
To the Editor: I couldn't decide if Georgette Mosbacher was willfully misreading backlash theories about feminism in "The Backlash Myth" (Op-Ed, April 20) or didn't analyze the debate.
To discuss the "backlash" against feminism is to acknowledge the book "Backlash: The Undeclared War Against Women" by Susan Faludi.
Yet nowhere in Ms.
Mosbacher's commentary is one pertinent refutation of a backlash argument as posited by Ms.
Faludi or anyone else.
Ms.
Mosbacher presents her own version of what the backlash theory is and rebuts her invented arguments.
The result is facile, pseudo-feminism.


Families Prepare for Move To Yonkers Units
THE federally imposed remedy for four decades of intentional housing discrimination in this troubled city began to touch the lives of its victims -- low-income, mostly minority families -- in a real way last week after six years of court rulings and bitter political debate.
Family members, many with young children, gathered in the community room of a housing project to learn what to expect in the new court-ordered housing they will begin to occupy later this month.
The talk was of washing machines and moving expenses rather than constitutional rights.


Abe Burrows: Undue Credit?
To the Editor:
I am saddened by the misinformation in William Kennedy's article "The Runyonland Express Is Back in Town"  [ April 12 ] .
In two places, Mr.
Kennedy states that Abe Burrows was the "main" or "principal" writer of the book for the musical "Guys and Dolls." Those of us who inhabit the entertainment business are usually well aware that the artist who receives first credit is the principal writer.
I was a student at the University of California at Los Angeles when "Guys and Dolls" was created.
I was there, kibitzing, when Cy Feuer and Ernest Martin, the producers, practially lived at our house for a full year while my father, Jo Swerling, wrote the book.


LAKES' SUCCESS
It is a day in mid-April, and daffodils are blooming in Central Park.
In Washington, the cherry blossoms are already past their prime.
But spring comes late to the Finger Lakes region.
It has been raining all night, and the paths through the vineyards are thick with mud.
Droplets of water glisten on the dormant vines, brownish water gurgles noisily in the drainage ditches and a chill fog swirls in from time to time.


How to Raise Funds in Difficult Times
IT is not the best of times to be raising funds for a charitable organization.
The recession has squeezed the foundations and individual donors who support charities.
The scandal that has shaken the United Way, involving the forced resignation of its national president, William Aramony, has produced public unease and tightened purse strings.
But Kevin Moriarty, the executive director of the Fund for Educational Advancement, has learned optimism and the need to find new and creative solutions in his 20 years of fund raising.
The fund raises money to send children to parochial schools in the Archdiocese of Newark.


Data Update
*4*BUILDING PERMITS ISSUED (Housing units)
Mar. 92
Feb. 92
Mar. 91
New York
2,109
1,631
1,676
New Jersey
1,495
1,130
929
Connecticut
697
300
410
*4*Source: Census Bureau, U.S. Department of Commerce
*4*MORTGAGE INTEREST RATES (Averages)
Last Week
Previous Week
Year Ago
New York
Conventional (30-yr)
9.05
8.94
9.78
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
6.18
6.18
7.42
New Jersey
Conventional (30-yr)
8.91
8.80
9.60
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.94
5.91
7.39
Connecticut
Conventional (30-yr)
8.99
8.82
9.63
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
6.02
6.06
7.23
Co-ops (N.Y.)
Conventional (30-yr)
9.15
9.06
9.95
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
6.61
6.56
7.72
*4*Indexes for Adjustable-Rate Mortgages*
1-yr. Treasury security
4.32
4.14
6.25
National Mortgage Contract Rate
8.15
8.15
9.26
*Rates on most adjustable mortgages are set 1 to 3 percentage points above these indexes.  (Source: HSH Associates)


Conversations/Joachim Lehmann; Living, and Living With Oneself, In the Grip of East Germany
But even for such a man, it became clear in a recent talk at his home, it would have been impossible to maintain concepts of good and evil without the gifts of wit and deception.
"Anyone with a public position had contact with the Stasi" -- the secret police -- he said.
"I myself am probably listed somewhere as a Stasi informer.


Evidence Links '88 Bush Campaign to Effort to Silence an Accuser of Quayle
In a peculiar footnote to the 1988 Presidential campaign, a Federal prisoner tried to step forward four days before the election to assert that he had once sold marijuana to Dan Quayle.
His accusation was never substantiated and he returned to the obscurity of his cell.
But now evidence collected in connection with a lawsuit by the inmate, Brett C. Kimberlin, indicates that the Bush-Quayle campaign was involved in a decision by the highest official of the Bureau of Prisons to silence Mr.
Kimberlin and place him in solitary confinement.


World Markets; Britain's Battle of the Big Banks
The British banking world was thrown into turmoil last week when Lloyds Bank P.L.C. cast a hostile eye at Midland Bank P.L.C. and set off what could be England's most famous banking battle.
In the ring are Lloyds and HSBC Holdings P.L.C., the parent of the Hongkong and Shanghai Bank, which made the first bid for Midland in March.
A victory by Lloyds would combine two of the country's four largest banks and would mean the biggest shakeup of British banking since the late 1960's.


CHILDREN'S BOOKS
RED DRAGONFLY ON MY SHOULDER
Haiku.
Translated by Sylvia Cassedy and Kunihiro Suetake.
Illustrated by Molly Bang.
Unpaged.
New York: HarperCollins Publishers. $15.  (Ages 5 to 10)


Jumping for Jetes
New York City Ballet benefit.
New York State Theater, Lincoln Center.
April 27, midnight.


Two Strangers Meet Through an Actor
Rarely has an actor undergone such a dramatic metamorphosis in the course of an evening as Ron Vawter in his one-man show "Roy Cohn/Jack Smith." Dressed in a purple smoking jacket and speaking in a nasal New York twang, he does an eerie impersonation of the celebrated lawyer Roy Cohn denouncing homosexuality.
When Mr.
Vawter reappears after intermission -- attired in bogus Ali Baba finery and sequined eye makeup and a mustache that make him look like a raccoon on acid -- it is hard to imagine that the same actor is now portraying Jack Smith, the eccentric creator of the landmark 1962 film "Flaming Creatures."
Even though Cohn and Smith both lived in New York and were roughly contemporaries, it is unlikely that they ever met.
But as Mr.
Vawter points out, Cohn, the ultraconservative uptown power broker who died in 1986, and Smith, the downtown avant-gardist and pioneer of gender-bending performance art who died in 1989, shared a common fate.


Serving Up a Special Feast, A Noted Painter's Masterpiece
GEORGE SEGAL made his out of what else -- plaster.
Carole Ferris created a cutout cityscape and William Wegman painted a dogless interpretation of Frank Lloyd Wright's Fallingwater.
Red Grooms did a takeoff on woman as musical instrument.
Vito Aconci made a magnetized design out of silverware and Will Barnet painted a girl in a tree.


Here's Branford
The Saxophonist Branford Marsalis and the "60 Minutes" reporter Ed Bradley are sitting in the back of a limousine, on their way to a screening of the "The Mambo Kings" in Manhattan.
They are friends, casual together, and Bradley asks Marsalis what he did all day.
Marsalis: "Interviews, man, for hours. It was terrible."


Ms. Hamilton Has Wedding
Michaela Ann Hamilton and Barry Readinger Buchter were married yesterday at the Highland House, an inn at Boiling Springs, Pa., operated by the bridegroom.
The Rev.
William J. Murphey of the Camp Hill (Pa.) Presbyterian Church performed the ceremony.
The bride is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Arthur W. Hamilton of Greencastle, Pa.
The groom is the son of Harold S. Buchter of Camp Hill and the late Sarah Buchter.


Norway Cruise
To the Editor: As the author of "By Steamer Through Norway's Fjords" (Travel, Jan. 16), I was pleased to read R. B. Pence's letter on April 5 mentioning the pleasant memories he and his wife share about a Norwegian coastal steamer trip they took a few years ago.
Mr.
Spence also refers to having been told of "a company policy not to discuss the ferocity of the German occupation" of Norway.
In September 1991 -- and I do not know when this procedure began -- each passenger boarding the Vesteraalen for the voyage north was presented with a copy of "2,500 Miles on the Coastal Steamer" by Erling Welle-Strand, which includes 10 references to atrocities committed by the Germans on Norwegian civilians in World War II, including executions and the destruction of towns.
The descriptions about Molde, Bodo, Hammerfest, Honningsvag and Kirkenes, the northernmost port reached by the steamer, are especially relevant.
In addition, mention is made of the execution at Ulven, near Bergen, of uniformed Norwegian naval personnel -- an action later determined to have been a war crime.


Noted With Pleasure
The Mother of Skepticism
In the 20th-century fascination with science, George Bernard Shaw found simply a new version of an ancient yearning to believe.
This is from the preface to "The Simpleton of the Unexpected Isles," collected in "Plays Extravagant" (Penguin, paper).


Muti: Arrivederci, Not Addio
When Riccardo Muti takes the stage of Carnegie Hall tomorrow evening to conduct works by Cherubini and Rossini, it will be the latest in a long series of goodbyes.
The concert marks his last performance in the United States as music director of the Philadelphia Orchestra.
And after leading a tour through Europe and Israel later this month, the 50-year-old maestro will turn his energies toward guest conducting and his duties as head of La Scala Opera in Milan, a two-hour trip (at the breakneck speed he drives) from his home in Ravenna, Italy.
For a dozen years he has held the Philadelphia post, which he inherited from Eugene Ormandy and will relinquish to Wolfgang Sawallisch.
For eight years before that, he was a guest conductor of the orchestra.
He suffered occasional barbs that his approach, particularly in vocal music, was rigid and dogmatic, and some complained that he did away with the plush "Philadelphia sound" made famous under Ormandy.
Mr.
Muti leaves with one of his major goals frustratingly unfulfilled, the realization of a new concert hall in which the orchestra could perform and record.


Radio Days In Cicely, Alaska: Anything Goes
America needs more radio stations like KBHR, the fictional voice of Cicely, Alaska, in "Northern Exposure." KBHR (also known as K-Bear) has no format, a mysteriously well-stocked record library and a philosophically inclined disk jockey, Chris Stevens (played by John Corbett).
He might play anything from the Chieftains' Irish traditional music to Italian opera to Duke Ellington to the original Richard Berry version of "Louie, Louie" to "The Stars and Stripes Forever." Between the radio station and a country-laden jukebox at the town's bar, Cicely and "Northern Exposure" (Monday nights at 10 on CBS) offer the best and broadest selection of music in series television, and a breadth of taste that makes MTV look parochial.
"In Cicely, Alaska, you can play anything you want on the radio station, and you can play anything on the jukebox, too," said Martin Bruestle, the show's associate producer, who chooses the music with Steve Tucker, its post-production coordinator, and Joshua Brand, an executive producer and co-creator of the series.
"The only rule is that there are no rules."


The Executive Computer; For Finances Past the Checkbook, a Small-Business Helper
Small businesses and home offices have the same goal as larger businesses -- financial soundness -- but they often lack the same resources.
The boss of a small office usually wears several hats, including chief financial officer and paymaster.
For people whose financial mastery extends as far as the checkbook but whose business bookkeeping requirements run to invoicing, receivables and reports, Intuit Inc. has created Quickbooks.
The $139.95 program is for DOS personal computers with 640 kilobytes of system memory and at least 2 megabytes of free space on a hard disk drive.


Pachysandra Shows Signs of Winter Stress
HOW soon we forget.
Nature is in charge, but when some kind of odd phenomenon is seen on the landscape, most gardeners are quick to analyze it and look for other explanations.
Consider, for instance, pachysandra, an ubiquitous ground cover.
It covers the ground around suburban houses, under trees, around shrubbery and even thrives in many woodland regions.


New Sprays May Help Gardeners of the Future
After reading "Public Gardens Are Showing the Way to Nontoxic Pesticides"  [ April 19 ] , I felt tremendous elation.
At last now we have begun to take seriously the protection, not only of our shrubs, but also the effects of harmful sprays in our environmental surroundings.
Now we are turning to the concern of our own well-being.
Will we take advantage of our new and extraordinary ability to alter our ways and spraying?
This is a hard question, but the harder fact is that we are menacing our health.
This fact will inevitably force an answer.
Will we hand on to coming generations the benefits and glories of gardening as we now know and enjoy them?
Or will we crowd out and deplete not only our own wilderness, but ourselves?
WILMA ASKINAS Great Neck


Votes in Congress
Tally Last Week in Connecticut, New Jersey and New York Senate 1.
Campaign Finance: Vote on passage of a campaign finance bill that would set voluntary spending limits in Congressional races and sharply reduce the role of "soft money," which is raised outside of existing Federal rules on contributions.
Approved 58 to 42, April 30.
Connecticut Dodd (D) . . . . y  Lieberman (D) . . . . y  New Jersey Bradley (D) . . . . y  Lautenberg (D) . . . . y  New York D'Amato (R) . . . . n  Moynihan (D) . . . . y  KEY: y Yea; n Nay; (A) Absent or did not vote; (P) Present.
House 1.
Space Station: Vote on an amendment to a $47.3 billion bill authorizing space programs for three years that would cut $2.2 billion for the proposed manned space station.
Rejected 254 to 159, April 29. 2.
House Bank Inquiry: Vote on a Democratic proposal to force a court test of the subpoena of House bank records by the Justice Department's special counsel.
Rejected 284 to 131, April 29. 3.
House Bank Inquiry: Vote to comply with the subpoena of the House bank records.
Approved 347 to 64, April 29. 4.
Abortion Counseling: Vote to repeal the Federal rule against abortion counseling in federally financed family planning clinics.
Approved 268 to 150, April 30.
Connecticut . . . . . . .1 . 2 . 3 . 4  1. Kennelly (D) . . . . n . y . y . y
2. Gejdenson (D) . . . . n . y . y . y
3. DeLauro (D) . . . . n . n . y . A
4. Shays (R) . . . . y . n . y . y
5. Franks (R) . . . . n . n . y . y
6.
Johnson (R) . . . . n . n . y . y  New Jersey . . . . . . . 1 . 2 . 3 . 4  1.
Andrews (D) . . . . n . n . y . y
2. Hughes (D) . . . . y . y . y . y
3. Pallone (D) . . . . y . n . y . y
4. Smith (R) . . . . n . n . y . n
5. Roukema (R) . . . . y . n . y . y
6. Dwyer (D) . . . . y . n . y . y
7. Rinaldo (R) . . . . n . n . y . n
8. Roe (D) . . . . n . y . A . n
9.
Torricelli (D) . . . . n . y . y . y  10.
Payne (D) . . . . y . y . n . y  11.
Gallo (R) . . . . n . n . y . y  12.
Zimmer (R) . . . . y . n . y . y  13.
Saxton (R) . . . . n . n . y . n  14.
Guarini (D) . . . . y . y . n . y  New York . . . . . . . . . . 1 . 2 . 3 . 4  1.
Hochbrueckner (D) . . . . n . n . y . y
2. Downey (D) . . . . n . n . y . y
3. Mrazek (D) . . . . n . n . y . y
4. Lent (R) . . . . n . n . y . n
5. McGrath (R) . . . . n . n . y . n
6. Flake (D) . . . . y . y . n . y
7. Ackerman (D) . . . . y . y . y . y
8. Scheuer (D) . . . . n . y . y . y
9.
Manton (D) . . . . n . y . y . n  10.
Schumer (D) . . . . y . n . y . y  11.
Towns (D) . . . . n . y . n . y  12.
Owens (D) . . . . y . y . n . y  13.
Solarz (D) . . . . y . n . y . y  14.
Molinari (R) . . . . y . n . y . y  15.
Green (R) . . . . y . n . y . y  16.
Rangel (D) . . . . n . y . n . y  17.
Weiss (D) . . . . y . y . n . y  18.
Serrano (D) . . . . y . y . n . y  19.
Engel (D) . . . . n . n . y . y  20.
Lowey (D) . . . . y . n . y . y  21.
Fish (R) . . . . n . n . y . y  22.
Gilman (R) . . . . n . n . y . y  23.
McNulty (D) . . . . y . n . y . y  24.
Solomon (R) . . . . y . n . y . y  25.
Boehlert (R) . . . . n . n . y . y  26.
Martin (R) . . . . n . n . y . y  27.
Walsh (R) . . . . n . n . y . n  28.
McHugh (D) . . . . n . y . y . y  29.
Horton (R) . . . . n . n . y . y  30.
Slaughter (D) . . . . y . y . y . y  31.
Paxon (R) . . . . n . n . y . n  32.
LaFalce (D) . . . . y . n . y . n  33.
Nowak (D) . . . . n . n . y . n  34.
Houghton (R) . . . . y . n . y . y  KEY: y Yea; n Nay; (A) Absent or did not vote; (P) Present.


White Poor, Black Poor
That racism remains a horrible blight on this society has been made painfully clear by the sadistic police gang beating of Rodney King, the mindless insensitivities of Daryl Gates and the shamelessly immoral verdict that has ignited rage in the nation's second city.
That a significant minority of African Americans face a chronic economic crisis, with 40 percent of their children in poverty, is a national tragedy.
And that a much smaller proportion -- perhaps no more than 10 percent -- is trapped in a life style of criminality and self-destruction, we all know and dread.
Though historically linked, these three problems have evolved as different social cancers that, while disproportionately harming the African American part of the nation, increasingly threaten its entire body politic.
Combining them confuses the issues, worsens racial divisions and thwarts sound policy.


First Ladies' Gowns on Display
After being out of sight for five years for conservation and reorganization, the collection of First Ladies' gowns, one of the most popular attractions at the Smithsonian Institution, has been returned to public view with a new focus.
Roger Kennedy, director of the Smithsonian's National Museum of American History, which maintains the collection, said of the revised exhibition: "It isn't about pretty costumes. It's a political show."


In the Region: Long Island; Recent Sales
East Islip 220,000
12 Dana Lane  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 20-year-old colonial; dining room, eat-in kitchen, den, deck, 2-car attached garage; taxes $5,900.
Great River 265,000
42 Woodhollow Road  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 32-year-old farm ranch; den, fireplace, finished basement, patio, inground pool; taxes $6,300.
Islip Terrace 155,000
264 Manhasset Street  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 25-year-old ranch; eat-in kitchen, finished basement, porch, patio, 1-car garage; taxes $3,800.
Mattituck 119,000
225 Sunset Avenue  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 20-year-old ranch; dining room, eat-in kitchen, 2-car garage; taxes $2,000.
Ridge 91,000
100 Raynor Road  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 41-year-old ranch; enclosed porch, basement, 1-car garage, 1 acre; taxes $2,400.
Sound Beach 121,270
58 Upton Drive  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 15-year-old ranch; eat-in kitchen, dining area, finished basement; taxes $2,900.
OTHER AREAS South Salem, N.Y. 495,000
Ashwood Road  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, year-old colonial; 2 fireplaces, dining room, family room, Jacuzzi, 7.6 acres; taxes not yet assessed.
Clinton, Conn. 120,000
44 Morgan Park  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 58-year-old bungalow; water views, atrium doors to deck, wood stove, 50- by 162-foot lot; taxes $1,581.
Howell, N.J. 148,000
106 Old Bridge Drive
4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 23-year-old colonial; 2-car garage, c/a, fireplace; taxes $3,567.


Palette Pals
Hopper and Ruscha previews. Shafrazi Gallery. April 25, 7 P.M.


Backlash Blames Feminism for Sins of Sexism; Happiness in a Jar
To the Editor:
Georgette Mosbacher's April 20 Op-Ed article denouncing those who have raised the issue of a backlash against American women is an example of the pot calling the kettle black.
Ms.
Mosbacher has made lots of money selling cosmetics to women.
Her beauty products, along with breast implants and fad diets, constitute the real conspiracy.
Ms.
Mosbacher and many others are still peddling happiness in face-cream bottles.


The 1800's Portraitist as Businessman
ABOUT a year ago, the Gallery at Bristol-Myers Squibb here changed its decor from cocoa brown to a mild tan.
Now, with "A Loving Likeness," it has changed its exhibition style.
This is a selection of early 19th-century American folk portraits -- paintings, drawings and silhouettes -- that was drawn from the collection of Raymond and Susan Egan (Mr. Egan is the company's executive vice president).
The show comes with a glossy catalogue that reproduces the pictures small and complete with frames, which gives a somewhat mail-order impression.


U.S. Action Needed on Halogen Lamps
To the Editor:
"New Study Bolsters Skin Cancer Link to Halogen Lamps" (news article, April 16) should be no surprise.
Ultraviolet B radiation has long been linked to skin cancer and cataracts.
Halogen lamps emit large amounts of radiation in the ultraviolet B region.


Ms. Matthews, Executive, Wed
Marianne Matthews, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Arthur Matthews of Manhasset, L.I., was married yesterday in New York to Jay Randall Anderson, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Kenneth Anderson of Hemet, Calif.
The Rev.
George Baker officiated at Epiphany Roman Catholic Church.
Mrs.
Anderson, 31 years old, graduated summa cum laude from C. W. Post College and received a master's degree in English literature from New York University.
She is a sales and marketing executive for Image Zone, a multimedia production company in New York.
Her father is a senior labor relations administrator for Consolidated Edison in New York.


Pornography and the New Puritans: Letters From Andrea Dworkin and Others
To the Editor:
As one of many feminists who oppose the legalization of censorship represented by Senate Bill 1521, I am cheered to read intelligent critiques of that flawed and dangerous piece of proposed legislation.
But John Irving's essay is not only an attack on this bill, it is also an attack on a feminism
he
constructs.
I agree with Mr.
Irving that censorship can be a subtle business.
His essay proves this by loudly censuring "some of  [ his ]  feminist friends," who support the bill, while quietly censoring "most feminist groups," which oppose it.
These particular feminist friends -- whose position on pornography he associates with fascism -- are elided with "a few of  [ his ]  pro-choice friends." This blurs and effectively denies the variety of the sometimes conflicting opinions held by people who would nevertheless accept some "feminist" label.
VIRGINIA RUTLEDGE New York


Talking: Down Payment; Saving To Buy a First Home
SAVING for a down payment when living expenses seem to constantly outstrip income is one of the perennial problems facing young couples eager to buy a first home.
Moreover, interest rates on savings are now so low that a small nest egg is unlikely to grow into anything usable for a long time.
"You get nothing from leaving your money in the bank," said Stuart Richardson, a graphic designer who will be married in Glen Cove, L.I., in October.
Even worse, he added, "there are always so many bills coming in."


Bare-Fisted Violence or Subtle Threats?
John Gotti's taste in clothing runs to what might be called the full Broadway look -- expensive double-breasted suits and silk ties of bright, bleeding colors complemented, of course, with matching pocket squares.
Thomas Gambino dresses with the tailored restraint of the English or Milanese aristocracy, in dark, demure suiting made all the more understated by deep, monochromatic ties and French-cuffed white shirts.


Images of Catastrophe as Corporate Ballyhoo
As everyone over 5 must know by now, Benetton has been appropriating the news for its ads.
In March, Vogue rudely slapped six pages of the company's ads between beauty creams and luxe: three double-page spreads of a bombed-out car ablaze in the street, Albanian refugees climbing desperately onto a packed ship, and a young man dying of AIDS in his father's arms.
In last month's issue of Interview, an Indian couple waded through a flood for Benetton; in Vanity Fair and Details, refugees scrambled into a boxcar and an armed soldier held a large bone behind his back. (In Italian publications only, a murdered Mafia victim lay in a pool of blood.)


Data Bank/May 3, 1992


A Light Touch With the Kitchen Grill
ALL hail 1992 as the "Year of the Grill." Since last December, a spate of grills has opened, including the Newport in Garden City.
Grills, in fact, are starting to approach the popularity of pasta cafes and Italian family dining restaurants.
All three have reasonable prices and abundant, straightforward food in casual surroundings.
The Newport Grill breaks the mold in the decor department.
White tablecloths and plush carpeting replace the usual grill hallmarks of butcher paper-topped tables and wood floors.
After all, this is Garden City.


Lil E. Tee, in Upset, Steals Arazi's Lightning
Arazi, the wonder horse from France, met his Waterloo today at Churchill Downs.
The flying red colt, heralded as the best of his time on two continents, faded in the homestretch and ran eighth in a field of 18 while the long shot Lil E. Tee made a rousing late run to win the 118th Kentucky Derby by a length over an even longer long shot, Casual Lies.


After 30 Years, Still No Compensation
To the Editor:
Your article "Cuba, Long Forbidden, Wins Major Attention Abroad" (April 19) fails to tell readers that the reason for the 1962 Cuban trade embargo was that the properties of American citizens and companies were confiscated by the Castro government without paying prompt, adequate and effective compensation as required under United States and international law.
The illegal confiscation of private assets was the largest uncompensated taking of American property in the history of our country.
It affected scores of individual companies and investors in Cuban enterprises.
DAVID W. WALLACE Stamford, Conn., April 23  The writer is chairman of the Joint Corporate Committee on Cuban Claims.


Purnell H. Benson, 78, Stock Market Expert
Purnell Handy Benson, a professor emeritus of business at Rutgers University and an expert on the fluctuations of stock prices, died on Monday at Morristown Memorial Hospital in Morristown, N.J.
He was 78 years old and lived in Madison, N.J.
A family spokesman said that Dr. Benson died of a bone marrow disease.


POP'S BEQUEST
I was touched by Collins's effort to donate his father's body to science and fulfill his father's dying wish.
As a student at the New York University School of Medicine, I have spent many hours in the anatomy lab, studying, cutting and learning from people who were generous enough to allow me such a privilege.
Those who donate their bodies exhibit a desire to help others that inspires many to the study of medicine.
Work in the anatomy lab offers time to contemplate life, death, the soul and a vortex of emotions.
In a bizarre sense, the anatomy lab is a medical student's first patient contact.
Only in facing our own fears of mortality can we begin to appreciate our patient's fear.


Murder of Rookie Officer Inspires Anti-Drug Drives
On Feb. 26, 1988, a rookie New York City police officer, Edward Byrne, was shot in the head five times as he sat by himself in a patrol car outside the Queens home of a drug-case witness he was guarding.
The South Jamaica killing stunned the city, sparked major police drives against drug dealers and led to the arrests of four members of a drug-dealing ring.
The four were charged with executing the 22-year-old rookie at the order of their jailed leader, Howard Mason, who prosecutors said wanted to retaliate for his own conviction in a weapons case.


At Work; When a White Collar Unravels
Most middle-class Americans -- and most Americans define themselves as middle class -- find it difficult to see the poor as anything other than objects of charity, pity or contempt.
That sentiment makes all the more arresting the ramifications of a new historical study of poverty, "The Dispossessed: America's Underclasses From the Civil War to the Present."
Like the labor economists who argued in this space last week that white-collar workers should attend to the fate of their unionized blue-collar counterparts, Dr.
Jacqueline Jones, Harry S. Truman Professor of American Civilization at Brandeis University, contends that the middle class has much to learn from the former slaves, migrants and sharecroppers who people her research.


Young Photographers Get a Crash Course
WHAT happens when 12 inexperienced student photographers are assigned to one of the biggest picture stories in the United States, and then told to fend for themselves against some of the most experienced photojournalists around?
They learn fast.
That's what Boston University's College of Communication discovered during the Presidential primary in New Hampshire in February.


Golden Age Near, Michigan Scholars Are Told
The president of the University of Michigan, James J. Duderstadt, told the students, faculty members and parents at the start of the university's commencement exercises yesterday that the opportunities for change had never been so rich.
"The end of the cold war, transformation of our economy, emerging global society, technological revolution and spread of democracy," Mr.
Duderstadt said, were part of the miracles "made possible by revolutionary advances in learning."


Tips for the Experienced Driver
MY grandfather swapped his chewing tobacco for cigars when he realized that a stogie was all he needed to be the spitting image of Winston Churchill.
When I knew him, he owned a hardware store in Allentown, Pa., but when he was young he had been on the road as a traveling salesman, and he swore by Chryslers.
"Engineering," he used to say, nodding that bald head.
His name was Walter Marshall, and he was the man who taught me to drive.
He was patient and forgiving, even on the day that I swelled with know-it-all exuberance and took a turn far too fast.
"I think maybe you need another lesson," he said calmly after I had bounced over the curb, stalled the engine and sat shaking at the wheel.


Dream-Team Style
Headgear of the immortals doesn't come with angel's wings attached.
It's deep blue and roundish, and the imprint of greatness, stitched above the narrow brim, is the "NY" logo of the 1927 Yankees, the team of Lou Gehrig and Babe Ruth.
The Roman Company of Randolph, Mass., has issued the cap in soft wool like the original's, and fortunately without plastic sizer, as part of the Cooperstown Collection, which includes facsimile caps from the old Negro League teams.


Lynne Fletcher Plans to Wed
Lynne Margaret Fletcher, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Alan J. Fletcher of Basking Ridge, N.J., and Gregory Patrick O'Brien, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert O'Brien of Arlington, Mass., are engaged to be married in September.
Miss Fletcher, 29 years old, graduated cum laude from Princeton University and received a J.D. from Georgetown University.
She is the manager of government affairs for the Dupont Merck Pharmaceutical Company in Washington.
Her father is the president of Vista Information Group, a pharmaceutical consulting firm in Morristown, N.J.
Her mother teaches learning-disabled students at Central Middle School in Parsippany, N.J.


Don't Tear It Down; Reform It
To the Editor:
Regarding "Pulling Down the Corporate Clubhouse" (April 12), assume that a C.E.O.'s job is to preserve and enhance the value of the assets of an organization.
How should this be measured?
Among its assets, a firm could list its product lines, personnel, research and development, customers, sales and marketing efforts, supply relationships and plant and equipment.
Traditionally, only plant and equipment has been considered an asset.
It may be the least important of them all.


End of the Beginning For Coleman and Nets
Nearly an hour after his team had been eliminated from its first playoff series in six seasons, Derrick Coleman, the New Jersey Nets' 6-foot-10-inch forward, sat in front of his dressing stall, sorting out the mixed emotions of a crazy season.
There was the immediate sense of disappointment that the Nets had lost.
"I wish it was still going on and I wish we were going to Cleveland to play," he said.
"But somebody's got to win. Somebody's got to lose. At least we weren't the first team to get knocked out, and that's a plus."'


The School Boards Are Irresponsible
A letter by Martin Davis  [ March 22 ]  categorized schoolteachers and administrators as the "greediest people" because of their high salaries and benefits.
He is wide of the mark.
The staff has every right to negotiate and obtain the best that they can, and their leadership should be congratulated for their successful efforts.
Mr.
Davis should castigate not the staff, but school boards who through the years voted to increase salaries to the point where they have become an onerous burden.
Many of the boards have continued to approve raises that belie the dire economic straits of Long Island.
My school board, Syosset, is an example of the unbridled spending that is increasing our taxes to the point where we will have difficulty in selling our homes.
A recent salary increase will raise teachers' maximum salaries to $72,500.
The high school principal at maximum will earn $113,400, and the superintendent is receiving $128,000.


The On-Time Record For PATH Trains
I would like to respond to several areas concerning PATH in a letter by Janet L. Grosso to the New Jersey editor on April 5.
PATH's on-time performance for 1991 was 90.4 percent.
In December of that year and during the first two months of 1992, we did experience enroute delays in both our Journal Square-33d and Hoboken-33d services.
These delays were caused by track conditions in several tunnel areas that required us to institute slow-speed orders in those tunnel areas.
These problems did adversely affect PATH's on-time performance for this period.


'Right to Know' Is Not Unlimited
To the Sports Editor:
Barry Lorge mentioned in "Tennis's Conspiracy of Compassion for Arthur Ashe," (The Times, April 12) that, journalistically, it is difficult to justify withholding newsworthy information once it has been confirmed.
I suppose "newsworthy" can be put into the same category as "the public's right to know." However, what most people are unaware of is that "the public's right to know" is not an unlimited one.
In fact, it is a very limited right to know, restricted to the information a person needs to perform as a citizen.
Anything beyond that is simply to sell newspapers.
Arthur Ashe was done a cruel disservice by the newspaper that had the information and rationalized that it was the public's right to know and consequently printed it.
Outrageous.
MORTON LAZARUS New York


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Social Policy; Clinton Blames Bush and Republicans for Racial Turmoil
Using his sharpest language yet on the nation's social ills, Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas today placed the blame for the failures in race relations with President Bush and preceding Republican administrations.
Citing the rioting in Los Angeles and violence in other cities, the Democratic Presidential candidate turned a speech before the Democratic Leadership Council here into a treatise on America's cynicism and racial division that he said threatened the nation's future.


Fall Wedding For Amy Seltzer
Mr. and Mrs.
Harold I. Seltzer of New York have announced the engagement of their daughter, Amy Dean Seltzer, to Harry Brett Hedison, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Haig Hedison of South Orleans, Mass.
An October wedding is planned.
Miss Seltzer, 29 years old, is the director of investor relations for Biogen Inc., a biotechnology firm in Cambridge, Mass.
She graduated from Princeton University and received an M.B.A. degree from Dartmouth College.
Her father is a senior vice president of Oppenheimer &amp; Company in New York.
Her mother, Adele Seltzer, is an interior designer in New York.


Ms. Cornfeld Wed To W. L. Whisler
Judith A. Cornfeld, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
David Cornfeld of Penn Valley, Pa., and William L. Whisler, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert D. Whisler of Richmond, were married yesterday evening in Philadelphia.
Judge Norma L. Shapiro of Federal District Court in Philadelphia performed the ceremony at Buttonwood Square, a hotel.
Mrs.
Whisler, 30 years old, graduated from the University of Pennsylvania and received a master's degree in business management from Northwestern University.
She is the associate director of client services at Information Resources Inc., a market research company in Chicago.
Her father is a professor and the vice chairman of the department of pediatrics at the University of Pennsylvania and deputy physician-in-chief of the Children's Hospital of Philadelphia.


Jean T. Palmer, 88, Ex-Barnard Official
Jean Tilford Palmer, a former director of the Navy Waves and longtime administrator at Barnard College, died on Thursday at her home in Manhattan.
She was 88 years old.
During World War II, Miss Palmer was a Wave captain, serving as women's reserve assistant to the Navy's director of enlisted personnel.
She rose to the position of director of the Waves in 1945.


Fresh Air Fund Provides Summer Relief
Nine-year-old Charles Aviles usually spends steamy June afternoons playing football on the sidewalks of the South Bronx, but last summer he left his hardscrabble neighborhood for two weeks on a Pennsylvania farm.
He rode horses, golfed and hooked his first baby flounder.
The family Charles was staying with treated him to carnival rides and baseball games and walks in the woods.


Setting the Odds
To the Editor:
William Kennedy writes that he searches in vain for the source of Damon Runyon's famous betting odds against, which are indeed six-to-five.
In "A Nice Price," a story in "Money From Home," a collection of Runyon stories, Sam the Gonoph and Liverlips hear from Benny Southstreet that the Yale rowing team is favored over Harvard's three-to-one, a nice price.
" 'I do not know anything about boat races,' Sam says, 'and the Yales may figure as you say, but nothing between human beings is one-to-three. In fact,' Sam the Gonoph says, 'I long ago come to the conclusion that all life is six-to-five against.' "


O'Neill's 'Touch of the Poet' at the Long Wharf
THE Long Wharf Theater opened and is closing its season with variations on the one-man show.
But not on purpose.
In October, "Booth Is Back," a flawed play by a dabbling playwright about a fallen man, was overtaken by an outsized Frank Langella performance that remains the Connecticut season's singular display of acting pyrotechnics.


G. Y. Schein Wed To Ms. Edwards
Amber Stevens Edwards and Gideon Yehuda Schein, television executives, were married in New York last night.
Rabbi Jonathan Prinz performed the ceremony at the Hotel Westbury.
Ms.
Edwards, who is 31 years old and is keeping her name, is the host and producer of "State of the Arts," a weekly program on the New Jersey Network.
She and her husband also produce television documentaries.
She graduated from Yale University.
She is the daughter of the late Mr. and Mrs.
Edward J. Edwards Jr., who owned and managed farms.


The Fans Get to Call This Game
NEW YORKERS are a breed that loves a good fight, especially when they can't get hurt.
The presence of two major sporting goods stores, Paragon and Herman's, on Broadway between East 17th and 18th Streets, has consumers bouncing back and forth across the street like tennis balls to see if they can save a dollar.


Elizabeth Clary Has Wedding
Elizabeth Jeanne Clary, a daughter Mr. and Mrs.
Edward T. Clary of New Canaan, Conn., was married there yesterday to Edward Chee Hsuan Chow, a son of Mrs.
Pui King Chow of Brooklyn and the late Woon Chow.
The Rev.
Roland Jones performed the ceremony at St.
Mark's Episcopal Church.
Mrs.
Chow, 31 years old, is a vice president of Chemical Bank in New York.
She graduated from Smith College and received an M.B.A. from the University of Chicago.
Her father is the vice president for taxes of the Bristol-Myers Squibb Company in New York.


U.S. vs. Needy Students
One would think the Administration of the self-styled Education President would embrace ways to help needy students get through college.
Instead, the Bush Administration has gone to court to block the way the Massachusetts Institute of Technology spends $20 million a year on scholarships.
Why?
Because the Justice Department thinks M.I.T. is violating antitrust laws.
It's a destructive claim, unworthy of litigation.
At least it warrants being contested.
But Justice now wants to deny even a fair hearing; it asks for summary judgment.
That risks turning the unwarranted into the outrageous.


Wilbur Mills, Long a Power In Congress, Is Dead at 82
Wilbur D. Mills, a dominant figure in the House of Representatives for more than two decades, died yesterday at his home in Kensett, Ark.
He was 82 years old.
Mr.
Mills, a Democrat whose name for years seemed inextricably linked to the title "chairman of the powerful House Ways and Means Committee," was taken to White County Memorial Hospital in nearby Searcy, Ark.
Efforts to revive him failed, a nursing supervisor, Jackie Wooldridge, told The Associated press.
Ms.
Wooldridge would not disclose the cause of death.


Czar Wars
COMRADES
1917 -- Russia in Revolution.
By Brian Moynahan.
Illustrated. 374 pp.
Boston: Little, Brown &amp; Company.


New &amp; Noteworthy
CHASING THE MONSOON: A Modern Pilgrimage Through India, by Alexander Frater. (Owl/Holt, $12.95.) When the author was a boy, he had over his bed a print of a landscape in India entitled "Cherrapunji, Assam: The Wettest Place on Earth." This book chronicles Mr.
Frater's 1987 journey to that site.
Last year our reviewer, Raleigh Trevelyan, called it "delightful, witty and unusual . . . full of humorous perceptions."
BRIEF LIVES, by Anita Brookner. (Vintage Contemporaries, $11.) This novel is narrated by Fay Langdon, who has reached old age with the somber realization that she has never really been loved.
She looks back on her relationships with her husband and lover, both now dead, and her lover's wife, a woman who seems to embrace life with all the verve and daring Fay lacks.
But in the end her story is a courageous one, Joyce Reiser Kornblatt said in The Book Review last year: " [ Fay ]  'felt a grief that was not merely personalized but general, and an unwilling solidarity with all female destinies.' That empathy, which Fay comes to late, informs all of Anita Brookner's novels. 'Brief Lives' is yet another instance of her large and knowing heart."


On Beyond Zinnia
I admit to being a tad Anglophobic when it comes to British garden books.
Certainly the word "Royal" in the title of THE NEW ROYAL HORTICULTURAL SOCIETY DICTIONARY OF GARDENING (Stockton Press, $795) seemed a rude reminder of the surfeit of marginal books that have drifted onto these shores.
So it was a relief to discover the many native North American species among the 50,000 plants in this superlative four-volume work.
Refreshing, too, is the inclusion of the common names along with the botanical, an index, an essay on American garden history and a comprehensive -- and comprehensible -- glossary.
Also, tucked among the biographies of 175 of the garden world's notables are some of our very own heroes, including Frederick Law Olmsted, John Bartram, Charles Sprague Sargent and Liberty Hyde Bailey, whose glorious "Standard Cyclopedia of Horticulture" (1914) is mentioned among the inspirations for this work.
The editor in chief, Anthony Huxley, the editor, Mark Griffiths, and the managing editor, Margot Levy, certainly have succeeded in giving more than lip service to gardeners on the Atlantic's west bank.
No plowing through stiff, academic cadences here.
We get our dirt-garden priorities right when, for example, after a nitty-gritty listing of genus, origin of plant name, family, distribution, species and hardiness zone, there appears an ingenuous observation in the cultural notes, for example that on one of the eight pages on narcissus: "They are also excellent as cut flowers." When it comes to gardening, only the jaded (or supercilious) take this rightful hierarchy of interests for granted.
Two dozen superb botanical illustrators have added a sprinkling of delightfully informative pages of drawings to the densely packed text.
So dare I quibble?
Dare I yearn for those elegant typefaces and graceful layouts of earlier tomes whose tradition this ambitious work continues?
Informative, up-to-date and awesome it is.
Absolutely.
But what a shame that the glorious art of bookmaking got lost in a computer.


Cars and VCR's Aren't Necessarily the First Domino
Must commerce among nations always be a dog eat dog fight for absolute advantage?
Economic Darwinians fear that America's loss of leadership in a few key industries is the beginning of an irreversible decline in competitiveness.
A more sanguine school, which holds that industrialized economies will ultimately converge, maintains that Japan and Germany will catch up with the United States, but not surpass it.
As it turns out, reality isn't unfolding quite according to either script, some economists say.
While the level of output per employee in Japan and Germany and the United States has converged since the 1950's, productivity in individual industries has begun to diverge.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-16  BATTLE IN SARAJEVO


April 26-May 2: Retailing; Change at Macy's Signals New Era for Shoppers
To the merchants of Edward S. Finkelstein's generation, the department store was a theater where shoppers could star in their own opulent dramas.
Last week, he became the last of that line to make his exit, resigning as Macy's chairman one season after his $3.5 billion buyout of the chain careered into bankruptcy court.
With the recent departures of other master merchandisers like Ira Neimark of Bergdorf Goodman's and Marvin S. Traub of Bloomingdale's, a royal style of retailing fades as well.
The new crop of department store executives, at Macy's and elsewhere, rank as savvy marketers, but technocrats and disciplinarians besides.
Just as airline executives use computer programs to squeeze the most revenue from every seat, the new merchants have made a science of forecasting sales, managing inventories and calibrating prices.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: May 3, 1992
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
14
THE FIRM, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $5.99.) A young lawyer learns that his firm is engaged in secret, possibly illegal activities.
2
3
"H" IS FOR HOMICIDE, by Sue Grafton. (Fawcett, $5.99.) The private eye Kinsey Millhone on the trail of perpetrators of an insurance scam.
3
14
FRIED GREEN TOMATOES AT THE WHISTLE STOP CAFE, by Fannie Flagg. (McGraw-Hill, $6.95.) Life in rural Alabama.
4
3
THE SECRET, by Julie Garwood. (Pocket, $5.99.) A 12th-century English belle finds romance.
5
2
AS THE CROW FLIES, by Jeffrey Archer. (Harper Paperbacks, $6.50.) A man strives to create the biggest store in the world.
6
1
ASPEN GOLD, by Janet Dailey. (Little, Brown, $5.99.) A woman returns to her native Colorado to face a choice: fame in Hollywood or love with an old flame.
7
1
SHADOWS OF YESTERDAY, by Sandra Brown. (Warner, $4.99.) A widow in a crisis is rescued by a man who hides his past; first published in 1983 as "Relentless Desire."
8
2
SKY MASTERS, by Dale Brown. (Berkley, $5.99.) The United States Air Force goes to the aid of the Philippines in a war with China in 1994.
9
52
THE PRINCE OF TIDES, by Pat Conroy. (Bantam, $5.99.) Complex family relationships in South Carolina's low country and New York City.
10
11
LOVES MUSIC, LOVES TO DANCE, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Pocket, $5.99.) Two women get caught in the snare of a serial killer.
11
2
THE SEERESS OF KELL, by David Eddings. (Del Rey/Ballantine, $5.99.) The fifth volume in the fantasy series "The Malloreon."
12
1
BOY'S LIFE, by Robert R. McCammon. (Pocket, $5.99.) A boy struggles to understand the forces of good and evil at work in his small Alabama town.
13
1
THE RUSTLERS OF WEST FORK, by Louis L'Amour. (Bantam, $4.99.) A frontier novel featuring Hopalong Cassidy, first published in 1951.
14
2
THE DISINHERITED, by Peter David, Michael Jan Friedman and Robert Greenberger. (Pocket, $4.99.) New adventures of the "Star Trek" crew.
15
3
A TIME TO KILL, by John Grisham. (Wynwood, $9.95.) Racial tensions surface during a trial.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
3
JFK: CONSPIRACY OF SILENCE, by Charles A. Crenshaw with Jens Hansen and J. Gary Shaw. (Signet, $4.99.) A Dallas surgeon tells what he observed while treating the dying John F. Kennedy and Lee Harvey Oswald.
2
2
AMERICA: WHAT WENT WRONG? by Donald L. Barlett and James B. Steele. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $6.95.) How the practices of Washington lawmakers and Wall Street deal makers have benefited a few Americans at the expense of most.
3
50
YOU JUST DON'T UNDERSTAND, by Deborah Tannen. (Ballantine, $10.) The different languages men and women speak.
4
8
YOU'LL NEVER EAT LUNCH IN THIS TOWN AGAIN, by Julia Phillips. (Signet, $6.99.) Life in Hollywood as experienced by a producer.
5
7
IF YOU REALLY LOVED ME, by Ann Rule. (Pocket, $5.99.) The bizarre family relationships behind the murder of the wife of an entrepreneur.
6
443
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Psychological and spiritual inspiration by a psychiatrist. (LP)
7
1
CRUEL DOUBT, by Joe McGinniss. (Pocket, $5.99.) The tribulations of a North Carolina woman whose son was accused of planning the murder of herself and her husband.
8
11
IRON JOHN, by Robert Bly. (Vintage, $11.) The passage of the male from boyhood into manhood, as practiced in various cultures.
9 *
42
A YEAR IN PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A sojourn in the south of France.
10
129
LOVE, MEDICINE, AND MIRACLES, by Bernie S. Siegel. (Harper Perennial, $8.95.) The importance of a patient's mind and emotions.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
38
LIFE'S LITTLE INSTRUCTION BOOK, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $5.95.) Some 500 tips for achieving a self-fulfilling life.
2
7
ATTACK OF THE DERANGED MUTANT KILLER MONSTER SNOW GOONS, by Bill Watterson. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $8.95.) "Calvin and Hobbes" cartoons.
3
2
LIVE AND LEARN AND PASS IT ON, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $5.95.) Morsels of what they've learned about life, from people aged 5 to 95.
4
86
THE T-FACTOR FAT GRAM COUNTER, by Jamie Pope-Cordle and Martin Katahn. (Norton, $2.50.) How to reduce fat in one's diet.
5
67
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $9.95.) Principles for success.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,050 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 38,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.


California Governor Facing Tough Time
In a difficult time for governors, Pete Wilson of California may be having the toughest time of all.
He came to office 16 months ago as a rising star in the Republican Party, with a reputation as a pragmatic conciliator and consensus builder who could change a troubled state and a virtually paralyzed state government.


Beneath the Wheels of Progress
THE LIVING
By Annie Dillard. 397 pp. New York:  HarperCollins Publishers. $22.50.


Corrections
An article last Sunday about Asian educational techniques misstated the affiliation of James W. Stigler.
He is a professor of psychology at the University of California at Los Angeles.


A Klee? A Mondrian? Guess Again
Until they switched to Western dress about 1900, Korean aristocrats wore ceremonial robes with batwing sleeves striped like rainbows or vividly stitched with birds and flowers.
They also wrapped their possessions in abstract-patterned cloth, colorful patchworks that anticipated the paintings of Paul Klee and Piet Mondrian.
"These robes and wrapping cloths were among the best-kept secrets of the East," said Yi Song-mi, a professor of art history at the Academy of Korean Studies in Seoul.
They are secrets no longer thanks to "Korean Costumes and Textiles," an exhibition at the I.B.M.
Gallery of Science and Art, Madison Avenue at 57th Street, through June 13.
Professor Yi, who coordinated the show with Chung Yang-mo, chief curator of the National Museum of Korea, said that until now the costumes had never left Korea, and the wrapping cloths are rarely exhibited abroad. (The current exhibition is sponsored by the Korean Overseas Information Service and I.B.M.)


Contact Sports


Sometimes, Even Models Don't Like Cameras
Models dressing backstage have long been off limits to loitering photographers, but now that privacy appears to be evaporating.
Claudia Schiffer, the German supermodel, is fuming over a series of topless photos that appear in the new issue of R.O.M.E, a downtown magazine.
The shots reveal Ms.
Schiffer changing clothes backstage at a benefit showing of Chanel designs at Industria last fall.


'Smiling School' Wins National Recognition
DON'T tell Ridgewood High School, Westfield High, Moorestown High or any of the other schools in New Jersey that are often touted as the best in the state, but Redbook magazine, in an article in last month's issue on the nation's public high schools, has proclaimed Randolph High School as New Jersey's finest.
This 1,200-student high school in Morris County, known more for its performance on the athletic field than off, may not have the recognition factor of some other schools, but it has in fact been gathering laurels in academic subjects and extracurricular activities as well as sports for most of its 30 years.
And that was what led Redbook's panel of judges to select the school from among the 25 that applied for the honor.


Yale Sets Goal of $1.5 Billion In 5-Year Fund-Raising Drive
Yale University today announced a five-year campaign to raise $1.5 billion, the largest fund drive in the history of American higher education.
Yale has already raised $571.2 million toward that goal, including the largest single gift ever made to Yale, a donation by Paul Mellon valued at more than $50 million.
The gift from Mr.
Mellon includes books by the poet William Blake, historic documents from the Chateau de Rochambeau and at least $25 million in endowment funds for the Yale Center for British Art, which was established with earlier gifts from Mr.
Mellon, the philanthropist, who was a 1929 graduate of Yale College.


RIOT IN LOS ANGLES: The Overview; CLEANUP BEGINS IN LOS ANGELES; TROOPS ENFORCE SURREAL CALM
With 13,000 police and troops patrolling the streets of the nation's second-largest city, life in Los Angeles assumed a surrealistic sense of the normal today after one of the deadliest and most destructive racial disorders in American history.
As the night curfew ended at dawn, cleanup crews began spreading through the hard-hit South-Central area to salvage what they could from some of the 3,767 buildings burned in the three days of arson and looting.


For Travelers, Checks for Two
American Express has introduced traveler's checks that allow two travel companions to use the same checks separately.
With American Express Traveler's Checks for Two, the purchaser signs on the first line in the upper left corner at time of purchase (only that person need be present when buying the checks) and the other authorized user signs the second line later.
Either signer can use the checks by countersigning on the single line in the lower left.


Mambo Madness
MONDAY, Mambo Monday.
Again the pink flamingos are out on the sidewalk in front of S.O.B.'s in TriBeCa, a signal that, for the next hour or two, the Latin dance club is offering free lessons to would-be Mambo Kings and Queens.
The scene inside is dark, tropical, ripe.
At the bar, men and women are drinking Coors, smoking Camels and looking sultry.
They know how to mambo.
They learned last Monday.
At a table near the dance floor, a couple in business suits seem to be in the getting-to-know-you mode.
She's Joni Ruller, 29 years old.
He's Philip Oths, 33.


Brunilda Burgos and Adalberto Rodriguez St. Mary's Church/April 25, 1992
IN the kind of cold, rainy weather that only umbrella vendors and taxi drivers relish, Brunilda Burgos, 21 years old, and Adalberto Rodriguez, 34, were married in St.
Mary's Roman Catholic Church on the Lower East Side.
At 5 P.M., the scheduled time for the ceremony, it looked as if there might not be a wedding at all.
Only a handful of people were in the church, among them Mr.
Rodriguez, who was smiling in the slightly otherworldly way of the Mona Lisa.
A foreman for a plexiglass company, he has the patience of someone who can assemble tiny things: he builds miniature cars as a hobby.


Your Game, Mr. Schulhof
Michael P. Schulhof, the chairman of Sony Music Entertainment, is going to considerable expense to play tennis.
Last year, he paid $950,000 for a house next door to his in East Hampton, L.I.
Recently, he sold it, had it moved and is hoping to be serving by summer.
Locals are calling it the "million-dollar tennis court."


Sports of The Times; Knicks Face Honors Exam: Pass or Fail
ALL around the country, college students are thinking about final examinations.
This afternoon, the New York Knicks take theirs.
It is the biggest test of the year for them, and there are only two grades on it.
Pass.
Or fail.
To be sure, the Knicks have achieved a diploma of sorts, by virtue of the league's highly tolerant grade curve.
Even the New Jersey Nets made the playoffs, for goodness' sake, and they were a mutinous bunch from the owners to the players.
But the first round of the playoffs is for honors.
Eight teams survive it and eight do not.


Streetscapes: The Belnord; Is a Courtyard Inside or Out?
THE Belnord has been in and out of the news for more than a decade as the battleground where the owner, Lillian Seril, and her rent-regulated tenants have clashed over rents and maintenance.
Now a separate dispute has come up over changes to the apartment house's huge interior courtyard and it calls attention to the complicated issue of what is protected when the exterior of a building is designated a landmark.


Brooke Norris, Analyst, Weds
Mary Brooke Norris, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Paul Stetson Norris of Baederwood, Pa., and Karl Seiler Murray, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
William Bruce Murray of Rydal, Pa., were married yesterday at the Abington (Pa.) Presbyterian Church.
The Rev.
Dr.
Edmund S. P. Jones performed the ceremony.
Mrs.
Murray, 28 years old, is known as Brooke.
A graduate of Haverford College, she is an information analyst for the operations group at O'Brien Environmental Energy, a privately owned power company in Philadelphia.
Her father, now retired, was an international credit specialist for the Sun Refining and Marketing Company in Philadelphia.
Her mother, June Norris, is a senior editor at the Springhouse Corporation, which publishes medical books and periodicals in Spring House, Pa.


'Balzac of the Camera' Preserved The Details of Parisian Churches
EUGENE ATGET (1857-1927) took up the camera at the age of 40, resolving, he said, to document "everything in Paris and its environs that was artistic and picturesque." Though he sold the results to stage designers, interior decorators and artists including Braque and Utrillo, the photographer did not achieve fame until he was almost 70 -- and then only because he had Man Ray as a neighbor.
The American Surrealist was the first to use Atget's prints as works of art, publishing them, albeit without credit, in the magazine La Revolution Surrealiste.
But it was Man Ray's student, Berenice Abbott, who did the most for Atget, preserving his enormous output and presenting it to the Museum of Modern Art in Manhattan.
She called him a "Balzac of the camera" and her photograph of him wearing a rumpled overcoat seconds the opinion.
The portrait accompanies the Atget pictures of Paris churches now in the Davison Art Center, at Wesleyan University.
This collection was bestowed on the center in 1984 by Alfred Berger, in memory of his wife, Rosalind, and his brother-in-law, Lee Taub, and it came as an album with the title, "Interieurs d'Eglises" in large, loopy handwriting on the cover.


A People Face the Mirror of History
There's no predicting the course of a playwright's career.
Even so, "Two Trains Running" at the Walter Kerr Theater is a play you wouldn't have expected August Wilson to write.
For some time, the gifted Mr.
Wilson has been chronicling the lives and mores of black people in America -- putting faces to those who might otherwise have been lost in the crowd, giving voice to their joy and their pain.
The grand scheme calls for a play for each decade of the 20th century, although, obeying inspiration rather than chronology, he has jumped around a lot.
He followed his first success, "Ma Rainey's Black Bottom," which was set in the Roaring Twenties, with "Fences," which took place in the moral twilight zone that was the 1950's.
He then backed up to 1911 with "Joe Turner's Come and Gone," before moving forward to 1936 and "The Piano Lesson."


Business Diary/April 5-10
COMPANIES Paying the Price for Violence in South-Central Los Angeles


A Gutsy Palate
LYDIA SHIRE DOESN'T sound like a rabble-rouser.
Her voice has the demure plain-spoken lilt that one hears in Boston's better Irish neighborhoods.
But what the chef and owner of the Boston restaurant Biba actually
says
would cause many a silver spoon to clatter against many a bone-china saucer.
"I am proudest of the awful," she says often, meaning "offal." In addition to sections offering meat, pasta and potatoes, vegetables and desserts, Biba's menu, which changes four times a year, lists offal like pan-fried brains with young pea vines, grilled veal heart with a garlic souffle, roasted marrow bones topped with duck "fries" (testicles) and served with millet rye toast and double-smoked bacon.
Before Shire, most Bostonians thought offal was awful.
But from a progression of local restaurant and hotel kitchens, the hometown chef has been tugging and cajoling, challenging and bewitching some of the most staid tastes in America for almost two decades.


Talking: Down Payment; Saving To Buy a First Home
SAVING for a down payment when living expenses seem to constantly outstrip income is one of the perennial problems facing young couples eager to buy a first home.
Moreover, interest rates on savings are now so low that a small nest egg is unlikely to grow into anything usable for a long time.
"You get nothing from leaving your money in the bank," said Stuart Richardson, a graphic designer who will be married in Glen Cove, L.I., in October.
Even worse, he added, "there are always so many bills coming in."


A Russian Maestro Out of Isolation
Yevgeny Mravinsky was probably the best 20th-century conductor to have had hardly any American career, apart from respectful attention to his occasional recordings.
Mravinsky (1906-88), the leader of the Leningrad (now St. Petersburg) Philharmonic from 1938 until his death, toured Western Europe a few times.
But mostly, he stayed within the confines of the Soviet bloc.
He was hindered from establishing a full-fledged Western career by the Cold War, of course.
Though devoutly religious, he was clever and talented enough to sustain one of the most prominent positions in the Soviet Union for half a century.
But in his later years, he became increasingly withdrawn, and rarely conducted in his native Leningrad, let alone elsewhere.


Evidence Links '88 Bush Campaign to Effort to Silence an Accuser of Quayle
In a peculiar footnote to the 1988 Presidential campaign, a Federal prisoner tried to step forward four days before the election to assert that he had once sold marijuana to Dan Quayle.
His accusation was never substantiated and he returned to the obscurity of his cell.
But now evidence collected in connection with a lawsuit by the inmate, Brett C. Kimberlin, indicates that the Bush-Quayle campaign was involved in a decision by the highest official of the Bureau of Prisons to silence Mr.
Kimberlin and place him in solitary confinement.


Any Democrat Will Do
Linda Bloodworth-Thomason and her husband, Harry Thomason, the executive producers of "Designing Women," raised funds for Bill Clinton.
The actress Kim Basinger sang for Edmund G. Brown Jr.
But two entertainment industry heavyweights aren't being personal in their partisanship.
Barry Diller, the former chairman of Fox Inc., and his former colleague Garth Ancier, once the top programming executive at Fox Broadcasting, are advising the Democratic Party on plans for its 1992 convention in July in New York.


Lainie Kazan Goes Back to Her Roots
HERS is one of the musical theater's best-known real-life variations on the scenario about the understudy who goes out there a nobody and comes back a star.
That happened 27 years ago, when Lainie Kazan went on for Barbra Streisand in "Funny Girl," for a Wednesday matinee and evening performance, and then nevermore.
So began, in media terms, what Ms.
Kazan calls a zigzagging career that has encompassed nightclubs, as manager and performer, television, screen as well as stage.


Bryant Park, An Out-of-Town Experience
Why is it that whenever a moment of genuine joy appears in the physical fabric of New York, the first impulse is to think you must be somewhere else?
Are we so used to the notion of New York as harsh, dirty and dangerous -- which it so often is -- that when we encounter something pleasant, we think not of how good this part of New York is but of how it makes us feel transported to a different place?
It says much about our sensibilities toward the city in the gloomy 90's that Bryant Park, in many ways the quintessential New York urban park, now feels like part of another city altogether.
This is not because the team of architects and landscape designers who have overseen the $8.9 million restoration of the park have tried to purge the midtown square of its New York identity.
Quite the contrary.
They have preserved those physical qualities that make this unusual park feel like the Manhattan landmark it is.
Rather, it is the mood of the park -- easy, relaxed, chatty, like the square of a small town -- that makes the new Bryant Park feel as if it has been airlifted out of the West 40's and dropped into some idyllic landscape far, far away.
Security guards who smile and say "Good morning"?
Maintenance workers who pick up papers as soon as they fall to the ground?
This is not the New York I know.


Czechoslovakia's Other Charismatic Vaclav
Czechoslovakia's Finance Minister, Vaclav Klaus, wears understated gray suits appropriate to his position.
But not for him the formal pronouncements or colorless statistics of economic policy.
The leader of the largest party in the Czech portion of Czechoslovakia, the 51-year-old Mr.
Klaus has passion and charisma that attracts from voters the kind of adulation usually reserved for movie stars -- even as his unswerving laissez-faire principles stir attacks from the country's left wing.


Dream-Team Style
Headgear of the immortals doesn't come with angel's wings attached.
It's deep blue and roundish, and the imprint of greatness, stitched above the narrow brim, is the "NY" logo of the 1927 Yankees, the team of Lou Gehrig and Babe Ruth.
The Roman Company of Randolph, Mass., has issued the cap in soft wool like the original's, and fortunately without plastic sizer, as part of the Cooperstown Collection, which includes facsimile caps from the old Negro League teams.


In Sarajevo, a Barrage of Terror
A pall of smoke from burning automobiles, tram cars and buildings hung over the city this evening as artillery shells and heavy machine-gun fire continued to rain into apartment blocks, the republic's presidency and Parliament buildings and downtown streets, witnesses said.
Bodies lay on sidewalks and in doorways after Serb-led Yugoslav Army forces and Serbian irregulars, claiming that they were provoked, fought street battles for hours in the center of Sarajevo against forces loyal to the new Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina.


Lock Step With New York City Economy, Budget Treads Path of Booms and Busts
The $29.5 billion budget proposed last week by Mayor David N. Dinkins left some New Yorkers with the impression that the city government had finally turned a corner after more than three years of fiscal distress.
But upbeat developments -- including a $455 million surplus this year that will allow the city to avoid borrowing and pay for some new programs next year -- obscured a more enduring problem, many fiscal monitors say.
For at least two decades, they say, the city's financial structure has been fundamentally out of balance.


The Message Takes Over The Medium
During the performance-art piece "Blue Dot Chorus," at Town Hall recently, members of a female choral group shouted out questions about sexual politics and rape ("If yes always means yes, why doesn't no always mean no?").
A chorister asked the women in the audience to undulate and freely express their sexual energy.
Then the Women's Action Coalition Drum Corps strode up the aisle, militantly rapping out march rhythms.
At that moment during a benefit concert celebrating the 20th anniversary of the Kitchen, the glossy surface of performance art -- its superstructure -- was pulled aside.
The fantasy, the electronic play with video and sound, the mixture of rock music and ironic impersonation that have marked the best performance art -- all that dissolved.
The art form, which grew out of the "happenings" and demonstrations of the 1960's, returned to its origins.
The message took over the medium.


Let a Thousand Lipsticks Bloom
Few Chinese houses have doorbells, but that has not stopped the emergence here of a growing army of 10,000 women who are called "elegant and fragrant ladies."
That is what the Chinese call their Avon Ladies, and they are peddling cosmetics with a determination that has made Avon one of the most successful and best-known companies here in southern China.


A Burst of Speed Followed By a Perplexing Slowdown
In the jockeys' room at Churchill Downs, the reaction to Arazi's convincing loss today was much the same as that of the stunned 130,000 spectators who were left buzzing outside: surprise and resignation, but no answers.
As several of the diminutive men and the lone woman who rode in the 118th Kentucky Derby crowded around a television to watch a replay of the race, they saw the would-be superhorse pass several horses in a sudden burst on the far turn that was a reprise of his fabled move at the Breeders' Cup Juvenile last November.


THE BEST-SELLING TATTOO DESIGNS
As arms have gotten more sophisticated, so too have their adornments -- those ubiquitous tattoos.
The first flurry is over, and the interlocking Chanel  C's and "Winona Forever" designs have given way to eco-correct symbols of dolphins and tribal imagery.
"If you don't have a tattoo, you're not what's happening," said Lou Sciberras, owner of Tattoos by Lou in Miami.
Here's a rundown of the best sellers from tattoo parlors across the country:
At Tattoos by Lou, the ecologically correct dolphin is a top choice.
The starting price is $50, for the one-inch size.
Equally popular is a tattoo dubbed Tribal -- a sinuous design that looks like lightning bolts or Celtic runes.
Tribal is also the design of choice at Tattoo Mania in Los Angeles, a shop owned by Gill (The Drill) Montie.


POP'S BEQUEST
Collins expressed the feeling of many folks who, when faced with a last request of someone they love, have to resolve the conflict between their sense of duty and their sense of what is suitable as a memorial.
His article demonstrated that even a seemingly simple task, like a body donation, can be an involved process.
As a funeral director, I have been asked many times why we need to be engaged for this matter.
We undertake those tasks at a time when grief and inexperience make even simple arrangements seem unnecessarily complicated, crass and painful.


Cubs' Bats Emerge From Hibernation
Cubs 10, Reds 3
CINCINNATI, May 2 (AP) -- Andre Dawson ended Chicago's streak of 36 innings without a run with a three-run homer and drove in two runs with a single as the Cubs erupted from a weeklong slump by pounding the Cincinnati Reds, 10-3, today.


Strong Suit
IT'S the other kind of drag.
Women in pin stripes, starched shirts and neckties ruled the runways from Paris to New York this season.
But like Madonna in "Express Yourself" or Marlene Dietrich in black tie, this is men's wear with an edge, Savile Row with an undercurrent of some new sexual dynamic.


Simplistic Formulas, Broad Generalizations
To the Editor:
Janine Wedel makes numerous and largely unsubstantiated critical comments regarding American assistance efforts in Eastern Europe, especially our aid to Poland ("Getting It Right in Aid to Russia," Forum, April 5).
She takes highly complex issues, reduces them to simplistic formulas, then makes broad generalizations which do not stand up to closer scrutiny.


Talking and Taking Turkey in Texas
Night was falling when John Falk and I turned off the hard-packed dirt road that led to the guest lodge nestled in a cluster of live oaks and mesquite on the 45,000-acre Encinitos cattle ranch in southwest Texas.
In the warm twilight we could hear the gobbling of the birds we had come to hunt.
Already at the lodge were four experienced turkey hunters: J. Wayne Fears of Alabama, Larry Weishuhn and Dan Klepper, both of Texas, and guide and outfitter Bill Whitfield, also a Texan.
When Falk, who hails from South Salem, N.Y., had first proposed the Texas trip, I had dragged my heels.
I had stopped spring turkey hunting nearly 20 years ago because my hearing was getting so bad I couldn't pinpoint the source of an approaching tom's gobble.


IN SHORT/REFERENCE BOOKS
THE PEOPLE'S CHRONOLOGY A Year-by-Year Record of Human Events From Prehistory to the Present.
By James Trager.
Holt, $45.


Water, Anyone? The Hollywood Guzzle
In Robert Altman's Hollywood sendup, "The Player," an initial attempt at what the film director calls "crass commercialization" turned into a stream of bottled-water humor, as scene after scene featured yet another designer-water label.
"We did not have a big budget to make this picture," Mr.
Altman said, "so we thought we could get some extra cash by using a couple of brands of bottled water."


Elizabeth Tauro, Lawyer, to Wed
Judge and Mrs.
Joseph L. Tauro of Marblehead, Mass., have announced September wedding plans for his daughter, Elizabeth Helen Tauro, and Todd Richard Saunders, a son of Roger A. Saunders of Boston and the late Nina A. Saunders.
Miss Tauro is also the daughter of the late Elizabeth M. Tauro.
The bride, 30 years old, graduated from Brown University and received a law degree from Cornell University.
She is an associate with Hale &amp; Dorr, a law firm in Boston.
Her father is chief judge of the United States District Court in Massachusetts.
Her grandfather G. Joseph Tauro, now retired, was Chief Justice of the Massachusetts Supreme Judicial Court.
Her stepmother, Ann L. Tauro, is an information systems consultant in Marblehead.


Palette Pals
Hopper and Ruscha previews. Shafrazi Gallery. April 25, 7 P.M.


Backlash Blames Feminism for Sins of Sexism; A Place for Tradition
To the Editor:
Thank you for "The Backlash Myth" by Georgette Mosbacher (Op-Ed, April 20), which refutes claims of a conspiracy against American women to reject feminism.
Ms.
Mosbacher is a perfect spokeswoman for those of us who feel satisfied with our place in life and the choices we have made, who feel we can have a career, families and look attractive.
In addition to being a highly public figure, she runs a multimillion-dollar company and finds time for benevolent causes, a husband, her health and appearance.


When Inter-American Force Succeeded
To the Editor:
Jose Luis Morin writes in "For Haiti, an Invasion Is Wrong Answer" (letter, April 9) in strong disagreement with your endorsement of a "Military Force for the Americas" (editorial, March 24).
He cites "failed military interventions" by the United States in the Caribbean region to support his argument that an inter-American force would be unsuccessful in addressing situations such as that in Haiti.


In the Region: Westchester and Connecticut; Recent Sales
Chappaqua, N.Y. 410,000
Annandale Drive  4-bedroom, 3-bath, 34-year-old split-level; family room, 2 fireplaces, skylights; taxes $11,187.
Mount Kisco, N.Y. 250,000
15 Horseshoe Road
4-bedroom, 2-bath, 40-year-old Cape Cod; fireplace, dining room, eat-in kitchen, screened porch, workshop; taxes $5,292.
South Salem, N.Y. 495,000
Ashwood Road  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, year-old colonial; 2 fireplaces, dining room, family room, Jacuzzi, 7.6 acres; taxes not yet assessed.
Clinton, Conn. 120,000
44 Morgan Park  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 58-year-old bungalow; water views, atrium doors to deck, wood stove, 50- by 162-foot lot; taxes $1,581.
Granby, Conn. 120,000
10 Fern Hollow Drive  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 33-year-old ranch; living room with fireplace, country kitchen, 0.75 acre; taxes $,1830.
North Branford, Conn. 135,000
20 Jerz Lane  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 30-year-old ranch; screen porch, c/a, hardwood floors, 0.5 acre; taxes $1,439.
OTHER AREAS East Islip, L.I. 220,000
12 Dana Lane  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 20-year-old colonial; dining room, eat-in kitchen, den, deck, 2-car attached garage; taxes $5,900.
Great River, L.I. 265,000
42 Woodhollow Road  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 32-year-old farm ranch; den, fireplace, finished basement, patio, inground pool; taxes $6,300.
Howell, N.J. 148,000
106 Old Bridge Drive
4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 23-year-old colonial; 2-car garage, c/a, fireplace, taxes $3,567.


Evidence Links '88 Bush Campaign to Effort to Silence an Accuser of Quayle
In a peculiar footnote to the 1988 Presidential campaign, a Federal prisonertried to step forward four days before the election to assert that he had once sold marijuana to Dan Quayle.
His accusation was never substantiated and he returned to the obscurity of his cell.
But now evidence collected in connection with a lawsuit by the inmate, Brett C. Kimberlin, indicates that the Bush-Quayle campaign was involved in a decision by the highest official of the Bureau of Prisons to silence Mr.
Kimberlin and place him in solitary confinement.


Pornography and the New Puritans: Letters From Andrea Dworkin and Others
To the Editor:
In "The World According to Garp," John Irving fantasized about the followers of Ellen James, a band of feminists who cut out their own tongues.
Clearly, he would prefer that certain feminists just shut up.
LYNN M. SANDERS Ann Arbor, Mich.


Ship to Shore
Some liked the waves, some lubbed the land: From New York Harbor to the Pierre.


SOCIAL EVENTS
House of Music Benefit
MAY 4 -- Peter Schickele will bring his comedic brand of music to the spring benefit for the Bloomingdale House of Music, a community music school on West 108th Street that is celebrating its 27th year.
Cocktails at 6:30 P.M. at the New York Society for Ethical Culture, 2 West 64th Street, will be followed by a 7:30 P.M. concert and then dinner and dancing starting at 8:30 P.M.
Tickets, $60, from (212) 866-9366.
Musical Award Night
MAY 4 -- A musical tribute to Cy Coleman will be held at the Church of the Heavenly Rest to benefit the York Theater Company.
Gwen Verdon, the star of Mr.
Coleman's 1966 musical "Sweet Charity," will present the award to the composer.
A 6:30 P.M. cocktail party will be held in a private town house and another party will follow the tribute at the theater.
Tickets, $200, for both parties and tribute and $60 for tribute and post-performance party, from (212) 874-5457.
Volunteers for Israel
MAY 4 -- New Israel Fund, which provides technical assistance to voluntary organizations that promote social justice in Israel, is celebrating its 13th birthday with a benefit at Lincoln Center.
A 5:30 P.M. cocktail buffet at the Vivian Beaumont Theater followed by a program that includes the Israeli author Amos Elon.
Tickets, $150, from (212) 302-0066.
Literary Birthday Party
MAY 4 -- The Millay Colony for the Arts will celebrate the 100th birthday of its namesake, Edna St.
Vincent Millay, with a black-tie benefit at the St.
Regis.
Cocktails at 6:30 P.M. will be followed by dinner and entertainment that will include the cabaret singer Andrea Marcovicci.
Tickets, $300, from (212) 799-7654.
Benefit for Music School
MAY 4 -- A black-tie benefit for the Third Street Music School Settlement will be held at the Carlyle starting with a 7:30 P.M. champagne reception.
Dinner at 8:15 will be followed by entertainment and dancing.
Tickets, $250, from (212) 777-3240.
New Help for the Park
MAY 4 -- The Central Park Conservancy is expanding its beneficence over Manhattan's sylvan centerpiece with creation of Playground Partners.
A party for children and adults will be held at the playground at Fifth Avenue at 76th Street to start the new group, which will seek to upgrade the park's playgrounds.
There will be food and entertainment from 5 to 7:30 P.M.
In case of rain, the benefit party will be held mid-park in the Dairy building just north of the Wollman Rink at 65th Street.
Tickets, $50 for adults, $10 for children under 12 years old, from (212) 315-0385.
Sibling Assistance
MAY 5 -- Big Brothers/Big Sisters of New York City, which matches adults with children who often lack strong parental guidance, with the aim of developing friendship, is holding a benefit at the Waldorf-Astoria.
Cocktails at 6:30 P.M. will be followed by dinner, awards and entertainment by the National Dance Institute.
Tickets, $350, from (212) 580-5511.
Anti-Bias Fund Raiser
MAY 5 -- The New York regional board of the Anti-Defamation League will hold its annual dinner and dance in the Rainbow Room.
The black-tie event starts with cocktails at 6:30 P.M.
Tickets, $325, from (212) 490-2525.
Italian Spring Festival
MAY 5 -- A traditional Italian musical celebration of spring will be held at the Italian Trade Commission, 499 Park Avenue at 59th Street, to benefit I Giullari Di Piazza, a professional troupe that performs traditional Italian folk music.
The party starts at 6:30 P.M.
Tickets, $75, from (212) 431-7179.
Lower East Side Benefit
MAY 5 -- The AIDS services and a planned residence for those with the disease will benefit from a party held by the Lower East Side Service Center at the Hudson River Club at No. 4 World Financial Center at 250 Vesey Street.
Guest speaker will be Jason McManus, editor in chief of Time Warner.
Cocktails at 7 P.M. will be followed by dinner and entertainment.
Tickets, $200, from (212) 233-5372.
SoHo Gallery Preview
MAY 5 -- A cocktail party and preview of the 50 works in an art show titled "American Vanguard: Jackson Pollock, Lee Krasner and Friends" will be held at the Stuart Levy Gallery, 415 West Broadway near Prince Street.
The evening from 6:30 to 9 P.M. will benefit the Pollock-Krasner House and Study Center in East Hampton, L.I.
Harbor Cruise
MAY 6 -- The Children with AIDS Committee and the Design Industries Foundation for AIDS will be the hosts of the 1992 Lightfair Pediatric AIDS Benefit to be held aboard the cruise ship New Yorker.
Boarding will be at 7:30 P.M. at Pier 81, 41st Street and the Hudson River, with sailing set for 8:15 P.M. and returning at midnight.
Cruise includes dinner, dancing and entertainment.
Tickets, $175, from (212) 571-0617.
Museum Ball
MAY 6 -- Dinner, dancing and a preview of the newly renovated west wing gallery space will all be part of the 35th annual Brooklyn Museum Ball.
Black tie.
Cocktails at 7:30 P.M.
Tickets, $200, from (718) 789-2493.
Caring New Yorkers
MAY 6 -- After 10 years of fighting litter and graffiti, We Care About New York Inc. is getting around to holding its first benefit to continue its environmental work.
Cocktails at 6 P.M. in the rotunda of Brooklyn Borough Hall at Court and Joralemon Streets will be followed by dinner in the courtroom.
Tickets, $200, from (212) 686-1001.
All About Dancing
MAY 7 -- The training programs of the Nanette Bearden Contemporary Dance School will benefit from a black-tie evening at the Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture at 135 Street and Lenox Avenue, in Harlem.
Cocktails at 6:30 P.M. will be followed by a performance of dances by Talley Beatty, dinner, a poetry reading by Danny Glover, and dancing.
Tickets, $150, from (212) 662-5835.
Aiding an Opera
MAY 7 -- Jane Alexander will give a reading, and Meredith Monk and Robert Een will sing adapted selections from Ms.
Monk's new opera "Atlas," at a benefit party from 6 to 9 P.M.
The evening, in a loft at 90 West Broadway near Chambers Street, will help defray the cost of the opera's New York premiere, to take place at the Brooklyn Academy of Music on May 14.
Tickets, $100, or $175 for two, from (212) 206-1440.
Cathedral Benefit
MAY 7 -- The Presiding Bishop of the Episcopal Church's Fund for World Relief will celebrate 50 years of service with a full day of festivities starting with an 11 A.M. festival eucharist at St.
Bartholomew's Church, Park Avenue at 50th Street, with special music and a procession of 50 bishops.
The congregation is invited to lunch afterward, on the terrace.
A black-tie program will be held in the evening at the Cathedral of St.
John the Divine, Amsterdam Avenue at 112th Street.
Cocktails at 6 P.M. will be followed by dinner and music.
Tickets, $1,000, from (212) 922-5461.
Trail Blazer Party
MAY 7 -- Trail Blazers, the 105-year- old social service organization, will hold a champagne reception and auction starting at 6:30 P.M. at the BMW Gallery, 320 Park Avenue at 51st Street.
Tickets, $60, from (212) 691-2720, or $65 at the door.
Irish Night
MAY 7 -- The annual New York dinner and dance of the American Ireland Fund, which promotes bonds between the two lands, will be held at the Waldorf-Astoria, starting with cocktails at 7 P.M.
Black tie.
Tickets, $400, from (212) 735-0755.
Legal Theater Party
MAY 7 -- MFY Legal Services, which provides free legal assistance to the poor in civil cases, will have a 6 P.M. dinner party at the Supper Club, 240 West 47th Street, followed by "Guys and Dolls" at the Martin Beck Theater, at 8 P.M.
Tickets, $200, from (212) 475-8000, Ext. 36.
Jazz and Comedy
MAY 7 -- Dave Brubeck and Family, and Alan King, will be the entertainers at a party at Tatou, 151 East 50th Street, to benefit the Center for Children and Families.
Cocktails at 6:30 P.M. will be followed by the performance and dinner.
Tickets, $250 for cocktails, performance and dinner, $125 for cocktails and performance only, from (718) 526-0722.
Russian Celebration
MAY 7 -- The Russian Nobility Association will hold its annual Easter Ball at the Plaza.
Cocktails at 7:30 P.M. will open the festive event, which raises funds to assist Russians in this country and to support historical and cultural projects.
White or black tie.
Tickets, $160, from (212) 249-2578.
Women Power
MAY 7 -- Oxfam America, which provides funds for development and disaster relief in Africa, Asia, Latin America and the Caribbean, is holding a benefit evening at the Cosmopolitan Club, 129 East 65th Street, with the theme of "The Empowerment of Women in South Asia and the United States." Cocktails, at 7 P.M., will be followed by music and entertainment.
Tickets, $100, from (212) 439-6452.
Readying for Camp
MAY 8 -- Camp Vacamas, in West Milford, N.J., which was started in 1924 to provide summer fun for urban children, still serves needy youngsters from New York, New Jersey and Connecticut.
A benefit for the camp will be held at the Insomnia Hotel and Bar, Amsterdam Avenue, between 82d and 83d streets.
No admission charge, but a cash bar from 7 to 10:30 P.M. will benefit the camp.
Information: (212) 695-4758.
Giving Health Care
MAY 8 -- The International Health Professionals Network, founded in 1990 by a group of black health-care workers to provide services to poor communities around the world, is holding a benefit at the Phelps-Stokes Foundation, 10 East 87th Street, from 7:30 to 11:30 P.M.
Clara Hale will be honored for her work.
Tickets, $40, from (914) 949-3982 or at the door.


Keeping a Deck in Shape Can Avert Major Repairs
AFTER a winter of disuse, most outdoor decks need cleaning and, sometimes, resurfacing or repairs.
The secret of deck maintenance is to keep up with the little jobs so that they do not develop into big ones.
Washing a deck often brightens it sufficiently.
Use a bristle scrub brush dipped in a solution of warm water and strong household detergent.
To mix the solution, follow the label directions for heavy cleaning or use about a half-cup of detergent for each gallon of water.
After scrubbing, rinse the deck by mopping it with clear water or by spraying it with a garden hose.


A Little Confidence Helps Agassi Go Much Further
Andre Agassi hasn't been secretive about the five-month slump that has dumped him from tennis's inner sanctum to 16th in the world.
"I'm like a guy who decided to add a few rooms onto his house and started off by blowing the whole thing up," is his description of the damage done to his tennis and self-esteem during a winter of vast discontent.


Spanish Melodies


Groundwater
To the Editor:
Your article on Feb. 23 entitled "Protecting Groundwater and Open Space" about efforts to protect the region's groundwater while resurrecting the economy failed to address a critical point.


Professionals Stand By To Plan Care for Elderly
ERWIN GOLDSTEIN was worried.
How would his elderly, ailing father get meals and medications on schedule?
What about his father's weak legs, which made stair climbing and driving too tiring?
How does a son tell his father, "you can't have the car keys anymore"?
Mr.
Goldstein said that the last question especially bothered him because his father -- "a working man all his life"-- had finally splurged on a new white Cadillac.
Mr.
Goldstein, a teacher and writer who lives in Griswold, called nursing homes and state agencies.
"I got bureaucratic answers," he said.
Then he called Anne Sharpe, who recently opened a geriatric consulting service in Norwich.
Mrs.
Sharpe made numerous phone calls that were hard for Mr.
Goldstein to make during business hours.
In the end, he said, Mrs.
Sharpe found "local, reasonable" people to assist his father at home.
She also helped in evaluating electric stair climbers and she explained the "legalese" of nursing home eligibility.
She even viewed the beloved Cadillac and helped Mr.
Goldstein devise tactful strategies for accompanying his father on car trips.


Wall Street; Good Science, Bad Grades in Boston
Can good science defeat bad timing, bad publicity and bad judgment?
People who invested in the initial public offering for Seragen, a Boston-area biotechnology company, are getting a chance to find out.
On April 1, Seragen sold three million shares for $12 each.
That was a fraction of what the company's shares would have fetched if it had gone to market a year ago, of course.
But it is considerably more than the shares were worth on Friday, when they closed at $8.25 each.


Residential Resales
Closings in the week ended April 18  MANHATTAN  Upper East Side 572,000
715 Park Avenue (70th St.)  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,340-sq.-ft. postwar condo; 24-hr. doorman, manned-elevator, dining alcove, 2 exposures; common charge $988, taxes $6,308 (Brokers: Walter &amp; Samuels/Domus Realty)  Upper East Side 635,000
40 East 78th Street  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,550-sq.-ft. postwar condo; 24-hr. doorman, dining area, terrace, 3 exposures; common charge $868, taxes $4,800 (Broker: Freda Green &amp; Associates)  Upper West Side 1.7 million
1 West 72d Street  (Dakota)  4-bedroom, 4-bath, 4,000-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, concierge, dining room, library, 4 fireplaces, den, 3 exposures; maintenance $5,400, 30% tax-deductible (Selling Broker; Donna Ellen Berg)  West Side 275,000
140 West End Avenue (66th St.)  (Lincoln Towers)  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,285-sq.-ft. postwar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, dining area, terrace, Hudson River view; maintenance $1,277, includes gas and electricity, 58% tax-deductible (Broker: Residence Resource Ltd.)  West Village 265,000
652 Hudson Street  1,700-sq.-ft. open-loft co-op; elevator, 1 bath, 12-ft.-ceilings, exposed-brick walls, floor-to-ceiling windows, 2 exposures; maintenance $700, 50% tax-deductible (Broker: William B. May)  BRONX  Baychester 170,000
4175 Wilder Avenue  3-bedroom, 2-bath, single-family, semi-attached, house; dining room, finished basement, 1-car garage, 25- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,200 (Broker: Century 21/Best Match Real Estate)  Spuyten Duvil 53,500
2400 Johnson Avenue  1-bedroom, 1-bath, 680-sq.-ft. postwar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, dining area, terrace, Hudson and Harlem River view; maintenance $640, 50% tax-deductible (Broker: Charles G. Brophy &amp; Associates)  BROOKLYN  Brooklyn Heights 275,000
65 Pineapple Street  2-family, attached, brick house; 3 bedrooms, 3 baths in primary unit; 2 bedrooms, 1 bath in other; 20.5- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $4,000 (Broker: Tabak Real Estate)  Gravesend 180,000
406 Quentin Road  3-bedroom, 1-bath, single-family, semi-attached, frame house; dining room, full basement, 1-car garage, 21.1- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,000 (Broker: Sure Sale Real Estate)  Midwood 200,000
1201 East 17th Street  4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, single-family, detached, stucco-sided house; dining room, finished basement, 1-car garage, 28.6- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,200 (Broker: Meryl Real Estate)  QUEENS  Astoria 465,000
49-03 Ditmars Boulevard  2-family, detached, brick house; 3 bedrooms, 4 baths, dining room in primary duplex unit; 1 bedroom, 1 bath in simplex; finished basement, 2-car garage, 40- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $3,000 (Broker: Century 21/Tri-Boro Terrace Realty)  Flushing 325,000
144-49 26th Avenue  2-family, detached, brick house; 3 bedrooms, family room in primary unit; 2 bedrooms in other; 1 1/2 baths, dining room, remodeled kitchen in each; 2-car garage, 21- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $2,800 (Broker: Value Lane Real Estate)  STATEN ISLAND  Randall Manor 253,000
274 Bard Avenue  5-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, single-family, detached Victorian; dining room, library, fireplace, 100- by 112-ft. lot; taxes $1,300 (Broker: Rand Properties)  Westerleigh 266,500
166 Auburn Avenue  2-family, detached, brick house; 3 bedrooms, 1 1/2 baths, dining room in primary unit; 2 bedrooms, 1 bath in other, 1-car garage, 40- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $2,291 (Broker: Century 21/Appleseed Agency)


What's in a Name? If It's New Jersey, Not Much
In one of the earliest testaments to New Jersey's image problem, Benjamin Franklin is supposed to have described the state as a valley of humility between two peaks of conceit, New York City and Philadelphia.
Generations later, the state is still fighting for respect.


Corrections
An article on March 29 about a support group called Mothers of Super Twins misstated the incidence of triplet births in the United States.
Over a 10-year period, the nubmer of births increased 101 percent, from 1,185 in 1978 to 2,385 in 1988 for a total of 18,085.
Dr.
Barbara Luke of the Rush Medical College in Chicago, who prepared the data, discovered the error when she read a copy of the article mailed to her.


April 26-May 2: Red-Tape Agenda; Ban on New Rules Renewed, Angering Conservationists
Sometimes those wounded in the Bush Administration's war on red tape wonder whether the red tape was ever the target.
The Administration announced last week that it would extend a 90-day freeze on new Federal regulations for several months, saying it had done wonders for the economy.
But conservation groups argue that most of the rules being held up are the ones that restrict strip miners, oil refiners, automobile makers, property developers and others that threaten the environment.
Other rules get changed if the Administration feels like it, they say.
As an example, they cite an 85-year-old rule that lets anyone object to the sale of a stand of National Forest trees.
The rule gives the public 45 days to object, and shuts off the chainsaws for another 115 days while the Forest Service responds.
The Forest Service wants to make objectors go to court to stop any sales, but local conservation groups say that would break them financially.


'Boheme' and 'Carmen' Are Both Offered Today
MUSIC lovers have a choice today of two operatic staples: Puccini's "Boheme" or Bizet's "Carmen." At 2:30 P.M. the Island Lyric Opera takes its concert production (in costume with piano accompaniment) of "La Boheme" to the White Plains Library.
The number to call for more information is 422-1493.
Bizet's "Carmen," staged and orchestrated, will be presented, also at 2:30, by the New Rochelle Opera at the New Rochelle Library.
"Carmen" will be repeated next Friday and Saturday at 8 P.M.
Additional information is available by calling 632-7878.


Overshifts by the Mets Go Awry, Twice
The overshift is a strategy born of computer data and personal convictions.
As theory, it invites disaster with a smile, smugly certain the man at the plate won't do damage because he won't be able to overcome his trademark tendencies.
"If a guy hits everything to one side of the field," said Barry Foote, the defensive strategist for the Mets, "the percentages say he's not going to hit it to the other."


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
DIAMOND FANTASY
ON behalf of Harriet (Hoffie) Feldman and mature women everywhere, let it be known.
Baseball fantasies are not some inalienable right of the male species.
Long before Little League let girls step to the plate, females were fantasizing about hitting a World Series home run, or striking out Mickey Mantle.


Munich
To the Editor: The article about Munich ("What's Doing in Munich," March 29) refers to "Germany's densest and most choking traffic jams," yet the vital statistics accompanying the story include only taxis and rental cars.
As is the case with most European cities, Munich has an excellent public transit system which includes "subway" service at the new airport.
Day and multiday fare cards facilitate fast and cheap movement for tourists and others.


Kenya, a Land That Thrived, Is Now Caught Up in Fear of Ethnic Civil War
For the first time since independence from Britain nearly 30 years ago, fierce ethnic fighting has raised the specter of civil war in Kenya, one of Africa's most stable and prosperous countries.
Hundreds, if not thousands, of people have been killed since the tribal-related outbursts began in October.
The violence has intensified over the last 10 days.


EAST GERMANS FACE THEIR ACCUSERS
Although some may be tempted to equate the evils perpetrated by the Stasi and the K.G.B. with Communism, it should be recalled that Czarist Russia and Nazi Germany both had extensive secret-police organizations.
For many years prior to the Communist governments in those countries, people had been taught that they were serving the best interests of the nation by monitoring and reporting on the activities of their fellow citizens.
So, for many, it was business as usual.


New Kabul Government Is Mired in Uncertainty
Afghanistan's new Government has stumbled through its first week unsure of its identity, unsure of its mission, unsure even of who are among its members.
So sudden was the disintegration of the old regime, and so hurried was the assumption of power by a group of rebel leaders who have spent most of their years in opposition in Pakistan, that the true balance of power in this country of such disparate nationalities, sectarian beliefs, regional authority and personal charismas remains unresolved.


A Boy in Flames
THE SHRINE AT ALTAMIRA
By John L'Heureux. 261 pp. New York:  Viking. $19.


A Cautious, Hopeful Quiet Prevails in Other Cities
Police forces in several dozen cities all across the country remained on alert yesterday, watchful for renewed street protests over the jury verdict that acquitted four Los Angeles white police officers accused of assaulting a black motorist.
But for the most part the day was calm.
There were demonstrations in some cities, including Pittsburgh, Portland and Cincinnati.
But they were peaceful, and law enforcement officials expressed cautious hope that the calm would continue through the weekend.


Maripat Gilligan Wed in Chicago
Maripat Gilligan, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
William J. Gilligan of Oak Brook, Ill., and Sean Robert Carney, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Robert J. Carney of Edmonton, Alberta, Canada, were married yesterday at St.
Michael's Roman Catholic Church in Chicago.
The Rev.
Leo Mahon performed the ceremony.
Mrs.
Carney, 27 years old, is an associate with Salomon Brothers in New York.
She graduated from Middlebury College, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
She received a law degree and M.B.A. from the University of Chicago.
Her father is an orthopedic surgeon in Hinsdale, Ill.
Her mother, Jayne Mullen Gilligan, is a psychotherapist in Oak Brook.


Savannah's Aroma
To the Editor: Your report "What's Doing in Savannah" (April 5) recalled our stay there in 1990.
Although my wife and I found the city extremely interesting, we had to cut short our visit because of the overpowering odors from what we were told were nearby paper mills.
The fumes permeated the city, particularly the riverfront area, day and night.


G. Martha Goepel Has Wedding
G.
Martha Goepel, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert A. Goepel of North Hills, Pa., was married yesterday to Robert Joseph Goodwin, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert R. Goodwin of River Edge, N.J.
The Rev.
Linda M. Haughton of Abington Baptist Church performed the ceremony at the home of Mr. and Mrs.
Goepel.
Ms.
Goepel, who is 30 years old and keeping her name, is a specialist in hazardous site mitigation for the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection and Energy.
She graduated from Pennsylvania State University, where she received a master's degree in public administration.


THE SLUGGER NOBODY WANTED
Cecil Fielder is mistaken if he thinks he was cheated out of the American League's 1991 Most Valuable Player Award ("The Slugger Nobody Wanted," by Peter de Jonge, April 5).
Does he believe that, in leading the league in homers and runs batted in while playing first base like a sea slug, he was more valuable than Baltimore shortstop Cal Ripken Jr.?
By hitting .323, Ripken out-hit Fielder by 62 points.
He also outslugged Fielder by 53 points, in spite of Fielder's 10-home-run advantage, and won the Gold Glove for defensive excellence at baseball's most demanding position.


Golden Age Near, Michigan Scholars Are Told
The president of the University of Michigan, James J. Duderstadt, told the students, faculty members and parents at the start of the university's commencement exercises yesterday that the opportunities for change had never been so rich.
"The end of the cold war, transformation of our economy, emerging global society, technological revolution and spread of democracy," Mr.
Duderstadt said, were part of the miracles "made possible by revolutionary advances in learning."


Coach Alford's Contract
What happens to a coach whose team winds up the season at 4-24?
Not so fast.
What if he had inherited an 0-8 squad in December and taken it on a 4-16 tear?
At Manchester College in Indiana that is apparently considered quite a feat, enough of one anyway that STEVE ALFORD has been given a long-term contract.


Separate Is Not Equal
To the Sports Editor:
Marsha Charney's letter (Mailbox, March 29) called for The Times to cover women's sports in a manner equal to how men's sports are covered.
Particular reference was made to college basketball.
My view is that if they must exist as a separate entity, women's sports should continue to be covered based solely on newsworthiness, and not on the basis of an artificial, unenlightened concept such as equality between the sexes.
Men's and women's basketball are on different planets when it comes to talent, popularity, complexity, historical significance, economics or any other way they can be compared, and newspapers should cover the two accordingly.
DAVID MARKOWITZ Albany


Shad Nets Yield Small Harvest
EACH spring the blooming forsythia signals the return of shad and shad fishermen to the Hudson River.
But commercial fishermen are finding slim pickings this season as they haul in their nylon gill nets in the hope of harvesting a bounty of migrating fish.
"I'd starve to death if I had to make a living from fishing for shad," said Thomas Crawford, known as Tucker to most everybody in this close-knit village on the Hudson River.
The 66-year-old retired barber began fishing the river more than 60 years ago as a buoy boy for his uncle.


Different Diagnosis
To the Editor:
As a holder of 50 shares of Fuller Houses Inc., issued March 21, 1946, I remember the failure of the Buckminster Fuller Dymaxion House differently than as told by Witold Rybczynski  [ "A Little House on the Prairie Goes to a Museum," April 19 ] .


It Wasn't Such a Wonderful Life
FRANK CAPRA
The Catastrophe of Success.
By Joseph McBride.
Illustrated. 768 pp.
New York: Simon &amp; Schuster. $27.50.


Ms. Brickman Plans to Marry
Ravelle S. Brickman, president of The Brickman Group, a public relations and marketing agency in New York, and J. Michael Maurice-O'Reilly Bonner, a vice president of marketing of Argus Investors' Counsel, an investment management firm in New York, are engaged to be married.
Ms.
Brickman graduated from Smith College.
She is the daughter of the late Eva Kaplan Silberman and the late Arthur M. Silberman, a former president of United Electronics Inc. of New York.


Routine Wastelands
The smoke has drifted away and the sirens have stopped in Los Angeles, but there and in every big city a high-pitched alarm still pierces the air.
Until Americans heed it, there will be more fires and more next times.
This time, New Yorkers shivered with relief that the rumors of trouble for their city were mainly wrong.
Other cities were not so lucky, and in Los Angeles, site of vast, new barren wastelands, people numbly count casualties and costs.


CORRECTION
The Streetscapes column on April 12 about Casa Italiana referred incompletely to the venture established jointly last year by Columbia University and the Italian Government to advance scholarship on Italian civilization.
It is the Italian Academy for Advanced Studies in America.


What a Difference A Year Can Make
Forcing academically deficient college football players to spend their freshman year studying rather than playing seems to be paying off.
A survey by the College Football Association shows that the graduation rate for players who graduate by Dec. 31 of the fifth year after matriculation jumped almost 12 percent last year -- from 51.7 percent in 1990 to a record 57.1 percent -- at 60 of the nation's major football powers.


Echo Bay Mines Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


At 14, a Diver Reaches New Heights
She is so tiny and childish-looking that any lifeguard would be inclined to direct Fu Mingxia away from the diving boards and over to the shallow end of a swimming pool.
The 14-year-old Fu is not a dog-paddler, however, but a world champion diver -- possibly the youngest world champion in the history of international acquatic competitions.
And when she mounts the platform this week in Fort Lauderdale, Fla., at the Alamo International competition, the last major diving meet before the Summer Olympic Games in Barcelona, Spain, she will be a symbol of her country's method of scouting children to cultivate athletic prodigies.


Exide Electronics Group reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


First Bancorp Indiana Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Taking Posters to the Streets To Promote Racial Harmony
ONE ad agency's efforts to do well by doing good are assuming an unusual resonance in the wake of the violence over the Rodney King verdict.
Beginning tomorrow, posters that promote racial harmony are scheduled to be mounted on 250 telephone kiosks around the five boroughs of New York City.
The pro bono campaign, by Smith/Greenland Inc., had been in the works since racial disturbances racked the Crown Heights section of Brooklyn last summer.


TV SPORTS: Horse Racing; A Lot on You Know Who And Little on Lil E. Tee
Well, we saw the 90-minute Arazi Derby on Saturday.
We saw the upset by Lil E. Tee.
And what do we know about the winner from ABC?
Nearly nothing.
Only after he had won did we learn that Lil E. Tee had finished in the money in all nine of his races and was bred in Pennsylvania.
But that was all we knew.
Why should we have known anything if ABC gave us so little?


Guarantees Sought for Russian Ventures
Many American companies, convinced that it is too risky to invest in the former Soviet Union, have appealed to the Bush Administration for greatly enlarged Federal investment guarantees to protect them from losses.
Without such guarantees, Corporate America appears to have decided that it will not go forward now with extensive ventures in the Commonwealth of Independent States -- despite the potential for big profits in the future.


Market Place; Finding Winners Among Losers
When it comes to profiting from other people's problems, there's no place like Wall Street.
And, in recent months, there has been no analyst like George Putnam when it comes to telling investors how to do it.
Mr.
Putnam's monthly investment publication, the Turnaround Letter, recommends the stocks and bonds of distressed companies that the markets may have undervalued, including enterprises in bankruptcy or with other troubles.


Maxum Health Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Alpnet Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


DeVry Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Afghan Hard-Liner Insists Militias Quit Kabul
The powerful Afghan guerrilla leader who has refused to join the interim Government in Kabul says he has been in contact with leaders of other factions in an effort to resolve the political and military standoff.
But Gulbuddin Hekmatyar, head of the rigidly fundamentalist Hezb-i-Islami -- the Islamic Party -- threatened to attack the capital within days if militias from northern Afghanistan were not immediately withdrawn.


A Private Affair At Giants Stadium
A two-week football camp opens today at Giants Stadium and the instructors are the Giants' coaching staff.
But if you haven't been invited, don't bother trying to enroll.
The camp is for the Giants' offensive veterans to introduce them to new passing schemes, plays and routes.


RIOTS IN LOS ANGELES: The Overview; Calm Endures With Grief in Los Angeles
The streets of riot-weary Los Angeles were calm for a second day today, as Federal troops joined law-enforcement patrols, and cleanup efforts accelerated.
Mayor Tom Bradley said he hoped to lift the city's dusk-to-dawn curfew on Monday.
Across the city, many grocery stores and gas stations shuttered during the riots were open but with added and armed security, and longer lines.
Basketball courts and soccer fields were crowded for the first time in days, and the Los Angeles Unified School District announced that classes would resume Monday at the district's nearly 700 schools.
Pastors at churches in South-Central Los Angeles, and indeed throughout the country, spoke of the need for healing and compassion.


Calls for Change In Agency Fees
Advertisers remain unsatisfied with the ways they pay their agencies, a survey has found, and they continue to seek alternatives.
The 1992 edition of the Trends in Agency Compensation survey, conducted by the Association of National Advertisers, is scheduled to be released today in Phoenix.
Of the 111 national advertisers responding, representing more than $8.5 billion in advertising spending, 39 percent reported changing their compensation system during the last three years, virtually unchanged from the 38 percent that reported doing so in the previous survey, released in 1989.


A Tough Sell For Olympia; Developer Set to Meet With Restless Lenders
Continuing to seek more help from its bankers, Olympia &amp; York Developments Ltd. has asked a dozen of its largest lenders to meet with it in Toronto this morning, hoping they will go along with a new plan to create a $700 million pool of loans.
Under Olympia &amp; York's plan, all its nearly 100 bank creditors would contribute to the pool, which would be used to refinance numerous real estate projects in the United States, Canada and Britain.


Catalina Marketing Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


A Magazine Is a Magazine, But a Good Cigar Is a Smoke
At a time when tobacco is out of fashion and some new men's magazines have gone up in smoke, Marvin R. Shanken is betting on a projected life-style quarterly for the well-to-do called Cigar Aficionado.
Mr.
Shanken, chairman of M. Shanken Communications and editor and publisher of the semimonthly Wine Spectator, the nation's largest-circulation consumer wine magazine, plans to distribute the first issue of Cigar Aficionado in September.


Northwest Takes On Gypsy Moth
For the last two weeks, a fleet of helicopters has been flying low over port cities in the Pacific Northwest, trying to eradicate a forest villain that could be more destructive than all the logging and forest fires of the last decade.
The target of the $10 million aerial spraying program is the Asian gypsy moth, an insect that has destroyed vast stretches of forest in Russia and is now making what scientists believe is its first appearance in North America.


S. C. Mersereau Weds Lauren Tyler
Lauren Melinda Tyler, a daughter of Waldo H. Tyler of Cleveland and Carol A. Tyler of Worthington, Ohio, was married yesterday in Bernardsville, N.J., to Stephen Crocker Mersereau, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Holland C. Mersereau of Kennesaw, Ga.
The Rev.
Frederick S. Baldwin performed the ceremony at St.
Bernard's Episcopal Church.
Mrs.
Mersereau, 30 years old, is a vice president at Allen &amp; Company, an investment banking firm in New York.
She graduated from Yale University and received an M.B.A. from Harvard University.
Her father is a pharmacist with the Rite Aid Corporation in Cleveland.
Her mother is the group manager for special services for the American Red Cross in Columbus, Ohio.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Press; Newspaper Industry Begins To Show Signs of Recovery
"I mean, this baby was going down," Vance C. Brown said of his family's newspaper, The Herald in New Britain, Conn., where New England's economic decline hit especially hard.
For instance, The Herald's classified advertising revenue last year was about a third that in 1987.


MTS Systems Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Melissa Russell, Hotelier, Wed
Melissa Beth Russell, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Stephen Russell of New York, was married yesterday to Matthew Evan Rubel, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Stanley Rubel of Pompano Beach, Fla.
Rabbi Hillel Silverman performed the ceremony at the Pierre in New York.
Mrs.
Rubel, 29 years old, is the managing director of the Bristol Plaza, a residential hotel in New York.
She graduated from Cornell University.
Her father is the chairman of the Celadon Group, an air freight and trucking concern in New York.


Independent Bank Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Jefferson Bank reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Manhattan Hires Fraschilla
Fran Fraschilla, an assistant at Providence, has been hired as the new head basketball coach at Manhattan College and will be introduced at a news conference today.
Fraschilla, 33 years old, will succeed Steve Lappas, who took the head-coaching job at Villanova.
Lappas replaced Rollie Massimino, who went to Nevada-Las Vegas.
Fraschilla was hired over three other finalists, a Virginia assistant, Dennis Wolfe, and two Manhattan assistants, Ed Beglane and John Leonard.


Reviews/Music; Some Rarities for Big Band
The American Jazz Orchestra closed its sixth season at Cooper Union on Thursday night with an odd group of compositions that weren't connected musically.
They were connected, instead, by intent: each piece was meant to display a soloist, within the context of a big band.
The selection of tunes was slightly skewed as well.
The band's leader, Loren Schoenberg, is a lover of the arcane, and instead of the obvious -- classic settings for Louis Armstrong, for example -- the majority of the pieces were obscurities like "The Ox," by Don Stratton, or "I Tried and Tried," by Petsye Powell.
For the most part, they worked.


Amity Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


RIOTS IN LOS ANGELES: The Victims; 3 Killed When Death Was Looking for Strangers
In the first 24 hours of what has become the worst urban riot in modern American history, bullets claimed the lives of Dwight (Fishman) Taylor, a black fish cutter, Matthew Haines, a white mechanic, and Elbert Wilkins, a black businessman.
The violence, which started with news of the acquittal of a group of white police officers accused in the beating of a black motorist, took the lives of at least 47 other people.
Many were shot -- some by the police and some by rioters.
Others were stabbed, strangled, beaten or burned to death or died when they were struck by or fell from vehicles.


Guaranty National Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Waters Instruments Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Belgrade's Army Frees President of Bosnia and Herzegovina
After widespread international criticism, the Yugoslav Army released Bosnia and Herzegovina's President today about 24 hours after detaining him.
President Alija Izetbegovic was seized on Saturday by the army at Sarajevo's airport when he returned from European Community-sponsored peace talks in Lisbon.
At the time, Sarajevo was under a heavy bombardment and forces loyal to the Sarajevo Government were engaged in fierce clashes with the Serb-led Yugoslav Army and Serbian guerrillas.


Santa Anita Cos. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


New Yorkers Girding For Washington March
Outraged over crime and violence in New York City, Ralph Torres and some 50 other residents of Williamsburg in Brooklyn are planning to march on Washington on May 16.
"The Federal Government has got to give us an alternative and can start by restoring the unfair cuts in youth employment, substance abuse, counseling and other social programs," said Mr.
Torres, the chairman of the Neighborhood Alliance for a Drug-Free City.


One of New York's Covered Bridges Gets a Reprieve
ONE of the few remaining covered bridges in New York State has been saved from destruction by a great-grandson and a great-great-grandson of the men who built it.
"It's a pleasure, it's a labor of love," said Robert Vredenburgh, turning for a moment from building a new rock foundation for a massive floor beam at one end of the bridge.
Since 1990 Mr.
Vredenburgh, a 46-year-old retired State Police investigator, has been working with his 18-year-old son, Joseph, to repair the Grants Mill Bridge, which was built in 1902 by two of his great-grandfathers, Edgar Marks and Wesley Alton.
"They were both farmers here and won a contract to build the bridge," he said.
"It was the first and last bridge they ever built."
Grants Mill is one of 21 covered bridges remaining on public roads in New York, according to the New York State Covered Bridge Society.
When it is repaired, it will not be used for traffic, but the town hopes it will become a tourist attraction.
The 66-foot bridge was built to span the Mill Brook on Millbrook Road in the Millbrook Valley in a remote corner of Ulster County.
The bridge was covered to keep rain and sun from damaging the supporting timbers, and thus to prolong the bridge's life.
With the construction of a new steel-and-concrete bridge only a few yards away four or five years ago, the covered bridge became redundant.
Its wooden roof began to leak, and it gradually disintegrated.
At a family reunion in the Millbrook Valley a few years ago, Mr.
Vredenburgh heard that the Town of Hardenbergh was taking bids for the demolition of the bridge.
He bid $5,000 and won the contract.
"But then I looked at the bridge and began to think about saving it," said Mr.
Vredenburgh, who has worked as a carpenter.
"I submitted a proposal to repair the bridge with a budget of $15,550, with no expense to the town, and it was accepted."
The town has contributed $1,000 to the project and about $10,000 has already come in from other sources.
Four or five times a week, Mr.
Vredenburgh and his son drive 80 miles from their home in Chenango Forks, just north of Binghamton, to work on the bridge.
As guides, Mr.
Vredenburgh has been using his Grandfather Marks's diary and a book, "The Last of the Covered Bridge Builders," by Milton S. Graton of Ashland, N.H., who is regarded by covered bridge buffs as the master builder.
The Vredenburghs have replaced the roof and the long trusses that stretch between the banks of the brook and are putting in new floor beams.
Mr.
Vredenburgh said he hoped to complete the project by the next family reunion in August.
"When it's finished," said Mr.
Vredenburgh, "I'm going to drive my pickup truck across."


Singer Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


TSI Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


ICOS Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Crestmont Financial reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Rioting Causes Jitters Over Auctions' Success
Some credit market analysts say the disorders in Los Angeles and elsewhere last week may be felt in the financial markets for weeks if not months.
The analysts look to this week's $36 billion Treasury refunding auctions as one area where the anxiety may be felt.


Lawyers Title reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Dance in Review
Bocca and Ferri In 'Romeo and Juliet'
Julio Bocca and Alessandra Ferri were a pair of spoiled rich kids rushing excitedly into disaster in the first "Romeo and Juliet" of American Ballet Theater's season on Thursday night.
Kenneth MacMillan's 1965 treatment of the Prokofiev ballet score has proved itself as an enduring and popular theatrical spectacle, and the realistic swordplay, grandly vigorous on this occasion, is almost as important as the dancing.


U.S. Banknote Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Primary; North Carolina Seems Ripe for Bush and Clinton
As the Presidential primaries move back to the South with voting here on Tuesday, President Bush seems poised to get strong endorsement from Republicans while Gov.
Bill Clinton is likely to reinforce his image as someone who can bring together conservative whites and black voters.
Few surprises are expected in the voting here in spite of extensive campaigning by Patrick J. Buchanan, the conservative columnist who is challenging Mr.
Bush.
Jack Hawke, the state Republican chairman, said that while Mr.
Bush's support in the state was not as strong as it was four years ago it would be strong enough to keep Mr.
Buchanan from winning more than 25 percent of the vote.


Oglebay Norton Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Store Chain In Bankruptcy
The convenience store chain Cumberland Farms Inc. has filed for bankruptcy court protection from its creditors.
Hurt by the recession and slumping real estate values, the privately held company had been trying for several months to work out a new arrangement with its lenders, said Foster Macrides, vice president for human relations.


K-Swiss Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Dancing, Maybe, To Lester Lanin
Lester Lanin, whose orchestras have provided dance music for over 50 years for European royalty and at debutante parties, Presidential inaugurations and big charitable and corporate affairs, is bringing a sampling of music on Wednesday nights to an unlikely place: the Red Blazer Too, a small club at 349 West 46th Street.
The club regularly offers a variety of bands playing jazz styles of the 1920's, 30's and 40's.
Mr.
Lanin's usual dance programs are built around medleys of familiar tunes played at the lively tempo known as "the businessman's bounce." To a degree, the 70's band at the Red Blazer Too on Wednesday followed the formula.
There were Cole Porter medleys, tunes of the 30's and the 60's, bossa novas and Dixieland.


Hearing Boos, Wilkins Lowers a Boom
The substitution was made with 8 minutes 12 seconds remaining in the third quarter, John Starks for Gerald Wilkins, who had opened the second half by missing a shot, committing a foul and being hit with a traveling violation.
Pat Riley, the Knicks' coach, had seen enough of Wilkins, and so had the Madison Square Garden fans, for whom the seventh-year guard has become a leading symbol for a team with little offensive fluidity, consistency or sanity.


Foreign Affairs; Bush's Iraqi Blunder
This is the story of George Bush's dealing with Saddam Hussein -- until Iraq invaded Kuwait.
It is a tale of deception and self-deception, of realism gone awry and/or of gross carelessness.
In 1984, President Reagan signed a still-top-secret directive that officials interpreted as follows: "Do anything and everything" to help Iraq in the war against Iran.
Saddam had started the war.
But Iran was winning and threatening to dominate the Persian Gulf, and had to be stopped.


Bell Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Nuclear Backsliding in Ukraine
Ukraine, which once promised to get rid of all its nuclear weapons, has begun to balk.
Unless the Bush Administration exerts pressure promptly, Ukraine could become the third-biggest nuclear power in the world.
When Leonid Kravchuk, Ukraine's President, visits Washington this week, he needs to be told that toying with nuclear arms is no way to protect Ukraine's hard-earned independence, boost its prestige or win America's favor.


City Holding Co. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Man Fatally Shot in Bronx
One man was killed and seven people were wounded when three men in a car sprayed a Bronx street corner with bullets at 1:25 A.M. yesterday, the police said.
The dead man was identified as John Soldi, 26 years old, of the Bronx.
Detectives were investigating reported links to a dispute between Dominican drug gangs in the Bronx and upper Manhattan.
Detectives asked anyone with information to call (212) 542-5530.


Bridge
A Polish player was making a strong bid yesterday to win the prestigious Cavendish Invitational Charity Pairs for the second time in three years.
Pyotr Gawrys, who won in 1990 with Eliakim Shaufel of Israel, was in the lead with 81 deals out of a scheduled 105 completed, playing with Krzysztof Lasocki, also of Poland.
The leading scores were: 1, Gawrys and Lasocki, 1,388.6 imps; 2, Kitty Bethe of Manhattan and Larry Mori of Ballston Lake, N.Y., 1,002.9; 3, Lars Andersson and Hans Gothe, both of Sweden, 893.6; 4, Amos Kaminski of Manhattan and Sam Lev of Forest Hills, Queens, 809.4; 5, Barry Goren of Chicago and Peter Weichsel of Encenitas, Calif., 781.7.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Undeclared Candidate; Perot Admits Deficit Fix Is Imprecise
Ross Perot, the Texas businessman and likely independent candidate for President, conceded today that his plans to erase the Federal budget deficit were based on casual and perhaps flawed analyses that would require more study.
Mr.
Perot had said the Government could save $100 billion a year if wealthy people did not accept Social Security and Medicare payments and another $180 billion by eliminating fraud, waste and abuse in Government.


Not All Ballplayers Rake in Millions
To the Editor:
While major league baseball players are indeed well compensated for their efforts, they are not nearly as highly paid as you suggest in "If You're Talking $1 Million for a Major Leaguer, You're Talking Peanuts" (Sports, April 12).
You exclaim that 15 players who have salaries of $1 million or more still earn less than the average salary for all players, which is $1,086,988.


Republicans Must Change Abortion Plank
To the Editor:
"A Way Out for Republicans on Abortion" (Op-Ed, April 23) by Ann E. W. Stone confirms that she is a stalking horse for the ideologues on the right who are determined to preserve the anti-choice plank in the Republican Party platform.
She makes a compelling statement of the risks of defeat facing anti-choice Republicans, including the President, yet she wants the Republican National Convention to adopt a platform "that recognizes the Administration's opposition to abortion, but makes it clear that . . . the G.O.P. is open to diverse views on the subject."


A Stumbling Economy Absorbs Another Blow
California, already mired in a recession that was exposing jagged cracks in its Golden State facade, now faces an even bleaker economic future.
The violence, looting and arson that swept wide areas of the nation's second-largest city last week, killing at least 49 people and causing hundreds of millions of dollars of damage, destroyed thousands of small businesses.
That disaster will cause the direct loss of more jobs and tax revenues from a state already enduring a hemorrhage of both, economists say.


Quebecor Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Momentum Distribution Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Premdor Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Russian Ballet School's Fame Softens Hard Times
For anyone remotely interested in dance, the Vaganova Ballet Academy is full of wonderful ghosts, some of them still alive.
The academy, which dates back 257 years and has always been associated with the Kirov Ballet, counts among its graduates such legendary names as Anna Pavlova, Vaslav Nijinsky, George Balanchine, Galina Ulanova, Michel Fokine, Rudolf Nureyev, Natalia Makarova and Mikhail Baryshnikov.
Today, the Vaganova (pronounced vuh-GAHN-uh-vuh), arguably the most famous ballet conservatory in the world, is carrying on.
But like nearly every other institution in Russia, artistic and otherwise, it has been afflicted by the country's troubled transition from Communism to democracy and capitalism.


Communications Systems reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Health Treatment On Personal Basis
TOMMY VARDELL was at the other end of the draft spectrum: He was the ninth player to be drafted in the first round by the Cleveland Browns.
Vardell, a rugged 235-pound running back from Stanford, is a member of the First Church of Christ Scientist, one of whose tenets is that illness be treated by mental and spiritual means rather than medical.


RULERS OF KUWAIT ON SPENDING SPREE, RAISING DEBT FEARS
The Kuwaiti Government is in the middle of a seemingly unrestrained multibillion-dollar spending spree, raising fears among Kuwaiti economists and opposition figures that this once fabulously wealthy nation could end up in debt in just a few years.
While much of the money is going to meet the huge expenses of the Persian Gulf war and rebuilding in the aftermath of the country's occupation by Iraq, billions of dollars are committed to programs that critics are calling unwise.
For instance, the Government plans to bail out private Kuwaiti banks by assuming all their bad loans to Kuwaitis, many of whom are said to be well-connected billionaires and members of the ruling royal family who could easily repay.


Reviews/Music; Period Instruments and Substance
The Barros Classical Consort chose its late Classical and early Romantic program wisely on Thursday night at the New York Society for Ethical Culture.
Then it used its small collection of period instruments -- fortepiano, violin and cello -- to create substantial performances.
Thomas Mark Fallon's countertenor voice shared half of this long program.
It is bright, powerful and rhythmically aware, although one could question a number of Mr.
Fallon's musical decisions.
Two Mozart songs and familiar arias from "The Marriage of Figaro" were precisely sung. (Mr. Fallon works hard at diction, but his vowel sounds in Italian and German can be curious indeed.) Schubert's "Litanei" and "Nacht und Traume," on the other hand, were taken so slowly as to create nearly insoluble technical problems and to render their messages moribund.
"An die Musik" seemed inappropriately operatic; "Lachen und Weinen" papered over Schubert's ambivalence with bluff good humor.


Libel Lawsuit Questions Role of Book Contract
When "60 Minutes" established itself as television's innovator in vigorous investigative journalism, a joke started to make the rounds: What are the six words someone would least like to hear?
The answer -- Mike Wallace is on the line.
There are people in the business and financial world who are giving a new answer to the old joke: Bryan Burrough is on the line.


Review/Television; Putting Human Faces On the Abortion Debate
In the waiting areas and operating rooms of the Women's Health Services clinic in Pittsburgh, "Abortion: Desperate Choices" finds deeper resonances in words like choice and life than are heard on the street outside, where opposing groups sometimes trade their slogans.
The affecting documentary, tomorrow at 10 P.M. on HBO, explores the needs or desires that bring women to the clinic and the unresolved emotions some carry away.
In the customary style of Maysles Films, there is no narrator, and the interviewer is never seen and rarely heard.
In the room where what clinic counselors call "the procedure" is performed, the vacuuming sound of the suction machine announces the crucial moment.
The screen is filled with the patient's face, usually in tears, as what might have become a child is removed.
The camera makes no judgments; somehow it manages to be sympathetic and unsparing at the same time.
And the individual stories are not readily categorized.


State Financial Services reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Republicans Must Change Abortion Plank; From the Sidelines
To the Editor:
As I read "Roe v. Wade: Still Good Law," your April 20 editorial calling for a reaffirmation of the right for a woman to have an abortion, I wondered how many women like me sit in frustration on the sidelines of this important national debate.
When I was in college and later as a young single woman, I vehemently fought for the right of a woman to have an abortion.
The issue became for me a test of the state of the women's rights movement in the United States.
I joined abortion-rights groups and worked with other women to protect those rights.


India Shift Seen On Oil Deals
Foreign and private Indian companies may be allowed to develop oilfields in India for the first time, a senior Petroleum Ministry official says.
The official, Naresh Dayal, joint secretary for oil exploration, said in an interview over the weekend, "There is a decision in principle to consider proposals for developing discovered oilfields on a joint-venture basis" with the Oil and Natural Gas Commission.


Weldwood of Canada reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


The U.S., Too, Has Dumped Waste at Sea
The Soviet Union was not the first nation to discard its radioactive wastes at sea, but dumping by the United States, Britain, Japan and other nations has been limited to material with a lower level of radioactivity than what the Soviets are believed to have dumped.
Much of the dumping by the United States and several European nations has been at a deep-ocean site in the northeast Atlantic monitored by the International Atomic Energy Agency.
Nations that signed an antidumping convention agreed to a moratorium on the dumping of radioactive material in 1983 and this is still in effect.


Gwenn Saiman Has Wedding
Gwenn Caryn Saiman, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Martin Saiman of Great Neck, L.I., was married in New York yesterday to Robert Charles Schagrin, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
David Schagrin of New York.
Rabbi Deborah Hirsch performed the ceremony at the Four Seasons restaurant.
Mrs.
Schagrin, 26 years old, graduated from Boston University.
She is an agent at IMG Models, a New York modeling agency.
Her father is a senior partner in the New York law firm of Kaye, Scholer, Fierman, Hays &amp; Handler.


Liqui-Box Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to April 4


Neozyme Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Knights Stay Alive in Wild-Card Race
The New York/New Jersey Knights put an end to a frustrating chapter in their brief World League history and kept alive their fading hopes for a wild-card playoff spot with a 41-13 rout of the London Monarchs this afternoon before 30,112 at Giants Stadium.
The victory was the third straight for the Knights (3-4).
It was also the first for the team in five meetings with the Monarchs on two continents in the last two years.
The loss was doubly disappointing for the Monarchs, the defending World League champions.
London (1-5-1) was eliminated from the playoffs by virtue of the loss to the Knights and a victory by the Sacramento Surge today.
Defense Smothers Monarchs
"Finally, after what seems like 15 or 16 games, we got a win," said Knights Coach Darrell (Mouse) Davis in reference to his team's struggles against London.


Halliburton Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Shell Oil Co. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Forest Fire in New Jersey Stops A-Plant and Traffic
A fire that raced across thousands of acres of dry scrub oak and pine woods today forced the evacuation of an adult residential community, shut down a nuclear power plant and closed the Garden State Parkway and other north-south routes connecting Atlantic City with the New York metropolitan area.
Volunteer fire departments in Ocean County teamed with 75 state firefighters to combat the blaze, which burned an estimated 10,000 acres in the vicinity of Forked River, some 10 miles south of here.
No injuries or damage to dwellings were reported, the New Jersey state police said.


In Hartford, Senate Stalls House Plan On Budget
In an unusual Saturday night session that staggered on into Sunday, the State Senate early today rejected the budget agreement reached in the House of Representatives last week.
Instead, the Senators passed a modified plan that brings to a full boil some of the most divisive issues at the Capitol: slot-machine gambling, aid to distressed cities and the financing of the state pension fund.
The resulting standoff leaves the legislature with three days to make peace and craft a budget that Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr. can sign before the regular session ends at midnight Wednesday.
Leaders in both chambers said today, however, that they thought some middle path could be found that would allow them to meet the deadline and avoid a special legislative session and the sort of budget gridlock that gripped the legislature last year.


St. Lawrence Cement reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Desjardins Trustco reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Centex TelemanagementCorp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Bank of Nashville reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Review/Television; Cybill Shepherd, on the Case and Cracking Wise
Who needs Bruce Willis?
That's the nose-thumbing attitude being mischievously taken tonight at 9 by Cybill Shepherd in "Stormy Weathers," an ABC movie, which obviously has its eye on a weekly series.
Like Maddie Hayes in "Moonlighting," Samantha Weathers -- call her Sam -- is a private investigator with a hands-off attitude and a mouth to back it up.
Only Sam doesn't have to parry David Addison's repertory of wisecracks.
She's very much her own woman, and Ms.
Shepherd doesn't let you forget it.
Sam used to be called Stormy, but anyone using the nickname these days had better duck.
The daughter of a former police officer, now dead, Sam continues to run the Los Angeles office of Weathers &amp; Weathers, detective agency.
Finding a young film student and computer whiz named Cyril (Charlie Schlatter) at her desk one morning, she simply changes his name to Squirrel and lets him hang around doing odd hacking jobs when needed.
"You live with your mother?" asks a skeptical Sam.
"Why not," Squirrel says.
"She keeps the music down."


Indiana United Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Alfred Gross, 90, a Developer Who Built Thousands of Homes
Alfred Gross, a builder of more than 25,000 housing units in New York City and the Southeast, died on Saturday at Mount Sinai Hospital in New York.
He was 90 years old and lived in Palm Beach, Fla., and Manhattan.
He died of natural causes, his son, Peter, said.


Where Older Drivers Can Get Help
Getting an older relative or friend to talk about driving is often an uncomfortable experience for everyone.
But in recent years, several organizations have developed courses and booklets aimed at helping older people drive more defensively or decide that it is time to seek help.
Older drivers who complete courses also qualify for insurance discounts in most states.


Penguins Change Style To Fit New Fashions
Back in the old days, before they became such poised and mature champions, the Pittsburgh Penguins used to be so much fun to watch.
They were a run-and-gun team, the closest thing to the National Basketball Association in the Steel City.
Most nights, they would score five or six goals, and sometimes give up seven or eight, but it was always quite a show, with flashing red lights and blaring sirens.
Coaches would come and go, but the Penguins would go home after the regular season, or after one round of playoffs at most.


CHRONICLE
HELEN SUZMAN, one of South Africa's best known white campaigners against apartheid, who served in Parliament for 36 years, will speak at Princeton University on May 18 in the first in a series of lectures established in memory of a Princeton undergraduate who died last year.
PRISCILLA GLICKMAN was 21 years old and about to enter her senior year at Princeton when she was struck and killed by a truck while bicyling last summer on Martha's Vineyard.


Soviets' Secret Nuclear Dumping Causes Worry for Arctic Waters
For three decades the nuclear-powered Soviet Navy and icebreaking fleet have dumped much of their radioactive waste in the Arctic, the Russian authorities now acknowledge.
The dumping, in the shallow waters of the Barents and Kara Seas, has potentially serious consequences for the Arctic environment.


Petroleum Heat &amp; and Power reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


LTV Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Pan Canadian Petroleum reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


China Asserts Rioting Reflects Rights Abuses
China said today that the rioting in Los Angeles reflected human rights violations in the United States, and it called for "a fair solution" to the problems.


Eagle Snacks Spoofs Doritos
The salted-snack wars have intensified as Eagle Snacks ambushed Frito-Lay Inc. with an advertising campaign meant to mock its larger rival's elaborate "D (for Doritos) Day" promotion.
Late last week, a television commercial and newspaper advertisements, created by TBWA Advertising Inc. in New York, spoofed Frito-Lay, which promoted a new formula for nacho-cheese-flavored Doritos by giving away five million sample packages of the tortilla chips on Saturday.


Bristol-Myers Has Worked to Improve Syracuse Environment
To the Editor:
Statements by members of the United States Attorney's office following the April 24 plea by Bristol-Myers Squibb to four Clean Water Act misdemeanors raise concerns for us in the Syracuse business community (news article, April 25).
We favor swift and strict enforcement of environmental laws in the community where we live and work.
The United States Attorney's office sought to characterize the misdemeanors for which the pharmaceutical maker took full responsibility as more than they were, thus overshadowing the company's positive and responsible environmental programs.


Graham Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Question Box
Skimpy on Goals Against
Q.
Way back in the early stages of the National Hockey League season, the Montreal Canadiens had 23 points in the standing and had allowed only 21 goals.
Has an N.H.L. team ever finished a regular season with more points accumulated than goals allowed?
A.
Way back in the early stages of the National Hockey League, the Montreal Canadiens managed this feat, not once but twice, and in successive seasons at that -- 1927-28 and 1928-29.
No team has done it since.


Mattingly Flounders as Yankees Fall
Scott Kamieniecki, who the Yankees hope will be part of their pitching future, was the center of attention at Yankee Stadium yesterday, but maybe the Yankees should pay closer attention to the man who is an irreplaceable part of their hitting present.
Kamieniecki emerged with mixed results from the Yankees' 4-2 loss to the Minnesota Twins.
The Twins didn't batter him, but he himself acknowledged that he wasn't sharp with his pitches.


INSIDE
Kabul Militias Are Warned
A hard-line guerrilla leader threatened to attack the capital within days if militias from northern Afghanistan are not withdrawn.
Page A3.
Bosnia President Is Freed
The Yugoslav Army released Bosnia and Herzegovina's President a day after seizing him in Sarajevo, which was heavily bombed.
Page A9.
Overseeing Fish Market
Mayor Dinkins plans to hire up to 20 managers and inspectors for the Fulton Fish Market, described by officials as a Mafia stronghold.
Page B3.
Dr.
Lee Salk Dies
The child psychologist, a popular commentator on changing family patterns, was 65.
Page B12.


A First Baseman Takes the Mound
Two years ago TIM WAKEFIELD was a 23-year-old light-hitting first baseman for a Welland, Ontario, team in the Class A New York-Penn League whose future in baseball seemed dim.
Because injuries swept the staff, and because he had been seen fooling around with a curveball, Wakefield went to the mound but without much enthusiasm.


Western Capital Investment reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Tejas Power Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Essex Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 29


Arazi Leaves a Mystery Behind Him
Half a dozen horses who ran in the strangest Kentucky Derby in years were headed for the Preakness today, including the long-shot winner, Lil E. Tee.
But the fallen star of the cast, Arazi, who ran eighth in a field of 18, was headed back home to France for some rest and regrouping far from the clamor that surrounded him at every step in America.
He will bow out of the public spotlight and take life easy for at least the next two weeks in the pastoral setting of his home base at Chantilly outside Paris.
He will even skip the Epsom Derby on June 3, ending his quest to become the wonder horse who could win the classics of two continents.
He may shoot for the French Derby a week later, his owners said today, but more likely will aim instead for the Grand Prix de Paris at Longchamps on June 28.


Treasury's Quarterly Auctions This Week
It is expected to be a hectic week for the Treasury, which begins its quarterly refunding auctions in addition to today's regular weekly sale of new three- and six-month bills.
The Government will start the refunding tomorrow with an auction of new three-year notes followed on Wednesday by one for 10-year notes.
On Thursday, the final leg of the quarterly refunding, the Treasury will auction a new 29 1/2-year boad.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-9  ATOMIC POLLUTION IN ARCTIC
For the last three decades the nuclear-powered Soviet Navy and icebreaking fleet have been dumping radioactive waste in the Arctic, the Russian authorities now acknowledge.
The dumping, in the shallow waters of the Barents and Kara Seas, has potentially serious consequences for the Arctic.
A1
Other nations have also dumped atomic wastes at sea.  A8  BILLS ADDING UP IN KUWAIT
The Kuwaiti Government is in the middle of a seemingly unrestrained multibillion-dollar spending spree, raising fears that this once fabulously wealthy nation could end up in debt in a few years.
A1  AFGHAN THREATENS ATTACK
A powerful Afghan guerrilla leader who has refused to join the interim Government says he has made contact with other parties to try to resolve the political and military standoff, but says he will attack Kabul if militias from northern Afghanistan are not withdrawn.
A3  DISCORD IN NICARAGUA
The coalition that backed President Violeta Barrios de Chamorro in her electoral defeat of the Sandinistas two years ago is threatening to withdraw its support, saying she is under Sandinista influence.A6  PROTESTS IN TAJIKISTAN
The long-ruling Communists of Tajikistan threatened to crack down on anti-Government protesters paralyzing the capital, Dushanbe, after suspending civil liberties.
A3  RIGHTIST ADMITS BOMBING
A right-wing member of the South African Parliament said in a newspaper interview that he had confessed to helping bomb a formerly white high school that was to serve children of black political exiles returning from abroad.
A5  NORTH KOREAN CONCESSION
North Korea said it would give the International Atomic Energy Agency a list of nuclear-related sites ready for inspection, but it would not include a site suspected of being involved in nuclear weapons.
A7  BOSNIAN LEADER IS FREED
After much international criticism, the Yugoslav Army released Bosnia and Herzegovina's President a day after detaining him.
A9  St.
Petersburg Journal: Artists fight over studio space.
A5  Two former cold-war foes spend a day at the ranch.
A8  Strike may affect air traffic and rail freight in Germany.
A9  National A10-14, B7-9  CALM ENOUGH TO LOOK AHEAD
Riot-weary Los Angeles was calm for a second day, with Federal troops joining other law-enforcement patrols and cleanup efforts accelerating.
As the immediate crisis abated, the problems that underlay the bloodshed and vandalism seemed to rise to the surface of the political agenda.
A1  BRADLEY CRITICIZES GATES
The Mayor of Los Angeles said the Police Chief's "personal ego" might have delayed him from conceding that his department needed Federal help to quell rioting.
A1  THE ECONOMIC MORASS
The riots are likely to set back California's attempt to persuade companies to invest in the state or not to shift existing operations.
In the last two years, more than 600,000 jobs have been lost in the state.
D1  THREE LIVES LOST VIOLENTLY
A black fish cutter, a white mechanic and a black businessman were among the 49 people killed in the worst urban rioting in modern American history.
The stories of their lives illustrate the loss their deaths brought.
B8
In Simi Valley, where "somebody out of the ordinary sticks out." B7
Americans paused to pray for peace in a troubled land.  B8  NORTHWEST ATTACKS MOTHS
The Pacific Northwest has begun a $10 million aerial spraying campaign against the Asian gypsy moth, an insect that could be more destructive than all the logging and forest fires of the last decade.
A10  THE DANGER OF OLDER DRIVERS
The number of elderly motorists has surged, and with it the accidents involving them.
Government regulators are struggling to identifying the older drivers who pose a hazard while not discriminating against those who do not.
A1  CLINTON'S CHIEF LESSON
A reflective Governor Clinton said in an interview that the brutal campaign had taught him an important lesson: "I'm tough enough to be President." A1
The primaries head back South, with few surprises expected.  A14
Perot conceded that his economic plans were not quite solid.
A14  RESHAPING CURRICULUMS
The College Board announced plans to develop a curriculum and test for high school students, a project that could put it in a good position to influence the national debate on standards and testing.
A13  A new political battle over benefits for the long-term jobless.
A10  Lawrence, Mass., has been the site of 53 arsons since January.
A10  Metropolitan Digest, B1 Business Digest, D1  Arts/Entertainment C11-16  DANCING INTO DEMOCRACY
The Vaganova Ballet Academy in St.
Petersburg, Russia, is filled with the ghosts of some of ballet's greatest dancers, along with promising youngsters.
Now it is struggling through the country's transition from Communism to democracy and capitalism.
A1  Film: Redford on his new documentary.
C11  "Folks." C15  "Split Second." C15  Music: From India.
C11  Gorecki's "Beatus Vir." C11  The Charlatans.
C14  Dance: Paris Opera Ballet's youngsters.
C11  Word and Image: "After Henry," by Didion.
C15  "Abortion: Desperate Choices." C16  Obituaries B12  Dr.
Lee Salk, author of books on family relationships Justice Joseph F. Gagliardi, former State Supreme Court judge  Sports C1-10  Baseball: Bonilla takes lead for Mets.
C1  Another Cone shutout.C7  Yanks lose as Mattingly flounders.
C7  Basketball: Knicks advance in playoffs.
C1  Column: Rhoden on Pistons C3  Diving: At 14, a Chinese star reaches new heights.
C8  Hockey: Rangers lose opener to Penguins.
C1  Editorials/Op-Ed A16-17  Editorials A16  Backsliding in Ukraine.
Freezing government.
Justice in South Africa.
The emergency room trap.
Letters A16  Leslie H. Gelb: Bush's Iraqi blunder.
A17  William Safire: Trashing our justice.
A17  If you won the Perot account . . .
A17  Flora Lewis: Make a misstep and you're dead.
A17


Cone Leads the Number Crunchers
The succession of scoreboard zeros, at nine before the game, was at 18 when it was over.
David Cone, the proprietor of all that pitching perfection, was asked to assess the value of his holdings.
"I kept talking throughout the spring about how my numbers then weren't important, that I was for once pacing myself for the start of the season," said the right-hander.
"That theory is starting to ring true. The progression is right on target."


Delphi Financial Group reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Escape the Emergency Room Trap
New York City's slightly brighter budget picture permits the Dinkins administration to proceed with a welcome program of neighborhood clinics.
Addressing a need ignored for far too long, the Communi-Care program could save millions while improving health.
Residents of many poor neighborhoods now routinely go to hospital emergency rooms for simple medical problems -- bad backs, stomach pains, children with fever.
That's a costly way to get care, and is paid for by taxpayers when low-income patients qualify for Medicaid.


Walkout Stalls Repair Project On 14th Street
The chief contractor overseeing the rebuilding of 14th Street at Union Square has staged a partial walkout over pay, said New York City officials about the latest snarl in the troubled project.
The contractor, Robert Perez, owner of Perez Interboro Asphalt, pulled some workers off the project last week after the city temporarily withheld $400,000 in payments for additional work, said Joseph DePlasco, a spokesman for the city's Department of Transportation.


Emco Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Review/Theater; A Homeless Man Confronts the System
Family demons and the visceral realities of urban street life converge in Elizabeth Swados's venturesome new musical play, "Groundhog." Depending on one's point of view, the title character is either "a paranoiac schizophrenic" or "a primitive wild genius." For Ms.
Swados, who knows him like a brother, he is both at the same time.
In this deeply personalized work (at Manhattan Theater Club's Stage II), Groundhog is partly based on Ms.
Swados's own sibling, who died after years of living as a street person.
For fictional purposes, he is combined with a character like Joyce Brown (also known as Billie Boggs), who became a subject of controversy in New York in the late 1980's.
Acting as playwright, composer and director, Ms.
Swados is unflinching in her response to the madness of Groundhog (David Schechter), a figure to haunt anyone's nightmare.
Watching the musical, one wonders how the author and her fictional surrogate (Anne Bobby) were able to endure the abuse.


Diaper Makers Settle Legal Disputes
The nation's two leading makers of disposable diapers, the Kimberly-Clark Corporation and the Procter &amp; Gamble Company, have settled a series of legal disputes, a Kimberly-Clark spokeswoman said yesterday.
As part of the settlement, Kimberly-Clark agreed to drop an antitrust case against Procter &amp; Gamble that was scheduled to go to trial in Dallas this morning.
The terms of the agreement were not disclosed, and lawyers for the two companies could not be reached for comment.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Albertson's Inc. is offering $150 million in 6 3/8 percent three-year notes at 99.93 to yield 6.4 percent through Goldman, Sachs &amp; Co.
The issue is rated Aa-3 by Moody's Investors Service Inc. and A+ by Standard &amp; Poor's Corp.
The supermarket operator is based in Boise, Idaho.
*
Ford Credit Auto Receivables Corp., a unit of Ford MotorCo., Dearborn, Mich., filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission for up to $700 million in asset-backed certificates.


Enquirer/Star Group reports earnings for Qtr to March 30


Seaboard Bancorp Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Ambac Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Make a Misstep and You're Dead
Millions of land mines buried in various parts of the world threaten vast numbers of people.
They remain for many years, killing and maiming civilians, especially children.
Nobody knows how many people have been hurt.
The mines strewn over huge areas of Cambodia -- estimated at four million -- constitute "one of the worst man-made environmental disasters of the century," Col.
Alan Beaver, a New Zealander in the United Nations force there, has said.
Mines are also planted in Afghanistan, Kuwait, near Iraq's borders with Turkey and Iran, Angola and in the Falkland Islands.


Republicans Must Change Abortion Plank; Threat to Freedom
To the Editor:
Anna Quindlen in "Hearts and Minds" (column, April 22) calls for more talking and listening in the abortion debate.
For decades mainstream Americans have sought common ground with anti-abortion extremists.
Planned Parenthood has advocated tolerance for divergent views and prevention of the unintended pregnancies that lead to abortion.
Groups like Operation Rescue have countered our moderate approach by harassing and endangering women in Buffalo, Wichita and across the country.
They slander and insult the 16 million women each year who make difficult, principled decisions to end a pregnancy.
Astonishingly, they assail the sex education and contraceptive services that most effectively reduce the need for abortion.


CHRONICLE
The rock singer DAVID BOWIE has married the fashion model IMAN in Lausanne, Switzerland, a city official there said yesterday.
MICHEL PERRET said he supervised the brief city hall ceremony April 24 in the Lake Geneva city, where Mr.
Bowie has a house, The Associated Press reported.
Mr.
Bowie, 46, and Somalia-born Iman, 36, have had previous marriages.
They were engaged in November in Paris.


Quaker Chemical reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Freezing Government, Cont'd.
Is President Bush interested in making government more efficient?
Or does he aim to paralyze it?
Those questions arise now that he has extended for an additional 120 days a 90-day freeze on new Federal regulation.
The first 90 days suggest an answer: The moratorium smacks of an election-year conversion to improve Mr.
Bush's standing with conservatives and business interests that abhor regulation.
Having presided over three years of increased regulation by regulators of his own choosing, he suddenly decided in January that they were doing their jobs too well, and ordered them to stop.


Corrections
A brief review on Saturday about a recital by the violinist Pinchas Zukerman rendered the name of his piano accompanist incorrectly.
He is Marc Neikrug.


Justice Joseph F. Gagliardi, 80; Served 27 Years in State Courts
Joseph F. Gagliardi, a longtime justice and administrative judge for the Ninth Judicial District of the State Supreme Court in New York, died on Friday at White Plains Hospital Center.
He was 80 years old and lived in Larchmont, N.Y.
He died after a yearlong illness, according to the John J. Fox Funeral Home in Larchmont.


Reliance Insurance Co. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Lasmo Canada reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Black Rage, White Fear, and a Call for Remedies
THE six or so people who die violently on an average day in New York City, a rate insufficiently lower than the toll in Los Angeles last week, routinely constitute a quiet riot in some New York neighborhoods.
Well-meaning people of all races preached reconciliation yesterday.
Washington may even re-invest in cities that shelter too large a share of the nation's poor.
But the lessons of Los Angeles will be short-lived unless black rage and white fear are reconciled, or at least acknowledged.


Black Magazines See Sales in Unity
An unusual teaming up by six black magazines that compete for many of the same readers may turn out to be the cornerstone of a new marketing strategy for black publications.
As part of a Black History Month promotion in February, the magazines were grouped together in special floor displays in 2,700 retail outlets nationwide.
The $100,000 cost was split among the six magazines -- Essence, Ebony, Black Enterprise, Emerge, Black Elegance and YSB.


Doing for, and Doing Away With, Parents
Tom Selleck gets hurt a lot in "Folks," possibly more than might have been intended.
Among the many painful pratfalls this actor must endure in the role of Jon Aldrich, a Chicago stockbroker suddenly trying to cope with his aging parents, is one bad fall that costs him a toe and a testicle.
It's not easy to fathom how Mr.
Selleck or any other actor could have read this far in Robert Klane's screenplay and still decided to go full steam ahead.
"Folks," which opened on Friday, is a comedy about something even less funny than the lost-testicle misadventure.
It addresses the lighter side of Alzheimer's disease, with Don Ameche playing Jon's dazed, forgetful father as if he were a wonderful figure of fun.
Jon has supposedly not seen his parents in many years, but the story sends him from Chicago to Florida to help them after his mother becomes ill, which allows the film a chance to find dubious humor among the shuffleboard set.
"Look, do you mind?" says one of two old men playing that game when Jon gets in his way.
"We're trying to finish the game while we're still alive."


Reviews/Music; Hostile Psychedelia From the Charlatans
English rock has rediscovered psychedelia with every element but one: the optimism.
Both the Charlatans U.K. and Catherine Wheel, the two English bands that performed at the Academy on Thursday night, stand in shadows and play music that swirls around listeners' ears, while lights behind them flash and sometimes strobe.
And neither band wants to admit that it's having any fun.
The Charlatans helped create a British psychedelic revival in the late 1980's, alongside fellow bands from Manchester, England, including Happy Mondays and Stone Roses.
The Charlatans build their songs around the meaty tone of a Hammond organ, the instrument that drove bands like the Spencer Davis Group and early Deep Purple.
Most songs are enfolded by the organ's burbling riffs and big, throbbing chords, although the band occasionally uses a guitar or a different electric keyboard to escape its own formula.
Behind the riffs, drums pound out a choppy beat and Tim Burgess sings in a gentle, nasal voice.


Vital Signs Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Essay; Trashing Our Justice
"Scandalous," judges France's Mitterrand, from a system that does not give the accused the presumption of innocence.
"The Los Angeles jury could not have done more damage to their country's image abroad if they had tried," wrote The Japan Times, from a system that does not entrust decisions to juries in criminal cases.


Rise of the Old, Improved Agassi
The tennis traditionalists told him to clean up his act, shave, practice more, goof off less, cut out the curly fries, go on a diet, stay out of the limelight, hire a coach who wouldn't love him like a son and replace his old habits with work habits.
They told him such diligence would help him take logical steps in the direction of the world's No. 1 ranking, a spot currently held by Jim Courier, a player with moderate talent but maximum motivation, a guy who could play Dr.
Jekyll to Agassi's Mr.
Hyde.
Uncharacteristically, Andre Agassi took everybody's advice and turned over a new leaf, turned conventional for 1992.
He mimed the Couriers and Changs by practicing four hours daily, ate fresh fruit at every sitting, signed up for a bevy of tournaments, signed on for remedial coaching from Brian Teacher and convinced himself it was time to treat his calling like a business.


Sunrise Leasing Corp. reports earnings for Year to March 31


Vernitron Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Homestake Mining Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Books of The Times; Becoming Strangers in a Stranger and Stranger Land
After Henry  By Joan Didion 319 pages. Simon &amp; Schuster. $22.
The Henry recalled in the title of Joan Didion's thoughtful and timely new nonfiction collection, "After Henry," is Henry Robbins, the book editor who befriended and signed contracts with Ms.
Didion and her husband, John Gregory Dunne, in the summer of 1966 and remained their friend and editor until he died in 1979.


Transatlantic Holdings Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


New Fight Starts on Unemployment Aid
The Bush Administration and Congressional Democrats are battling again over extra unemployment benefits for the long-term jobless, with Congress apparently determined to make permanent changes in the law and the Administration preferring only another short-term extension.
Senator Lloyd Bentsen, the Texas Democrat who heads the Senate Finance Committee, and Representative Thomas J. Downey, the Long Island Democrat in charge of the issue on the House Ways and Means Committee, conducted hearings this week on the extra benefits.


Corrections
A chart on Friday summarizing racial riots and disturbances since 1964 misstated one source of the information.
It was the National Urban Coalition, not the National Urban League.


Pacific Nuclear Systems reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Dr. Lee Salk, Child Psychologist And Popular Author, Dies at 65
Dr.
Lee Salk, the author of eight books on family relationships and a popular commentator on social change, domestic strife and changing family patterns, died on Saturday at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in Manhattan.
He was 65 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died of cancer, his wife, Mary Jane, said.


Riots Raise Concerns About Insurance Redlining
As damage estimates rise to hundreds of millions of dollars, consumer advocates and some insurance regulators say they fear the Los Angeles riots could aggravate a problem that has plagued America's inner cities for more than 25 years: the abandonment of the poor by insurance companies.
After race riots in six American cities between 1965 and 1967, a Presidential commission found that the redlining of businesses and homes in poor neighborhoods by private insurers grew by an "intolerable degree." Officials later reported the sudden cancellation of property policies in New York, Philadelphia, St.
Louis and other cities that experienced riots after the assassination of the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr. in April 1968.


Officials Weigh Public Safety Against Older Drivers' Rights
Federal and state regulators are struggling to deal with one of the most vexing and fastest-growing roadway safety issues: identifying the older drivers who pose a hazard while not discriminating against those who do not.
The number of motorists over 65 years old has doubled over the last 20 years.
And while older people, as a group, have a lower rate of fatal accidents than teen-agers, their fatal-accident rates based on miles driven are among the highest, according to Federal data.


Sylvan Foods Holdings reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


RIOTS IN LOS ANGELES: The Mayor; Los Angeles Mayor Criticizes Chief for Slow Action on Riot
Under criticism for the city's slow move to quell rioting last week, Mayor Tom Bradley said Chief Daryl F. Gates's "personal ego" might have kept him from conceding early on that his police department needed help from Federal troops.
"It just sends out the message that they are not equal to handling the situation," Mr.
Bradley said Saturday afternoon in an interview at his City Hall office.


Reviews/Film; A Most Unpleasant London
London in the year 2008 is a dank hellhole aswarm with rats and is severely flooded because of global warming and torrential rains.
The soggy environment has spawned a killer who rips out the hearts of his victims, eats them and leaves elaborate astrological clues to his whereabouts.
Enter Stone (Rutger Hauer), the creature's would-be nemesis.
Three years earlier, his police partner was murdered by the beast.
Partly out of guilt for having taken up with his former partner's wife, Michelle (Kim Cattrall), Stone lives only to track down and exterminate the thing.


RESULTS PLUS
GOLF  Ammaccapane Wins Richest Event  Danielle Ammaccapane shot her fourth straight sub-70 round yesterday and held off three challengers by one stroke to win the richest tournament in women's golf, the $1.2 million Centel Classic in Tallahassee, Fla.
The $180,000 winner's purse catapulted the 26-year-old atop the L.P.G.A. earnings list with $353,354.
Ammaccapane shot a three-under-par 69 in the final round to finish at 275, 13 under. (AP) Third Straight for Trevino: Lee Trevino became the first senior golfer in five years to win three consecutive tournaments when he shot a 67 yesterday to beat Orville Moody by a stroke in the Las Vegas Senior Classic.
Trevino, who came into the event off victories in The Tradition and the PGA Senior Championship, averted a playoff when he rolled in a birdie putt on the 18th hole to negate Moody's birdie on the final hole.
Trevino finished at 206, 10 under par at the Desert Inn Country Club. (AP) First Victory for Funk: Fred Funk shot a final-round two-under- par 70 to win the Houston Open at The Woodlands, Tex.
Funk, who had been without a victory in four years on the PGA Tour, shot a course-record 62 on Saturday and held steady over the final holes to beat Kirk Triplett by two shots.
Funk finished with a 72-hole total of 272, 16 under par, to earn the $216,000 first prize. (AP) TENNIS Graf Tops Sanchez Vicario  Top-seeded Steffi Graf of Germany won her 63d title, defeating third-seeded Arantxa Sanchez Vicario of Spain, 7-6 (7-5), 6-2, to capture a tournament in Hamburg, Germany.
Using a vicious backhand slice, a powerful serve and a new full-court strategy, Graf got the upper hand early in the match, forcing Sanchez into repeated errors and moving ahead by 4-0 after 15 minutes. (AP) AUTO RACING  Mansell Ties a Record  Nigel Mansell of England won the Spanish Grand Prix in Barcelona to tie a Formula One mark with his fourth victory in four races this season.
Driving a Williams-Renault, Mansell tied the record of the defending series champion, Ayrton Senna, who opened last season with four straight victories.
Mansell beat Germany's Michael Schumacher by 24 seconds to claim his 25th career victory. (AP) Big Step for Allison: Davey Allison won his third Winston 500 at Talladega, Ala.
The victory, Allison's third of the season and 16th of his career, clinched a payoff of at least $100,000 for the 31-year-old, who now needs only to win one more of Nascar's big four races, either the Coca-Cola 600 on May 24 or the Southern 500 on Sept. 6, to win a $1 million prize. (AP) SYNCHRONIZED SWIMMING  Fourth Championship for Babb-Sprague  Kristen Babb-Sprague captured her fourth national solo title in the finals of the United States national championships in Oklahoma City.
Sarah and Karen Josephson, twin sisters, easily claimed their seventh national duet title. (AP) HOCKEY  Team USA Stays Alive  Ray LeBlanc posted his second shoutout of the tournament and Dave Jensen had two goals and one assist as Team USA stayed alive at the world championships in Bratislava, Czechoslovakia, with a 5-0 victory over Poland.
The United States is now 2-2 in the tournament and has a good chance of finishing among the top four teams in Pool A and thereby advancing to the quarterfinals. (AP) TRACK AND FIELD  Siefert Excels in Discus Throw  Jim Siefert of the Shore Athletic Club posted the best discus throw mark in the country this year when he won the event yesterday with a 217-foot toss at the New York Relays at Downing Stadium.
It was also a personal best for the C. W. Post graduate.
Siefert, 30 years old, hit the 217-foot marker on his first throw.
Jowanna McMullen, a ninth grader at Intermediate School 324 in Brooklyn, posted the fastest girls' 800-meter time in the United States this year, finishing in 2 minutes 8.64 seconds.
She was second in the open race to Kim Certain of Long Island.
DOG SHOW  English Springer Spaniel Is Best Again  An English springer spaniel, Ch.
Salilyn's Condor, who answers to the name of Robert, yesterday was named best of 3,774 dogs at the 63d show of the Trenton Kennel Club in New Jersey.
It was the second day in a row the liver-and-white 4-year-old dog had triumphed.
On Saturday, he led a field of 3,794 at Bucks County, the largest show to be held in the East this year.
It was the 58th top award for the dog, 28 of them this year.


State Bancorp Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


The Tax That Made Mad Dogs of Englishmen; A Captive Press
To the Editor;
From London, Anthony Lewis speaks of a captive press (column, April 2), characterizing British journalism as grotesquely partisan -- almost all of it pro-Conservative.
Here is an apposite quotation from "The Uncelestial City, Book I," by Humbert Wolfe (1886-1940), in the Oxford MiniDictionary of Quotations:


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
California faces an even bleaker economic future in the wake of last week's violence.
Already mired in recession, the state must now cope with the loss of more jobs and tax revenues.
And the image of a city out of control will do little for efforts to persuade companies not to leave and others to open factories.  [ Page D1. ]


PWA Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Morgan Financial reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Proler International reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Curative Technologies reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


The Tax That Made Mad Dogs of Englishmen
To the Editor:
Contrary to "No Earthquake in Britain" (editorial, April 11), the "poll tax" instituted by Margaret Thatcher was not a "local property tax." It was a head tax -- hence the name it was given by its victims.
Assessed and collected by local governments, it taxed each adult resident of a local area at a standard flat rate.
In a given village, for example, each of six adults living in a cottage would pay the same amount as each of two adults living in the manor house.
It made no difference whether you owned or rented the property, or whether the property in question was a palace or a shack.
It was emphatically not, therefore, a property tax.


Dividend Meetings
Following is a partial list of dividend meetings for the week of May 3: MONDAY  ARCO Cooper Tire &amp; Rubr Co G.M.
Jefferson-Pilot Corp La-Z-Boy Chair Co Source Cap Inc TUESDAY  Diamond Shamrock Inc Emerson Electric Enron Corp Georgia Pac Corp IES Inds Inc Kansas City Pwr &amp; Lt Kansas Pwr &amp; Lt Kerr-McGee Corp Lafarge Corp Mickelberry Corp Monarch Machine Tool Oryx Energy Co St Paul Cos.


Bruised but Not Out; Florio's Comeback Bid With Voters
It's been decades since Jim Florio stepped into a boxing ring with the single-minded intention of knocking the stuffing out of an opponent.
Yet the ring shadows his moves as Governor of New Jersey and as a Democratic politician whom some people have already counted out, with 19 months remaining in his first term.
Even in an interview, he bobs, he weaves, his dark eyes looking for an opening, his hands chopping the air.
Always, it seems, his guard is up.


RIOTS IN LOS ANGELES: The Suburbs; In Simi Valley, Defense Of a Shared Way of Life
The very layout of the streets in this well-to-do suburb speaks volumes about how unwelcome strangers are here, about how much safety means to the 100,000 people, most of them white, who have crossed the mountain range and then the Ventura County line to escape the chaos and discomfort of the city.
Each subdivision of Simi Valley, which now claims a place on the map of American race relations along with Selma and Howard Beach because of last week's verdict here, is a little world onto itself: a maze of dead-end streets easily navigable by residents but sure to baffle and trap any outlander who is up to no good.


Balchem Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Burritt InterFinancial Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Pretoria Legislator Reportedly Confesses to Role in Bombing
A right-wing Member of Parliament said in a newspaper interview today that he had confessed to helping bomb a formerly white high school in his constituency that was to serve children of black political exiles returning from abroad.
Rapport, a Sunday paper, quoted the legislator, Koos Botha, as admitting his involvement in the bombing of the Hillview High School, in Pretoria's northern suburbs, last June.


Justice in South Africa
As the Rodney King affair exploded in Los Angeles, a finer brand of racial justice was being dispensed in South Africa.
A white police commander was sentenced to hang for causing the massacre in 1988 of 11 blacks, including two children and six women, in Natal Province.
South Africa's death penalty remains morally and practically indefensible, even though commutation of this capital sentence is possible.
But the conviction of brutal security forces was remarkable.
This was the first time a senior South African policeman was tried and severely punished for orchestrating the violence that has bled the country since 1984.


Cenfed Financial reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Realife Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Equity Issues This Week
The following equity offerings are expected this week:
AG-Bag International Ltd., 1.2 million units (each unit consisting of two shares and one warrant).
Chatfield Dean.
Adelphia Communications Corp., 1.5 million common shares. Salomon Brothers.


RIOTS IN LOS ANGELES: The Nation; Pleas for Peace and Justice From Pulpits in Dozen Cities
After the storm of rioting and bloodshed in Los Angeles and four days of sometimes violent protests in a dozen other cities, Americans paused yesterday to pray for peace and to hear impassioned pleas from the pulpit for justice and racial harmony in a troubled land.
Across the New York area and in cities and towns across the country, bells tolled for the dead in Los Angeles, and spiritual leaders expressed sorrow for those who lost their lives or homes or jobs in the orgy of arson, looting and gunfire that followed the acquittal last Wednesday of four white Los Angeles police officers in the beating of a black motorist, Rodney G. King.
Many condemned the acquittal as a miscarriage of justice, but said violence was not the answer to racial injustice.
Others called for radical change in a society infected with institutionalized racism.
And amid the grief, some spoke of hope, calling the verdict and its aftermath a turning point, perhaps the harbinger of a new civil rights movement in America.
"There is a new kind of shame and pain in the white community," the Rev.
Cecil A. Williams told his racially diverse parish at the Glide Memorial United Methodist Church in San Francisco.
"It is time to put that to work, to stop watching the television in pain and get off the couch and take some action."
And in Manhattan, the Rev.
Dr.
James A. Forbes Jr., senior minister at Riverside Church, made an impassioned plea for a new commitment from his racially mixed congregation, just as the church threw itself into the anti-nuclear movement a decade ago.
"Could we take this one on?" he asked.
It was a golden Sunday over much of the nation.
The fresh grass, the new leaves, were apple green in the spring sun, and the day's gentle beauty offered stark contrasts with last week's images of burning and looting, of people running in the glare of flames, of smoldering fires in the half-light looking like the approaches to hell.
Except for gunshots fired at a police car in Los Angeles, calm prevailed yesterday in the riot-affected areas and in other cities that had been wracked by anger and violence in recent days, and many Americans took advantage of the respite to attend church services, to hear spiritual leaders and reflect again on the causes and possible responses to the country's racial divisions. 'We'd Like It to Be Over'
In Los Angeles, services at the Greater Ebenezer Missionary Baptist Church were just ending when gunfire erupted outside.
Congregants waited briefly until the danger passed, then filed out.
"We'd like it to be over," said Willie Tagger, a 54-year-old aircraft mechanic.
"I don't think it will end until Chief Daryl Gates is gone and the four police officers are gone."
Nearby, at St.
Vincent's Roman Catholic Church, the Rev.
Michael Crotty's voice broke as he told his parish of black, white, Asian and Hispanic members that there was no turning back from what had happened.
"People are saying, 'Oh, good, we're returning, little by little, to normal,' " Mr.
Crotty said.
"We cannot accept what was normal before the violence because what was normal was never that. What was normal was never acceptable."
President Bush, at Camp David, Md., for the weekend, proclaimed the first Thursday in May as a national prayer day, and urged Americans on that day "to pray for reconciliation and healing." He scheduled a White House meeting with several Cabinet members for today to discuss "long-range solutions for some regional and economic problems."
In Boston, 300 parishioners at the Union United Methodist Church, who wore black ribbons to protest the acquittals, applauded loudly as their pastor, the Rev.
Charles R. Stith, blamed the President for the verdict and exhorted them to reject Mr.
Bush at the polls in November. 'Bush Must Go!'
"The jury didn't see Rodney King -- they saw Willie Horton," Mr.
Stith declared.
"George Bush must go!" Mr.
Horton, a black man who raped a white woman after being furloughed from a Massachusetts prison, was mentioned in a commercial used by the Bush campaign against his Democratic opponent in 1988.
The commercial was widely viewed as politically effective, but many believed that it appealed to racial fears.
Mr.
Bush was also criticized at the Abyssinian Baptist Church in Harlem by the Rev.
Calvin O. Butts, who said the President had reassured whites that law and order was being restored but had failed to take steps to address the underlying injustices that had led to the rioting.
Mr.
Butts also criticized the Reagan and Bush Administrations for "12 years of neglect" of the inner cities and urged his congregants to join a May 16 march on Washington.
"I want you to take off from work and go down," Mr.
Butts said.
"We should be nonviolent, but we should stand up to Washington and say, 'Enough is enough!' "
Elsewhere in New York, at great cathedrals and small churches, there were prayers for an end to violence, calls from pulpits for renewed efforts to fight racism and praise for Mayor David N. Dinkins and community leaders for helping to avert a major explosion of violence in the city.
John Cardinal O'Connor, the Roman Catholic Archbishop of New York, expressed relief that New York was spared widespread violence and credited Mayor Dinkins and Police Commissioner Lee P. Brown for "the sensitivity and the prudence of their response to the understandable fear that began to pervade this city."
A largely Korean-American congregation at St.
Paul Chong Ha-Sang, a Roman Catholic chapel in Flushing, Queens, heard the Rev.
Joe Veneroso refer to the attacks on Korean-Americans and Korean-American businesses by rioters in Los Angeles last week.
"Koreans and blacks looked at each other and saw not their brothers and sisters, but their enemies," he said.
"The rioting may have stopped, but the racial problems have not."
In Atlanta, two ministers told congregations at black churches that their anger over the verdict in the beating case was justified, but that violence was neither the proper response nor the solution to problems of racism.
"Violence gets attention, but not lasting change," said the Rev.
Joseph Lowery, president of the Southern Christian Leadership Conference and pastor of Cascade United Methodist Church.
And at Mount Moriah Baptist Church a few miles away, the Rev.
Orlando K. Winters said: "Be angry, but sin not. Be angry, but don't let the sun set on your anger."
As she left the Mount Moriah services, 81-year-old Beatrice Cook shook her head and said she did not think the rioters knew what they were looking for in the streets.
"All I know is that they were looking in the wrong direction," she said.
"As for the verdict, it was wrong, but it didn't make me angry. It just made me hurt."


Robert Redford Speaks His Mind On Truth, Justice and Hollywood
Robert Redford says, with a smile, that he is a deeply private star who is often misunderstood here.
He acknowledges that having the freedom and money to work on only one film every three or four years makes him a target of resentment and envy, that Hollywood's penchant for fashionable causes sometimes disturbs him, that he has never been, as many believe, anti-Hollywood.
"I just choose not to live here and prefer other places," he said.
"I live in Utah. I chose that place for the soul. It's in the mountains, and I ski. And I live in New York because I simply like it: it's honestly dirty; it's honestly tough; it's honestly screwed up. It can't possibly be something that it's not. It's so clearly a mess. But for me, at least, there's something exciting about it."


RIOTS IN LOS ANGELES


Fitch's Status the Nets' Biggest Riddle
A tongue-in-cheek observation about the Nets was made at the end of the season: If the team could finish with a 40-42 record and make the playoffs for the first time since 1986 in spite of Bill Fitch, why not bring everybody back next season and see how far they can go?
That possibility is not out of the question, based on what Nets officials are saying now.
But the likelihood is that some changes will be made.
Perhaps Fitch will be forced out.
Perhaps there will be some new faces in the Nets' starting lineup.


Denise Meyer Has Wedding
Denise Leslie Meyer, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Sidney Meyer of North Caldwell, N.J., was married yesterday in Livingston, N.J., to Jeffrey Bruce Smith, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Arnold Smith of Boynton Beach, Fla.
Rabbi Alan Silverstein performed the ceremony at the Livingston Country Club.
Mrs.
Smith, 28 years old, is a lawyer at Insurance Services Office Inc., a New York firm offering legal assistance to insurers.
She graduated from Syracuse University and received a law degree from Yeshiva University.
Her father is a partner in Deloitte &amp; Touche in New York.


Sun Energy Partners L.P.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


St. Petersburg Journal; Battle Lines Are Drawn And All for Art's Sake
This echoing, haunted city has always fancied itself the trembling Italianate heart of Russian cultural life, where Dostoyevsky, Pushkin, Gogol, Mandelshtam, Akhmatova and others made their indelible way.
But modern culture is about money, too, not to mention politics, and as in Soho and Tribeca in New York, the artists of St.
Petersburg, Russia's "window on the West," are enveloped in a feud over property.
The edifice in question is an enormous, decaying Rococo apartment building of eight stairways, three courtyards and about 162,000 square feet of space, now divided into some 170 apartments and offices.
Superbly situated at 10 Pushkin Street, just off the grandeur of Nevsky Prospekt, no one -- even the most artistic person -- has any confusion about the worth of the 1877 structure, even in this period when the ruble has only a notional value.


UAP Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Bruncor Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Ms. Wernick Wed to Jason DeSalvo
Deborah Jean Wernick, a daughter of Prof.
Robert J. Wernick of San Francisco and Carol Newman of Columbia, Md., and Jason DeSalvo, a son of Drs.
Ernest J. and Louise DeSalvo of Teaneck, N.J., were married yesterday at the Oakland Manor in Columbia.
Judge Joseph H. Young, senior judge for the Federal District Court in Maryland, performed the ceremony.
Mrs.
DeSalvo, 27 years old, is the commercial traffic coordinator at WINS radio in New York.
She graduated summa cum laude from Hunter College.
Her father is a professor of mathematics and computer science at San Francisco State University.
Her mother is an artist and illustrator.
Her stepfather, Paul S. Newman, is a writer and comic-book author.


Mid Maine Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


First National Bank Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Wisconsin Public Service reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Review/Music; Translating the Spirit of Classical Hindustani Raga
The favored structures of Western classical music manifest a world-beating confidence.
A sonata theme announces itself at the start of a movement, defining and governing the music to come.
By contrast, North Indian Hindustani classical music seems diffident to a Western ear.
A raga begins with a slow prelude, the alap, in which an improviser seems to pull wisps and fancies from the air, following musical impulses.
Later, the raga acquires a steady rhythm, reveals its melodic contours and displays the performer's flashier side, all dependent on spontaneous inspiration.
It is an ancient tradition of music for the moment.
The raga itself is not a fixed composition to be recited, but a certain scale or mode, a set of melodic gestures, a rhythmic cycle and a mood.
If the soloist happens to break a string, as Ustad Ali Akbar Khan did during his concert at Alice Tully Hall on Friday night, the music continues while he changes it.
Mr.
Khan simply cued a solo for his collaborator, Swapan Chaudhuri, on tabla drums.


RIOTS IN LOS ANGELES: Challenger; Nation Needs Healing, Clinton Says
Gov.
Bill Clinton arrived here tonight to survey the damage from riots that devastated wide areas of America's second-largest city.
Mr.
Clinton immedidately set out for the First African Methodist Episcopal Church, a command post for volunteer efforts to clean up the city and aid victims of the riots in South-Central Los Angeles.


Horizon Bank reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Review/Ballet; Paris Opera's Elegant Neophytes Show Off for New York Devotees
Like Paris in Greek mythology, who had to choose the fairest of three goddesses, a ballet fan or critic would be hard put to select the best ballet school in the world.
Nevertheless, the Paris Opera School of Ballet could easily win that contest on the basis of the two types of performances it presented over the weekend.
On Friday at the City Center, Claude Bessy, the French school's dynamic director, introduced her pupils, age 10 to 18, in nearly six hours of onstage ballet classes with their customary teachers.
Like the similar classroom demonstration that took the New York City dance world by storm in 1988, this series of exercises was carefully rehearsed but not theatricalized.


Dance in Review
Kent and Collins In 'Giselle'
"Giselle" was a ballet about two gentle, serious and affectingly lost young people when Julie Kent and Jeremy Collins danced the lead roles on Wednesday afternoon.
It was a strongly danced performance, with the two dancers choosing to take some brave technical risks, but without bravura embellishment.
And that was the great pleasure of their performance.
Ms.
Kent and Mr.
Collins were not the most exciting of Giselles and Albrechts.
But they danced the ballet with a devotion and quality of care that were not only inspiring but also poignant.
This was a performance in the service of a ballet classic, to a degree that seems rare in two such promising dancers and that made these role debuts a privilege to witness.
Cynthia Anderson was a powerful Myrta, angling the Romantic curves of her choreography to interestingly craggy effect.
The Wili lieutenants were well danced by Amy Rose, an unusually personal Moyna, and Lucette Katerndahl as Zulma.


RIOTS IN LOS ANGELES: The President; Bush Moves to Respond to Strong Test From Riots
Deep into a difficult political campaign and facing what some aides now call a domestic Persian Gulf crisis, President Bush will meet with his top domestic advisers Monday morning to begin mapping his response to the civic and physical wreckage of the Los Angeles riots.
Mr.
Bush is being pressed to quickly address the broader social ailments underlying last week's upheaval, some senior Administration aides said, adding that the most likely forum for unveiling such a prescription was a long-scheduled visit to Los Angeles on Thursday.
Mr.
Bush had planned to speak about free trade, but the address will almost certainly now be devoted to the themes of economic and social justice, said the aides, all of whom insisted on anonymity.


Cuomo Still Pondering Signing or Vetoing Districting Bill
On the eve of what promises to be a day of last-minute brinkmanship, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo said today that he still had not decided whether to sign or veto the State Legislature's redistricting bill.
The Governor, who is given 10 working days to sign or veto any piece of legislation, must by law make a decision by midnight Monday.
He may well press up against that last-hour deadline on a day when the Assembly and the State Senate must decide whether to enact election-law changes that they agreed to on Friday and whether to make amendments to the legislative redistricting bill that Mr.
Cuomo had requested.


Ryland Group reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Nanometrics Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 28


First of Long Island reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Emma Carne Wed in London
Emma Carne, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Stuart Carne of London, was married there yesterday to Ethan Rasiel, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Amram Rasiel of Marblehead, Mass.
Rabbi Louis Jacobs performed the ceremony at the New London Synagogue.
Mrs.
Rasiel, 27 years old, is an associate at Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company in New York.
She graduated from Somerville College at the University of Oxford and received an M.B.A. from the University of Pennsylvania.
Her father is a physician in London.


Bush Is Assured Party Nomination
Republicans in Maine and Wyoming, in state conventions last weekend, pledged 30 delegates to President Bush, assuring his nomination at the party's national convention in Houston in August.
Mr.
Bush won all 22 delegates in Maine and 8 in Wyoming.
Another 12 delegates in Wyoming had been pledged to Mr.
Bush earlier, giving him all of the state's 20.


JSB Financial reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Peoples Energy Corp.  reports earnings for 12mos March 31


Mayor Plans Crackdown For Fulton Fish Market
Mayor David N. Dinkins announced plans yesterday to hire up to 20 managers and inspectors for the Fulton Fish Market, described by law-enforcement officials as a Mafia stronghold where extortion, violence and other crimes have led to higher retail fish prices.
The Mayor said he was reacting to a two-year investigation by city agents and confidential informants that found "continuing criminal activity and improper business conduct." Mr.
Dinkins said undercover agents had witnessed violations of city regulations and sales of guns and drugs at the market, which handles more than 125 million pounds of seafood a year.


Titanium Metals Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Tech-Sym Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Review/Music; Tempering the Avant-Garde With Medieval Faith
The score of "Beatus Vir" by the Polish composer Henryk Mikoyaj Gorecki asks that the music begin with great passion and tension, verging on aggression.
The chorus chants its plea, "Domine," with a descending minor second, an interval that haunts this deliberately primitive and fervently devout composition.
Composed of passages from the Psalms, the work was written in honor of Pope John Paul II's first pilgrimage to his native Poland.
It is a post-modern plea for succor in times of trouble, a theme that in 1979 had political as well as religious ramifications.
As part of the Manhattan School of Music's Festival of 20th-Century Music at the Cathedral of St.
John the Divine on Friday night, it also had another function.
With John Nelson leading the Manhattan School of Music Philharmonia along with the New York Choral Society (John Daly Goodwin, director), and with the bass Nikita Storojev, it was one of three works that served to introduce the composer to New York audiences who, until now, had only heard his music in isolated performances.
The composer himself was in attendance and was welcomed at concert's end with an ovation that testified to the music's immediate power.


Arkla Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Boy Accused Of Slaying In the Bronx
A 13-year-old boy was arrested on a charge of murder in the stabbing death late Saturday of his mother's boyfriend, who had broken up a fight between the youth and his younger brother in their Bronx home, the police said yesterday.
The suspect, Joshue Velez, who is to be tried as an adult on a second-degree murder charge, was arrested in the one-family house at 2036 Benedict Avenue near Pugsley Avenue in the Parkchester section shortly after Larry Gonzalez, 38, was stabbed once in the chest with a kitchen knife, said Sgt.
Edward Monks of the 43d Precinct detective squad.


Dance in Review
Laurent Hilaire's Debut In 'Romeo and Juliet'
Kenneth MacMillan's "Romeo and Juliet" requires more than fine technicians.
Its stars must also suggest that they are portraying interesting people.
It was obvious from the outset at Saturday night's performance that Laurent Hilaire and Susan Jaffe were admirable dancers as the tragic lovers.
But it was not until fairly late in the work that they created characters about whom one could have deep feelings.


Gateway Federal reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Cytel Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Rush to Kill?
To the Editor:
"The Court's Rush to Kill" (editorial, April 22), on California's execution of Robert Alton Harris, boggles my mind.
As you report in your news pages the same day, the crime was committed in 1978; the conviction was upheld by the California Supreme Court in 1981; district courts rejected habeas corpus petitions and were upheld by appeals courts; additional hearings were held in the intervening years.
And now, in 1992, you talk about a rush to kill!
There is certainly much room for difference of opinion among men of good will on the death sentence.
But to call an execution a rush to kill after 14 years of legal maneuvering, is out of line.
ALFRED N. GREENBERG New York, April 22, 1992


TakeCare Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Adobe Resources Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Accounts
*
Kenwood Appliances Inc., Parsippany, N.J., to Milton Samuels Advertising Agency Inc., New York, for its line of food-preparation machines, previously handled by Global Marketing Corp., Parsippany.
Other finalists in the review, and the billings, were not disclosed. *
Western Union Priority Services, Upper Saddle River, N.J., to Fox Pavilika &amp; Partners, New York, as its agency for business-to-business advertising.
Billings were not disclosed.


Snoozing Rangers Startled
The Rangers skated onto the ice last night at Madison Square Garden still looking for Claude Lemieux, or Scott Stevens, or some Devil-ish player they could really and truly hate.
Instead, they got the Pittsburgh Penguins, a polished, professional team with a doctorate in the counter-attack.
The Penguins fashioned a workmanlike 4-2 victory in Game 1 of the Patrick Division final series, and the Rangers were still trying to figure out how to get excited about an opponent who doesn't wear a chip on its shoulder pads.


Brown Campaigns in Indiana


Ms. Vinton Has Wedding
Margaret Jean Vinton, a daughter of Mrs.
Alfred M. Vinton of Rye, N.Y., and the late Mr.
Vinton, was married yesterday in Rye to Brady Hughes Cole, a son of the late Mr. and Mrs.
Kenneth R. Cole.
The Rev.
David Uhl performed the ceremony at Rye Presbyterian Church.
Mrs.
Cole, 43 years old, is a social worker with Upper Valley Youth Services in Lebanon, N.H.
She graduated from Wheelock College and received a master's degree in social work from Hunter College.
Her father was a senior vice president of Citibank in New York.


Debra Pine Is Wed
Debra Faythe Pine, the daughter of Rhoda Pine of Decatur, Ill., and the late Rabbi J. Jerome Pine, was married yesterday in Cincinnati to Andrew James Busch, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Malcolm R. Busch of Highland Park, N.J.
Rabbi Daniel H. Freelander performed the ceremony at Hebrew Union College, where the bride and bridegroom are rabbinical students.


First City Trust Co. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


For Gorbachev, a Trip to the West Takes On a Western Flavor


Heist (C.H.) Corp. (A) reports earnings for Qtr to March 29


OLD ALLIES ASSAIL NICARAGUA'S CHIEF
The broad-based coalition that backed President Violeta Barrios de Chamorro in her stunning electoral defeat of the Sandinista Front two years ago is now threatening to withdraw its support, charging that she is under too much Sandinista influence.
On April 25, the second anniversary of her inauguration, leaders of 10 of the 14 parties that make up the coalition signed a full-page newspaper advertisement criticizing her for maintaining Gen.
Humberto Ortega Saavedra, a Sandinista, as army commander, and for not keeping a promise to name a civilian Defense Minister.


Kerr-Addison Mines Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


American Bankers Insurance Group Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Thousands March to Celebrate Israel's 44th Birthday


Japan's Markets Closed
Financial markets are closed in Japan today and Tuesday for national holidays.
On Friday, the last trading day on the Tokyo Stock Exchange, the Nikkei index of 225 issues fell 87.32 points, or less than 1 percent, to close at 17,303.39.


Students Confront Officials on Race, Anger and Rodney King
Steve Bradshaw, a senior at Clara Barton High School in Brooklyn, said he made Police Commissioner Lee P. Brown squirm yesterday.
"I asked him if he really believes in justice, and does he believe the U.S. justice system works," said Mr.
Bradshaw, describing a meeting of young people and city officials to discuss last week's riots in Los Angeles.
"He said he believes in justice, although it sometimes makes mistakes."


Chipsoft Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Liposome Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  INSPECTORS FOR FULTON FISH MARKET
Mayor Dinkins announced plans to hire up to 20 managers and inspectors for the Fulton Fish Market, described by law-enforcement officials as a Mafia stronghold where extortion, violence and other crimes have led to higher retail fish prices.
The Mayor said he was reacting to a two-year investigation by city agents and confidential informants that found "continuing criminal activity and improper business conduct" at the market, which handles more than 125 million pounds of seafood a year.
B3.
MARCHING ON WASHINGTON
Outraged about crime and violence in New York City, Ralph Torres of the Neighborhood Alliance for a Drug-Free City and 50 other people from Williamsburg are planning to march on Washington on May 16.
Mark Zink is organizing members of Staten Islanders Against Nuclear Weapons.
Keith Brooks and members of the New York Unemployed Committee will recruit hundreds of the jobless to march, too.
Dozens of such groups are preparing for the "Save Our Cities, Save Our Children" march on May 16.
B3.
DEFINING THE PROBLEM OF RACE AND RIOTS


World Economies


Lights, Action, Nascar: Charlotte's New Nightspot
You could refer to what will happen at Charlotte Motor Speedway two weeks from now as the dawn of an era in stock-car racing.
But considering the schedule of events on May 16, it's more of a sunset on the age when racing lasted only as long as the daylight.
On that date, Charlotte Speedway, a 1.5-mile superspeedway in the heart of stock-car country, will turn on the switch of a $1.7 million, 1.2 billion candlepower lighting system and at about 8:58 P.M.
Eastern time, the Winston, a 105-mile series of sprint races, will be held under those lights.


Robinson Nugent Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Monday  None  Tuesday  Productivity . . . 1st Qtr.
Auto Sales . . .
April  Wednesday  None  Thursday  Consumer Credit . . .
March Weekly Jobless Claims  Friday  Unemployment . . .
April


As Convention Nears, Uncertainty Clouds Impact
With the Democratic National Convention to open in Madison Square Garden 10 weeks from today, just what it will mean to New York City remains unclear.
Even as the preparations shift into high gear, estimates of the impact on the local economy say more about the art of financial projection than about the count-the-dollars precision of an audit.
No one is sure, for instance, how to assess the official estimate that the city will somehow get between $200 million and $300 million worth of "media coverage" from a few days of international absorption with what goes on inside the Garden.


Worth Magazine Names a Publisher
Worth magazine in New York named Christien D. Boskin as publisher, succeeding David Kahn.
Most recently, Ms.
Boskin was national sales director at Town &amp; Country magazine in New York.
Alison Parks, Worth's associate publisher, said Mr.
Kahn had left the company over "philosophical differences between himself and Randy Jones as to how to market the magazine." Her reference was to W. Randall Jones, chairman and chief executive of Capital Publishing, the subsidiary of Fidelity Investments that publishes Worth.


TNP Enterprises reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


A Real Spring Weekend for a City That Desperately Needed One


Lillian Vernon reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29


Dramex Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Lone Star Industries reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Tembec Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Melcor Developments reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


North Korea to Drop First Veil From Nuclear Sites
Senior North Korean officials said today that they would hand over to the International Atomic Energy Agency on Monday a list of nuclear-related sites ready for inspection, but that the list would not include a plutonium-reprocessing installation that the United States suspects is at the center of an effort to build nuclear weapons.
The announcement today by Song Rak Un, who handles United States affairs for the Foreign Ministry, appeared to represent a direct challenge to the Bush Administration to prove its charges that the Government is only a few months to a few years away from producing a crude nuclear bomb.


BNH Bancshares Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Prayers for Dead, Thoughts of Rebirth
Bells tolled around the nation for the dead in Los Angeles, and Americans paused to hear pleas from the pulpit for racial harmony.
Page B8.
Mayor Dinkins met with New York students to hear them out and thank them for "not jumping on the train" to violence, as an aide put it.
Page B1.
While most of the dead in Los Angeles were black and Hispanic men, no race or sex was spared.
A portrait of some of the dead, page B8.


Galoob (Lewis) Toys (N) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


RIOTS IN LOS ANGELES: The Toll; Some of 50 Killed in Los Angeles Violence
The death toll in the Los Angeles riots rose to 50 today.
The Los Angeles County Coroner's Office is continuing to try to identify those killed, many of whom had no identification.
Following is a partial list of the dead, which was released by the coroner's office:
BATTAN, Patrick, 30 years old, white male. Shot in the head. Died Thursday, 5 P.M.
TXT&gt;
CHANNELL, Jerel, 26, black male, Los Angeles.
One of three people who died in a high-speed car crash while trying to elude the police.
Died Thursday, 12:15 A.M.
DAVIS, Gregory, 15, black male, Los Angeles.
Shot.
Died Thursday, 8:36 P.M.
EPSTEIN, Howard, 44, white male, Orinda.
Shot while inspecting his machine shop for damage.
Died Thursday, 2:41 P.M.
EVANAHEN, Kevin A., 24, white male, Inglewood.
Killed by a roof cave-in while fighting a fire.
Died Friday, 1:10 A.M.
GARCIA, Jose L. Jr., 15, Hispanic male.
Shot in the back.
GARCIA, Mark, 15, Hispanic male, Los Angeles.
Shot by a Los Angeles County sheriff's deputy.
Died Thursday, 5:20 P.M.
GIBSON, Meeker, 35, black male, Pomona.
Shot.
Died Friday, 4:55 A.M.
HAINES, Matthew, 32, white male, Long Beach.
Pulled from his motorcycle, robbed, beaten and shot by rioters.
Died Thursday, 6:55 P.M.
HARRISON, Deandre, 17, black male, Los Angeles.
Shot.
Died Thursday, 12:30 A.M.
JACKSON, Dennis, 38, black male, Los Angeles.
Killed in a gun battle with the police.
Died Thursday, 12:16 A.M.
LEE, Edward Song, 18, Korean-American male.
Shot.
Died Thursday, 8:30 P.M.
MALLORY, Darnell, 18, black male, Los Angeles.
One of three people who died in a high-speed car crash while trying to elude the police.
Died Thursday, 12:15 A.M.
MARONIAN, Lucie, 51, white female, Altadena.
Stabbed.
Died Friday, 1:58 A.M.
McCURRY, Ira, 45, white male, Los Angeles.
Shot in the head while trying to prevent looters from burning a store.
Died Thursday, 12:10 A.M.
MIRANDA, Arturo, 20, Hispanic male, Los Angeles.
Shot in the head while driving home from a soccer game.
Died Wednesday, 9:30 P.M.
NEAL, Ernest Jr., 27, black male, Los Angeles.
Shot.
Died Thursday, 11:45 P.M.
NETHERLY, Anthony, 21, black male, Los Angeles.
Shot.
Died Thursday, 10:07 P.M.
PEDAWAY, Juanita, 38, black female, Los Angeles.
One of three people who died in a high-speed car crash while trying to elude the police.
Died Thursday, 12:15 A.M.
TAYLOR, Dwight, 42, black male, Los Angeles.
Shot in the neck and chest.
Died Wednesday, 8:15 P.M.
TINEDA, Juan A., 19, Hispanic male.
Shot Friday.
TRAVENS, Edward, 15, white male, Mission Hills.
Shot several times in a drive-by attack.
Died Wednesday, 9:26 P.M.
VELA, Eduardo, 34, Hispanic male, Arvin.
Shot.
WATSON, Louis, 18, black male, Los Angeles.
Shot in the head while at a bus stop.
Died Wednesday, 8:20 P.M.
WILKINS, Elbert, 33, black male, Los Angeles.
Shot in the abdomen.
Died Thursday, 12:10 A.M.


Halsey Drug Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Westcoast Energy reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Grey Advertising Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Grace &amp; Rothschild Wins Waldenbooks
Waldenbooks Inc. in Stamford, Conn., a subsidiary of the Kmart Corporation, named Grace &amp; Rothschild in New York to handle advertising for Basset Book Shops, its proposed chain of "superstore" bookstores.
Though billings were not disclosed, an item last month in the Delaney Report newsletter estimated initial billings at $10 million.


Knicks Unite To Undo Pistons
On a day that could have delivered agony or ecstasy, the Knicks delivered a resounding peformance.
Winning a series that tested them physically and emotionally, the Knicks defeated the Detroit Pistons, 94-87, yesterday afternoon at Madison Square Garden to win the decisive Game 5 of their first-round playoff series.


Dance in Review
Bocca and Ferri In 'Giselle'
Giselle died again on Monday night.
And Albrecht went mad with grief at her death.
But it was hard to care much.
"Giselle" was danced with total calculation and chilled technical perfection by Alessandra Ferri and Julio Bocca.
Ms.
Ferri and Mr.
Bocca, whose new punkish haircut makes him look like Sean Penn, sketched in the general characters of the young peasant woman and her faithless, high-born suitor.
Their dancing in the second act suggested they had given some thought to the Romantic-era shapes of the choreography.
But only Mr.
Bocca's brises voles -- small, fast steps that traveled diagonally across the stage -- went beyond technical expertise to evoke something of the poetry of "Giselle" for a few brief moments.
There was some excitement in the pushing, ferocious surge of Susan Jaffe's Myrta.
But the only time the performance came to the sort of emotional life that is crucial to "Giselle" was when Ethan Brown was on stage as Hilarion.


Tajik Communists Threaten Crackdown
Having restored themselves to power a month after the coup attempt in August and suspended civil liberties last week, the long-ruling Communists of Tajikistan threatened today to crack down on anti-Government protesters paralyzing the capital, Dushanbe.
Tajikistan, with an economy based on cotton, is one of the poorest of the new states of the former Soviet Union and one of the most unreconstructed.
It has been run by President Rakhman N. Nabiyev for most of the last 20 years, and Mr.
Nabiyev has been trying in the last few weeks to beat off another challenge to his authority and that of the party.


Reviews/Film; A Detective Who Takes His Work Home
A morose romantic comedy of unusual integrity, "Just Like in the Movies" aspires to be more than another up-to-date sitcom about the travails of being a lonely grown-up in search of a mate.
Its central character, Ryan Legrand (Jay O. Sanders), is a divorced private investigator who specializes in gathering evidence of spousal infidelity.
And despite his rugged good looks, he is no Mr.
Right.
With his bohemian sidekick, Dean (Alan Ruck), Ryan spends hours each week hidden in a van with a video camera ready to roll when an adulterous couple shows up.
The darkest scenes in the film, now playing at the Quad Cinema, are the moments when Ryan dispassionately presents his clients with the evidence they have hired him to gather, and he watches as they crumple when put face to face with the bitter truth.


Bonilla Takes the Lead And Mets Gladly Follow
There are all sorts of ways to spend a guaranteed $29 million.
And there are all sorts of ways of earning a guaranteed $29 million.
You can take it and run.
You can take it and hide.
Or you can take it and take a stand, like one that says you will take the heat, whatever its temperature, whatever its fairness, whatever its implications for your public image.


Quotation of the Day
"People are saying, 'Oh, good, we're returning, little by little, to normal.' We cannot accept what was normal before the violence because what was normal was never that. What was normal was never acceptable." -- THE REV.
MICHAEL CROTTY of St.
Vincent's Roman Catholic Church in Los Angeles.  [ B8:2. ]


Julia Rosson Wed to Daniel Small
Julia Beth Rosson, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Robert S. Rosson of West Hartford, Conn., and Daniel Adam Small, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Gilbert L. Small of Canton, Conn., were married yesterday.
Rabbi Stanley Kessler officiated at Beth El Temple in West Hartford.
Mrs.
Small, 32 years old, is the press secretary to Senator Christopher J. Dodd, Democrat of Connecticut.
She graduated from Smith College and received a master's degree in journalism from Columbia University.
Her father is chief of gastroenterology at Hartford Hospital.
Her mother, Eileen Rosson, is a social worker with Jewish Family Service of Greater Hartford.


People


Action Industries reports earnings for Qtr to March 28


Snyder Oil Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


PRO BASKETBALL: Sports of The Times; The Bad Boys Are Sent Home for Good
CLICK.
Actually, I began counting Detroit out on my personal clock at this time last year after the surly, defeated Pistons walked off the court against Chicago without so much as shaking hands.
That particular game, and that entire playoff series, had been marked by cheap shots, mostly from Detroit, and the sort of mean-spirited play that had come to characterize so-called Bad Boy basketball.
Normally, the underhanded tactics that a team may employ to obtain a particular goal carries little weight with me in terms of an assessment of a game or performance.
What's fair is fair.


Second National reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Front-Runner; Clinton Lays Plans for November With Survivor's Calm Confidence
Bill Clinton says he will not be another Michael S. Dukakis.
If President Bush's press secretary wants to throw around slurs like "Slippery Bill," as he did last week, Mr.
Clinton says, he will counter.
Very quickly, he demonstrates: Mr.
Bush could be the "poster child of 1992 on slickness."


College Board Announces Project To Alter High School Curriculum
In a move that could put the College Board in a good position to influence the national debate on standards and testing, the board has announced a project that it says could redefine what high school students need to know.
The program, called "Pacesetter," would use the latest consensus by educators on what secondary students should know in English, mathematics, science, world history and foreign languages to develop a curriculum and test for high school students, said Donald M. Stewart, president of the College Board, who announced plans for the program on Wednesday.
The College Board also administers the Scholastic Aptitude Test to college-bound high school students.


Hey You Legends! Prepare to Fall
There may be someplace in the world where youth is still cautioned to respect its elders, but it's not the men's tennis circuit, as five legends of the game found out last week.
For the first time since 1981, BJORN BORG, GUILLERMO VILAS, JIMMY CONNORS, JOHN McENROE and IVAN LENDL were all in action in grand prix events, and all five met with an early and unceremonious end.


Guardian Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Washington Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Cassidy's Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Comdata Holdings Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


It's N.F.L. or Bust By Way of Ontario
ALEX IKONIKOV, how dare you turn pro?
Of the 34 underclassmen who entered the National Football League draft last week, 22 were selected.


Sony Venture to Start Game Show Channel
Sony Pictures Entertainment and the United Video Group are joining forces to start the Game Show Channel for cable television in 1993.
Sony Pictures Entertainment's holdings include Merv Griffin Entertainment, as well as the producer Chuck Barris's library of television shows.
That gives it control over a host of game shows, including "The Gong Show," "The Newlywed Game," "Wheel of Fortune" and "Jeopardy."


Fischer &amp; Porter Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Miss Campbell Has Wedding
Stasia Ellen Campbell, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Nicholas J. Campbell of New Canaan, Conn., and Dr.
Thomas Spentzas, the son of Brig.
Gen. and Mrs.
Theoharis Spentzas of Arta, Greece, were married yesterday in Stamford, Conn.
The Rev.
Constantine Mathews performed the Greek Orthodox ceremony at the Church of the Annunciation.
Mrs.
Spentzas is a market representative at the May Merchandising Company in New York, a subsidiary of the May Department Stores Company.
She graduated from Providence College.
Her father is the managing partner in the Stamford office of Arthur Andersen &amp; Company.


Macy Affirms Store Plan
A spokesman for R. H. Macy &amp; Company reiterated yesterday that the company was likely to close about 10 of its 120 department stores across the country as part of its bankruptcy reorganization.
But the spokesman, James Fingeroth, said Macy had not yet decided which stores might be closed, and he described as "way off base" an article in Crain's New York Business that said Macy would close 15 to 30 stores, many in the New York area, by the end of the year.


Oshkosh Truck Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Modine Manufacturing reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Minister's Suit Asks Ban of Film About Censorship
An award-winning documentary about recent clashes over censorship, art and pornography in the United States has been dragged into the cultural battles it chronicles.
For the last seven months, the English documentary, "Damned in the U.S.A.," has been withheld from distribution in this country because of a lawsuit against the film's producers filed by the Rev.
Donald E. Wildmon, an anti-pornography crusader from Tupelo, Miss., who is interviewed in the film.


United Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Franklin First Financial reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Selective Insurance Group reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Registration Is Revoked
Federal regulators said today that they had revoked the registration of an investment adviser accused of illegal operations that caused losses of more than $100 million to clients, mostly small counties and towns.
The company, Institutional Treasury Management Inc., was controlled by Steven Wymer, 43 years old, a Newport Beach, Calif., millionaire who in February settled civil fraud charges brought by the Securities and Exchange Commission over the firm's operations.


COMPANY NEWS: The Export Frontier; A Hat Company Profits In Many Markets Abroad
Until two years ago, the Bee Hat Company, a small family hat maker founded in 1926, never even considered trying to sell abroad.
Yet today, it exports its variety of zany hats -- from suede-visored baseball caps to Davy Crockett-style fur numbers -- to 30 countries from Sweden to Singapore.
Israel and Bermuda are the latest additions to Bee's growing list of export markets.
The St.
Louis company's exports of $280,000 lifted its total sales to $3.2 million last year, when the American market was sluggish, making the difference between profit and loss, according to Stewart Dahlberg, the 36-year-old vice president who runs Bee's overseas business.


Will Washington Heed the Marchers?
With a trembling voice and his face tormented by the hateful aftermath of an unjust verdict, Rodney King spoke to, and for, us all.
He told us simply and poignantly that the violence must end, and that we must work this out together.
As the flames rose in Los Angeles, dust from the city's ashes fell on each of us.
We deplored the violence but understood the outburst of a city filled with pain and despair.
The fires have stopped, but the destruction will take generations to fully repair.


Western Co. of North America reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Why White House Plays the Libya Card
To the Editor:
Accusing Libya of involvement in terrorism is not new.
Libya has been linked with incidents before, along with other Muslim countries: Iraq, Syria, Lebanon and Iran.
What is new in the case of the bombing of Pan Am Flight 103 over Lockerbie, Scotland, as well as the explosion on a French DC-10, is that Libya is being held solely responsible.
With sanctions now imposed (front page, April 15), the United Nations has been brought in to do the dirty work of the British-American alliance against the Muslim world and third world countries.


Allstate Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Chesapeake Utilities Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


The Growing Business of Helping Things Grow
It is springtime, and nature must once again be made to behave.
No riot of chickweed, henbit or dandelion may on the lawn appear.
No bag worm in the spruce or arborvitae, no leaf miners in the birch nor lace bugs in the azaleas are allowed.
These and other signs of nature taking its course, especially including tall, unkempt grass, are subdued by determined homeowners backed by an army of lawn and garden maintenance workers now deep in their annual routine of mulching, feeding, mowing, pruning, poisoning, aerating and de-thatching until each flower and fruit, each blade and leaf are in their right order.


Republic Automotive Parts reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Alberta Energy reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Elscint Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


The Fight for Mr. Bush's Mind
Following the waves of urban violence 25 years ago, President Johnson announced an "unconditional war on poverty." Later this week George Bush flies to Los Angeles to deliver his response to urban violence 1992.
He lacks Lyndon Johnson's passion for the poor.
He surely lacks for easy access to funds.
What he does have is a priceless opportunity to face up to a subject he rarely touches -- the racial and economic divisions laid bare by the violence.
In the last few days, Mr.
Bush has sensibly balanced justice and order.
But what of substance?
Even now, his aides struggle for his mind.


Help for the Long-Term Jobless
President Bush is stalling again on insurance for the long-term unemployed.
Having blocked emergency long-term benefits last year until the recession was 17 months old, he now stands in the way of further temporary benefits
and
permanent reform. Both are needed -- now.
The basic unemployment insurance system provides up to 26 weeks of benefits and, in tightly limited circumstances, 13 additional weeks for the long-term jobless.
Tighter eligibility rules enacted early in the Reagan Administration have reduced the program's basic protection to the point where only about 40 percent of the unemployed were covered in the current recession, roughly one-fifth less than in 1980.


Express Cash International reports earnings for Year to Jan 31


CHRONICLE
WILSON PICKETT, the rhythm and blues singer, agreed yesterday to pay $6,500 and to enter an alcohol rehabilitation program as part of an agreement with JEAN CUSSEAUX, his former girlfriend.
In exchange, she will drop assault charges against him.


Saberhagen Has Another Notch in His Holster
In effect, the scoreboard in the second inning read: Bret Saberhagen 2, Astros 0.
Part of the Astrodome population got up to hunt for popcorn.
Others sat back and stared at a bloopers tape on the screen in center field.
People laughed.
People studied statistics.
People didn't head for their cars.
Given their financial investment, it was possible to understand them.
Given their emotional investment, it was hard not to feel sorry for them.
With Saberhagen at the top of his form, a lead for the Mets in the second inning isn't a game any longer.
It's an exhibition.


Israel Galeano, 38, Contra Chief, Killed
Israel Galeano, a former leader of the Nicaraguan contras who was known as Comandante Franklin, died Monday in a car crash in the northern city of Matagalpa, the Interior Ministry said.
He was 38 years old.
Mr.
Galeano's wife, Sandra Mendoza, and the vehicle's driver, Ricardo Ordonez, were being treated at a hospital in Matagalpa, which is situated 65 miles north of Managua, the ministry said.


Rangers Go Back to the Drawing Board
Pittsburgh's defensive strategy choked off the Rangers' offense in the third period of the Penguins' 4-2 victory in Game 1 on Sunday.
The coaching staff of the Rangers had one strategy today: Don't let it happen again.
Coach Roger Neilson put the Rangers through 60 minutes of practice after an hour of watching videotapes in preparation for Game 2 of the Patrick Division finals, Tuesday night at Madison Square Garden.


RIOTS IN LOS ANGELES: The President; WHITE HOUSE LINKS RIOTS TO WELFARE
The White House said today that the riots last week in Los Angeles were a result of social welfare programs that Congress enacted in the 1960's and 70's, but it refused to say publicly whether President Bush would offer any detailed alternative to those "failed" policies in coming weeks.
Other senior officials said that Mr.
Bush favored an extensive lobbying campaign to enact and expand conservative social legislation that Congress has not enacted.


Handle Drops At Aqueduct
Irish Actress and Feten each won a division of the Kingston Handicap yesterday as Aqueduct ended its 107-day winter-spring meeting with a slight rise in attendance and a slight dip in betting.
Racing shifts to Belmont Park tomorrow.
Based on the same span from 1991, the attendance at Aqueduct rose 1.77 percent and the ontrack handle dropped 2.3 percent.
Statewide, including Offtrack Betting parlors and intertrack wagering, the handle at Aqueduct was off by 1 percent.


Toyota Plant in Kentucky Is Font of Ideas for U.S.
The ideas about factory work that the Toyota Motor Corporation was promoting around horse country here at first seemed too simple to be significant, the formulations of people who had only just noticed that thoroughbreds thrive on bluegrass.
But as Toyota rules were tested -- as the company installed cords for workers to pull for help, which they do an average of 3,500 times a day, and systems were developed to improve efficiency and prevent assembly line mistakes -- the brilliance of their simplicity was difficult to deny.


NSC Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Prices Mixed as Trading Slows
Prices of Treasury securities were narrowly mixed in slow trading yesterday as dealers made final preparations for quarterly refunding auctions that begin today.
Over the next three days the Treasury plans to sell a total of $36 billion of new 3-year and 10-year notes and 29 1/2- year bonds.
Market participants were modest sellers of intermediate- to long-term securities to make room for today's auction of $15 billion worth of three-year notes.


With Complaint to Judge, Murder Prosecution Rests
The prosecution rested in the Carolyn Warmus murder trial today after a clash between the judge and the chief prosecutor over whether jurors should be told about what the prosecutors said was significant evidence of Ms.
Warmus's guilt.
The latest in a series of confrontations over evidence occurred after the judge, John Carey, ruled that prosecutors could not introduce the fact that investigators this year found a light-colored hair on a black wool glove that has become the critical piece of evidence in the case.


UAP Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Crown Crafts Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 29


Moog Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Pay-Per-View Games Will Join '92 College Football Lineup
Pay-per-view sports events will take a step toward becoming a regular visitor to cable TV customers in September when ABC Sports gives viewers who pay a fee the chance to watch their favorite college football team, even if that game is aired by the network in other areas.
ABC's college football programming divides the nation into regions and beams games to areas of logical local interest.
On any given week, it produces up to six games at a time, but each region gets only one game.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  MORE SUPPORT FOR SCHOOL AID
Pressure increased on Mayor Dinkins to support a plan for committing hundreds of millions of dollars in Municipal Assistance Corporation money to the public schools, as the City Council joined Governor Cuomo and Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez in endorsing the plan.
B3.
ON THE ROAD, IN QUEENS
Mayor Dinkins took City Hall to Queens yesterday for a week of events aimed at winning over voters in a borough that handed him a stinging defeat in 1989.
Unlike his sojourns to Brooklyn and the Bronx in recent months, where he was dogged by budget problems and ethical embarrassments among his appointees, the political atmosphere was sunny.
An unanticipated surplus has taken the pressure off the city's budget and the city avoided the riots that shook other communities last week.
B3.
SCHOOL BOARD CHIEF SUSPENDED


Orion Capital reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


RESULTS PLUS
AUTO RACING  Practice Records Set at Indianapolis
Jim Crawford and Roberto Guerrero showed yesterday that the eye-popping speeds they ran during private tests in March were no fluke and that the once-questioned reliability of the Buick racing engine might at last be answered.
The King Motorsports teammates took turns breaking the Indianapolis Motor Speedway's unofficial one-lap track record.
Guerrero twice topped 230 m.p.h. and had a fast lap of 230.432 m.p.h. in the morning.
Crawford shattered that mark three hours later with a lap of 232.198 and finished with a 233.433 m.p.h. minutes before the track closed. (AP) TENNIS  McEnroe Trounces Mancini in Germany
John McEnroe opened his bid in the German Open at Hamburg with a 6-1, 6-2 upset of Alberto Mancini of Argentina.
Mancini is ranked 12th in the world in tennis.
Thierry Champion of France overpowered Lars Koslowski of Germany, 6-0, 6-1, in another first-round match.
Champion, with the victory that took only 58 minutes, advanced to a meeting with top-seeded Boris Becker today. (AP)
HOCKEY
U.S. Reaches Quarterfinals
Finland beat Italy, 6-1, in Prague, Czechoslovakia, assuring the United States of a berth in the quarterfinals of the world championships.
The United States team was one of the eight to qualify even though it played a 4-4 tie against Sweden, which also advanced.
Russia beat Canada, 6-4, leaving Canada to play undefeated Finland in the quarterfinals, which begin tomorrow. (AP)


Mitek Surgical Products reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Brooks Bros. Strike Vote Scheduled
Union employees of four Brooks Brothers stores in the New York metropolitan area are poised to take a strike vote tomorrow, after rejecting a proposed new contract, officials of the Amalgamated Clothing and Textile Workers Union Local 340 said yesterday.
"We hope that the company understands that the employees are serious," said Tom Thompson, manager of Local 340.
"This vote shows how unpalatable management's offer is."


Central Hudson Gas &amp; Electric reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


UniCare Financial reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Q&amp;A
Mammoth Differences
Q.
What is the difference between a mammoth and a mastodon?
And how do they differ from elephants?
A.
A mastodon, also called a mastodont by some authorities, is any one of a large group of extinct elephant-like mammals of varying sizes, most of them larger than modern elephants.
The word mastodont refers to the domed cusps that occurred in pairs along the length of their teeth.
Mastodons emerged perhaps 35 million years ago.


Weldwood of Canada reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Review/Music; Solti at the Helm of the Philharmonic, Ravenously
Georg Solti's extraordinary conducting career has been achieved without certain attributes one attaches to greatness in his field.
When Mr.
Solti conducted the New York Philharmonic at Avery Fisher Hall on Saturday night, profound meditation and revelatory vision were conspicuously absent.
There was little mystery, not much humor and certainly no tenderness in this recitation of Wagner, Liszt and Berlioz.
In their place was energy -- a visceral force of remarkable dimensions marshaled for specific purposes and aimed with fanatic precision.
The Prelude and "Liebestod" from "Tristan und Isolde" at this pension fund benefit was not so much performed as stalked, pounced upon and eaten alive.
There is something of the predatory feline in Mr.
Solti's presence: the calculating gleam of eye, the agile aggressiveness of gesture, a hint of menace that is slightly thrilling.
The Philharmonic players followed Mr.
Solti, eager but nervous and not always together at entrances.
Was he hungry for them as well as Wagner?
One couldn't be too careful.


National Education Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Accounts
*
The New England Honda Dealers Association, Boston, to Leonard Monahan Lubars &amp; Kelly, Providence, R.I., for its $6 million account.
The agency won the account in a review that also included Arnold Fortuna Lane, Boston, and Earle Palmer Brown &amp; Spiro, Philadelphia.


Stuarts Department Stores Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 1


A Housing Program That Builds for Less
To the Editor:
"Make the Most of Spring Creek" (editorial, April 18) discusses two proposals for low- and moderate-priced housing on Brooklyn landfill.
One, to be built by the Starrett Housing Corporation, would provide three- and perhaps six-story buildings for some 17,300 people.
The other, the Nehemiah program of two-story, single-family homes, has revived devastated neighborhoods.
East Brooklyn Congregations sponsors Nehemiah, which would house some 10,000 at Spring Creek.
You favor Starrett.
As the architect for the Nehemiah program since 1984, I can tell you why Nehemiah can build for less.
It is nonprofit; pays no interest during construction; has no sales expenses, lawyer or developer expenses; pays all bills within nine days; uses advanced construction methods, and its functional design avoids unnecessary costs.
JAMES THOMAS MARTINO Hicksville, L.I., April 20, 1992


Dinkins, Bounce in His Step, Goes to Queens
Lifted by praise for his handling of racial tensions after last week's riot in Los Angeles, Mayor David N. Dinkins took City Hall to Queens yesterday for a week of events aimed at winning over voters in a borough that voted against him in 1989.
Unlike the mood during Mr.
Dinkins's sojourns to Brooklyn and the Bronx in recent months, where he was dogged by budget problems and ethical embarrassments among his appointees, the political atmosphere surrounding yesterday's events was sunny.
An unanticipated surplus has taken some pressure off the budget, and New York largely avoided the violence that shook other communities last week.


Bradley Real Estate Trust reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Burt Supree, a Dance Writer, 51; A Village Voice Editor and Critic
Burt Supree, a writer on dance who was a senior editor and dance reviewer at The Village Voice, died on Friday morning in Manhattan.
He was 51 years old and lived in Manhattan.
The cause of death was believed to be a heart attack, said a friend, June Ekman.


Sports of The Times; A Sweet Smell for The Knicks
THOUGH often laughable, the Brooklyn Dodgers' cry of "Wait Till Next Year" still made their fans' winters easier to take.
"You Gotta Believe" stoked Mets' fans in a championship season.
There is no greater current example of the charm and power of hope, meanwhile, than the Knicks, as a team and as individuals.
Their cry, at this moment, as they prepare to play the defending champion Chicago Bulls in the second round of the National Basketball Association playoffs tonight, just might be: "Why not?"
The problem with sports is that there is so much insipid and stupefying bleating about it, about character-building and the playing fields of Eton and Field of Dreams, that when some nice story of real hope and striving comes along, it's often lost in the welter of the blather.


Healthcare Compare reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


AW Computer Systems reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Dinkins Is Pressed to Use M.A.C. Money on Schools
Pressure increased on Mayor David N. Dinkins yesterday to support a plan for committing hundreds of millions of dollars in Municipal Assistance Corporation money to the public schools as the City Council joined Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez in endorsing similar plans.
But the administration held its ground as mayoral aides said that the city could not afford to borrow more through the corporation and that any M.A.C. surplus should be used as a bargaining chip in trading raises for a smaller city work force.


Business Scene; A Worker Share Of Rise in Output
CHRISTOPH SCHMID'S message is a little unusual for the chief of a Midwestern manufacturer.
His company, Luk Inc., supplies the Big Three American auto makers with the majority of the clutch plates they use in their stick-shift transmissions, a highly competitive business.
But Mr.
Schmid says that rising labor costs for Luk's 311 employees here are not a major problem -- and certainly not a reason to shutter the plant and decamp for Mississippi or Mexico.
Not that Luk, a German company, outbids the other manufacturers for workers in this partly rural, partly industrial town, still encircled by grain fields.
Quite the contrary.
The various manufacturers swap wage information so that all use roughly the same scale of $7 to $15 an hour.
But while others stress sticking close to this pay scale and holding down labor costs, Mr.
Schmid preaches generous extra payments to reward his workers for their productivity.
He insists that Luk can offset this extra outlay through constant investment and retraining, so that the factory can produce more clutch plates per worker.


WorldCorp Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Bosnia Is Seeking Foreign Military Aid
Government leaders here rushed to finish an appeal for foreign military assistance today as Yugoslav Army jets rocketed targets above Sarajevo and as Serbian forces stepped up attacks to break up this multi-ethnic republic, news reports and officials said.
Foreign Minister Haris Silajdzic is to make the appeal at an emergency session of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe that is scheduled for this week in Helsinki, Finland.


Scientists Face Rumor On Cancer
PRELIMINARY results from a large Canadian study suggest that women 40 to 49 years old do not benefit from routine mammograms.
But the researchers said there was no truth to reports, circulating at medical conferences, that the study showed that women in the age group who had mammograms were more likely to develop cancer.
Data from the trial have not yet been published, but several months ago rumors began flying that the researchers had found women from 40 to 49 were actually more likely to die of breast cancer if they had a mammogram than if they were screened for cancer by manual breast exam.


CHRONICLE
SUSAN SARANDON, a star of the film "Thelma and Louise," gave birth yesterday to a 7-pound 8-ounce boy, her second child by TIM ROBBINS, star of "The Player." Their son Jack Henry is 3 years old.
Ms.
Sarandon also has a daughter, Eva Amurri, 7.
Cindy Studin-Berger, a spokeswoman for the couple, said they had no plans to marry.


In the Glow of a Cosmic Discovery, A Physicist Ponders God and Fame
On the first day back in his office at the Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory after his own professional "big bang," Dr.
George F. Smoot tasted the celebratory cake and submitted to a shower of confetti, all the while casting a twinkling eye this way and that on the fame now engulfing him.
He was living through what his fellow physicists might call a phase transition in the long process of a scientific discovery.
He had slogged through all the early steps: the definition of the question and the development of a way to answer it, with a set of instruments to be flown on a satellite.
When the data piled up, he and his colleagues had examined the results minutely, checked for errors and cautiously accepted the import of their findings.


Banister Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Pre-Paid Legal Services reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Discuss Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 29


NBC To Show Tripleheader
NBC will air a National Basketball Association tripleheader on Sunday, highlighted by an unusual 6:30 P.M. start for the Knicks-Bulls game in New York -- giving it a half-hour jump on CBS's "60 Minutes."
NBC's games will start at 12:30 P.M. with the Celtics against the Cavaliers, followed at 3 P.M. by Seattle facing the Jazz.
The Knicks-Bulls will follow a news break.


For the 90's, National Security Begins at Home; Making the Adjustment
To the Editor:
Leslie H. Gelb (column, April 17) laments our inability to earn the peace dividend because of the absence of conversion plans.
Consequently, he points out, Defense Secretary Dick Cheney's $1.5 trillion military spending bill over the next five years is less a response to imagined new enemies than a jobs bill.
Unfortunately, the problem is more general.
The inability to accept the dislocation of workers and entrepreneurs also makes us leery of bringing the free trade agreement with Mexico to a vote, of pushing for the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade and probably even leads us to the forcible repatriation of political refugees from Haiti.


New Manhattan Coach To Follow the Flow
FRAN FRASCHILLA, an assistant at Providence for the last three seasons, was named head coach at Manhattan College yesterday, replacing STEVE LAPPAS, who left last month to take the head job at Villanova.
Both Fraschilla and Lappas were Big East assistants with no head-coaching experience; both have New York roots with no playing credentials; both are the same age, 33.
"A lot, however, was different," the school's president, Brother THOMAS SCANLAN, said of the selection processes he oversaw.
"Last time was a gamble on both sides and now things have changed. I think there is a difference between a builder and a developer."


Radioactive Clay
Federal scientists studying a proposal to store high-level nuclear waste deep beneath Yucca Mountain in Nevada have been trying to solve the problem of what to do about radioactive particles dissolved in water.
But a new study suggests they had better also find a way to contain radioactive material trapped in clay.
The call for extra precautions to prevent radiation leaks has come from scientists at the Energy Department's Argonne National Laboratory.
Their findings are reported in the current issue of Science magazine.


RIOTS IN LOS ANGELES: The Democrats; Clinton Tours City's Damaged Areas and Chides Bush
Gov.
Bill Clinton inspected the devastation of South-Central Los Angeles today and sparred with the Bush Administration over political responsibility for the riots in America's second-largest city.
The long-distance exchange with Administration officials in Washington illustrated the potential risks and benefits of Mr.
Clinton's effort to use the riots as evidence of what he describes as President Bush's neglect of race relations, urban problems and domestic social policy in general.


MEI Diversified Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Angolan Rebel Lays Killings to a C.I.A. Plot
Denying American suggestions that he was responsible for repeated human rights violations, the Angolan guerrilla leader Jonas Savimbi has said that two killings in his movement in the last year probably resulted from a C.I.A.-supported plot to overthrow him.
Mr.
Savimbi's statement came in response to a letter from Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d last month demanding that he account for several accusations of killings in his ranks.


Taking a Letter, as Far as Possible
PRACTICALLY everybody has to write a letter at one time or another, but not everyone can write a good one.
Mom or your best friend probably will forgive shaky syntax or grammatical lapses, but business letters are another matter: writing mistakes reflect on the business itself.
Making collections of model letters goes back a long time, but the personal computer has been a boon to the business.
Letters on disk do not have to be retyped, and they are easily edited to fit individual circumstances.


Electronics Associates reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Scott Instruments reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Value Health Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


They Could Have Danced All Afternoon
Some decades ago, when Douglas Fairbanks Jr. was a 16-year-old student in France, he was convinced he looked at least 20.
This illusion -- or delusion -- encouraged him to gather a small group of schoolmates to attend the weekly thes dansants held at a nearby fashionable hotel.
"I thought we could be gigolos," said Mr.
Fairbanks, grinning a little wickedly at the memory.
"But we had absolutely no success."


Corrections
A chart on Sunday headed "Deadly Riots" referred incorrectly to past riots in the Watts section of Los Angeles, in which 34 people died.
They occurred in August 1965.


Harvey J. Levin, 67, Economics Professor
Harvey Joshua Levin, a professor of economics at Hofstra University and a consultant on antitrust and telecommunications matters, died at his home in Garden City, L.I., on Friday.
He was 67 years old.
He died of heart failure, his son said.
Dr.
Levin was an internationally known telecommunications expert who wrote extensively on the political dimensions of radio and television regulation and the implications of communications satellites.


Head of Checking Inquiry Is Retiring From House
In a protest against the public's anger toward Congress, Matthew F. McHugh, the nine-term upstate New York Democrat who headed the House investigation into the checking scandal, said today that he was tired of being reviled for serving as a Representative and would not seek re-election.
"I will admit to some pain and frustration when I find myself frequently put in the position of defending my character simply for being a member of Congress," he said in a statement.
"There is now too great a gulf between my hopeful belief in what our institutions can be and the public perceptions of them."


George Murphy, Singer and Actor Who Became Senator, Dies at 89
George Murphy, a Hollywood actor, singer and dancer who was later elected a United States Senator from California, died Sunday night at his home in Palm Beach, Fla.
He was 89 years old.
He died of leukemia, his wife, Bette, said.


In One Big Sweep, Albany Backs New Voting Laws and Districting
In a pair of decisions that will leave a profound imprint on New York politics for at least the next decade, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo signed the State Legislature's redistricting plan today and the Legislature approved sweeping changes in the state's arcane election laws.
At 10:15 P.M., Mr.
Cuomo issued an unusual memorandum explaining that he had signed the redistricting bills in spite of his opinion that the new legislative maps were seriously flawed.


TSI Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Friday about a Japanese program to help American exporters misstated the number of exporters that have fewer than 500 employees, according to Cognetics Inc.
It is 87 percent, not 87, of 51,000 surveyed.


Moto Photo Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Disabled Children Rally for Financial Aid in Trenton


Bush Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 28


FPI Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Candidate's Record; Federal Contracts Gave Perot His Big Break
In the popular folklore that surrounds him, Ross Perot started his company, the Electronic Data Systems Corporation, in 1962 with a $1,000 check and built it, through grit, determination and good fortune, into the largest data processing company in the world.
While that tale is largely true, it contains another element that Mr.
Perot and his business associates do not always mention: the spectacular financial success of the would-be Presidential candidate, who presents himself as a Washington outsider and a private-sector entrepreneur, began in the mid-1960's with the help of lucrative contracts to administer the Government's medical insurance program for the elderly.
A Question of Image
In addition, questions were raised then about these contracts that belie the image Mr.
Perot likes to promote of himself as a businessman who "plays in the middle of the field, and not along the sidelines." An investigation by a Congressional subcommittee in the early 1970's, for example, explored questions about his conduct in securing the contracts for his fledgling company, which he has since sold to the General Motors Corporation.
The committee's investigation did not find that Mr.
Perot or his company did anything wrong.


Counting On Talent Is Hard to Count Out
As kids do, he dreamed -- dreamed big and had the conviction to assert it.
Not out loud, exactly: Meldrick Taylor of Uber Street, North Philadelphia, was not a brash child.
But at age 10, as he sat in the bedroom he shared with his twin Eldrick and older brother Myron, he felt compelled to declare that vision of the future.
With a black Magic Marker he wrote along the side of a chest of drawers: "I will be champion of the world."


SCANDAL IN ITALY HURTS SOCIALISTS
As Italy gropes its way through a crisis that has left it without a president or a new government, a huge kickback scandal in Milan is rapidly spreading tentacles around the political machine of the Socialist leader, Bettino Craxi, the man who would be the next Prime Minister.
Even for a scandal-weary nation, the unfolding saga of nepotism, million-dollar corruption, Swiss bank accounts, phone-taps and possible links to the Mafia has proved obsessive, reminding Italians of just why they mistrust most people in office and showing that Milan, the country's industrial and financial heart, is no longer the squeaky-clean city it once professed to be.


Lincoln National Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Patterns
Bullocks Looted
The landmark Bullocks Wilshire store near downtown Los Angeles was hard hit by looting last week.
The grand Art Deco ground floor, with its Lalique lighting fixtures, curved wooden displays and spacious aisles, was devastated, Bullocks Wilshire executives said, by rioters.
The accessories, cosmetics, crystal and china departments were virtually wiped out.
Looters found their way to the second-floor designer shops, where high-priced fashions were stolen.
The Chanel shop was also plundered.


Sales 38,981,000 37,701,000


Market Place; The R.V. Indicator Turns Upbeat
Sales of recreational vehicles, those homes on wheels that clog the nation's highways during the summers, appear to be picking up, figures compiled by the industry's trade association show.
That may signal some good news for the nation's economy; many in the industry at least view R.V. sales as a reliable leading indicator.
"The pattern has held for 20-plus years," said H. Wayne Dahl, president of the Holiday Rambler unit of Harley-Davidson Inc.
"Recreational vehicle sales are among the first things to fall off in a recession, and they have always led the recovery." Although Harley-Davidson is best known for its rumbling motorcycles, 25 percent of its revenues come from Holiday Rambler, which makes high-priced motor homes and other vehicles.
A Cyclical Business
David Humphreys, who is president of the Recreational Vehicle Industries Association in Reston, Va., said: "We knew the industry had a history of ups and downs, but at first we didn't believe that we were a leading indicator. But Chase Economics and the University of Michigan's Consumer Research Center found that we were one of the most leading indicators they could find."


Sex and the Amoeba
HOW long can an amoeba go without sex?
While the query might sound like a joke, it is actually a matter of scientific interest.
And the latest finding is: not as long as most experts thought.
Many species are thought to forgo sex, at least for many generations, and some may never have sex, including species of lizards, aphids, mites, rotifers and most of the single-celled protozoans.
As scientists have learned more about the evolutionary benefits of two parents contributing to offspring's genes, they have become more puzzled by the persistence of these asexual creatures.


RIOTS IN LOS ANGELES: A Difficult Lesson; Searing Lesson for Children: How Hate Can Undo a World
Grammar and logarithms were put aside in schools across Los Angeles today as the children of this careworn city returned to classes and struggled to make sense of the chaos that had engulfed them.
Principals gathered children for makeshift assemblies, and teachers tried anything from poetry to word association to coax out the hurt and anger, mining a torrent of emotion at the first mention of the beating of Rodney G. King by four white police officers and their acquittal on Wednesday.


Tougher Standards at CUNY
The City University of New York is imposing tough academic standards and stiffening graduation requirements.
The changes are meant to improve the performance of CUNY students, more than half of whom do not graduate within nine years.
Can the new requirements coexist with CUNY's 20-year policy of open admissions?
Yes, if the public schools give students the preparation they need to succeed in college.
With 200,000 students, CUNY is the nation's largest urban university.
Since 1970, admission has been available to any city high school graduate.
Admission is one thing; graduation another.


Books of The Times; Looking Inward and Finding a National Religion
The American Religion  The Emergence of the Post-Christian Nation  By Harold Bloom  288 pages.
Simon &amp; Schuster. $22.
In his 1982 book "Agon: Towards a Theory of Revisionism" (Oxford University Press) the scholar Harold Bloom amplified the theory of poetic influence he first laid out in his ground-breaking study "The Anxiety of Influence" (Oxford, 1973).
He used that theory to illuminate the works of such American writers as Emerson, Whitman and Hart Crane; and in doing so, he also identified what he saw as essential American characteristics.
American writers, he argued, possess an interconnected drive toward freedom and isolation (think, for instance, of Thoreau and Emily Dickinson), as well as a tendency to rebel against the weight of European tradition by embracing an ethos of radical individualism and self-creation.


Rexene Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Allied Research Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Review/Theater; Giving One-Act Plays Fairest Shot at Success
For 15 years the Ensemble Studio Theater has celebrated spring with a festival of one-act plays, introducing new playwrights and encouraging more experienced ones to flex their talents.
Naturally the quality of the writing varies, but the directing and acting invariably show a play in the best possible light or demonstrate how a play has fallen short of the performance.
In the opening series of Marathon '92, the most evocative work comes from an unexpected source.
In her full-length "Apocalyptic Butterflies" and "The My House Play," Wendy MacLeod has often been overcome by whimsy.
Her one-act play "The Shallow End" speaks with clarity and humor about young women embracing adolescence with all the mixed emotions of their age.


Ranchmen's Resources reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Pay the TB Patients to Come Take Their Pills
To the Editor:
You report (news article, April 20) that New York State will begin making Medicaid payments for someone to watch tuberculosis patients swallow their pills.
This will be done in hospitals, clinics and drug-treatment centers, and is known as "directly observed therapy." Medicaid will pay a weekly rate of $38.82 to $95.90 a patient, and these funds to workers will somehow insure that the medicine is taken.
The effort is intended to deal with patients who fail to complete treatment.
Patients who come to hospitals and clinics are not the problem.
They come there because they have an interest in completing treatment; having someone watch them take pills is a waste of money.


America Service Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Pricing Plans Shift at Hertz And Alamo
The Hertz Corporation, the world's largest rental-car company, expanded its new simplified pricing system yesterday to many business customers, lowering its rates in most cases.
Alamo Rent A Car Inc., the fifth-largest rental-car company, quickly followed with a similar offer.
Two weeks ago, Hertz and Alamo lowered rates on rental cars used on weekends, mostly by vacation travelers.
The new rates, effective today, do not require weekend use of the car and are for businesses travelers not covered by corporate rental contracts.


Sweden Agrees to Let Volvo Raise Its Stake in Procordia
Volvo A.B. reached agreement yesterday with the Swedish Government over the auto maker's links with Procordia A.B., saying it would increase its stake in Procordia but would not merge with the food and drugs company.
The pact appears to end a three-month standoff between Volvo and the Swedish Government, which began on Jan. 25 when Volvo and Procordia announced plans to merge.
If completed, the merger -- an exchange of shares valued at $6.6 billion -- would have been one of Europe's largest.


Century Telephone Enterprises reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Lomas Financial reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


No Room for Reyes
The Montreal Expos designated catcher GILBERTO REYES for assignment yesterday, a day after he completed drug rehabilitation.
Montreal has 10 days to trade Reyes, assign him to the minor leagues or place him on release waivers.
If the Expos attempt to assign Reyes to the minors, he will elect to become a free agent, according to his agent, LISA WELSCH.
Reyes, who hasn't played this season, was faced with having to compete with catchers DARRIN FLETCHER, GARY CARTER and RICK CERONE. (AP)


New Park Is a Success In Old-Fashioned Way
Could it be that Orioles Park at Camden Yards used to be another great ball park in its previous life?
How else can one explain the feeling that is running through some of the Orioles as they settle into the new facility that has the feel of their favorite old pair of shoes?
"I don't know, but it just seems like somebody has played here before," said Mike Flanagan, the veteran Orioles pitcher.
"It seems like it's been here a long time, been proven, like all the kinks are out."


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: On the Issues; Perot Tells Money Managers How to Fix U.S. Education
For nearly a decade, Ross Perot has linked what he believes are the nation's lax schooling standards with America's eroding strength in global industrial competition.
And in a speech on those issues here today before a national convention of professional money managers, Mr.
Perot provided a preview of how his blunt assessments of America's troubles, blended with pledges of quick action and a rapid-fire Texas humor, might sound if he decides to run as an independent candidate for President.


Meridian Diagnostics reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Review/Television; Authorities and Rapists On the Psychology of Rape
If it's a skin flick you're after, try ABC at 10 tonight.
"Peter Jennings Reporting: Men, Sex and Rape" offers a swell assortment of swelling breasts and buttocks, mostly amid the sands and bars of Palm Beach.
And they can be enjoyed guilt-free, since the display is in the cause of increased male sensitivity about rape.
If you have not heard that rape is aggressive behavior against women, you can hear it quite a few times tonight: from a professor of psychology who uses phrases like "sexually aggress"; from convicted rapists who, having picked up the lingo of therapy in jail, are brought forth to instruct others about rejection, degradation and manipulation, and from corrections officers who have learned, possibly from other television shows, that "women are often viewed as objects."


RIOTS IN LOS ANGELES: Political Week; Candidates Turn Riots Into a Campaign Issue
Last week's riots in Los Angeles, which cost 58 lives and shattered a lot of illusions about the nation's progress in coping with poverty, have already begun to affect the 1992 Presidential campaign.
There was evidence of that over the weekend in New Orleans, when Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas and the Democratic Leadership Council, a centrist group that he led for a time, did their level best to avoid sounding like liberal bleeding hearts.
You could almost hear them saying to white suburbanites, "You can trust us to crack down on civil disorder and protect you."


Upper Peninsula Energy Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


A Cry of Concern for the Earth
People have always exploited nature in the belief that the all-encompassing biosphere was so vast and enduring that they could never do it any basic harm.
Events of the last decade have shattered that comforting perception.
That is why delegatesw from around the world are preparing to gather at an "Earth Summit" early next month in Rio de Janeiro.
Above, a map created from satellite data shows the nutrient-rich area of the planet's oceans and seas (lighter grays) and the areas of vegetation on land (darker grays).
Deserts and the Arctic, almost devoid of vegetation are shown in white.
Science Times, Page C1.


Reporter's Notebook; Motley Band Of Brothers Takes Kabul
Es Haq Gailani, the son of a prominent rebel leader, climbed out of his shiny metallic gray Toyota Land Cruiser at the Prime Minister's offices, his clothes traditional but meticulous, the black and white tip of a Mont Blanc fountain pen peeking from his breast pocket.
Around him in a courtyard lined with lilac and cherry trees hovered the men of the mountains, their unshorn locks tumbling from beneath swiftly tied turbans, bandoliers of bullets draped over much-lived-in battle fatigues, their feet shod in muddy sandals or clumsily molded rubber shoes.


Gambino Overseer Named
Robert J. McGuire, a former New York City Police Commissioner, has been appointed to oversee the liquidation of Thomas and Joseph Gambino's garment-district trucking businesses.
The Gambinos, who were accused of forcing garment-industry companies to use their trucks at inflated prices, agreed in February to plead guilty to an antitrust violation, pay $12 million in fines and sell off their trucking companies.


Pirates Rally With 11 Runs in 6th
Pirates 12, Reds 5
PITTSBURGH, May 4 (AP) -- The Pittsburgh Pirates used an 11-run sixth inning to defeat the Cincinnati Reds, 12-5, tonight.
The Pirates entered the sixth trailing by 5-1.
Jose Lind, Cecil Espy and Jeff King had two hits each in the innning, and Andy Van Slyke, who finished the game 4 for 4, had the go-ahead two-run single.
Pittsburgh sent 16 batters to the plate in the sixth, getting nine hits.
Most of the damage -- seven runs, six hits and four walks -- came against a Reds bullpen that was 5-0 with seven saves and a 1.40 earned run average entering the game.
For the second time in six days, the Reds' Tom Browning couldn't make it past the sixth inning against Pittsburgh.
Browning, ejected after the sixth in the Reds' 3-2 victory in Cincinnati last Wednesday, left after Jeff King and Barry Bonds doubled, Steve Buechele flied out and Don Slaught singled in Bonds, making the score 5-4.
Lind doubled off Dwayne Henry (0-1), who drew the loss by retiring just one of four hitters.
Espy's pinch-single scored Lind with the tying run, and Van Slyke's two-run, two-out single made the score 7-5.
Following Van Slyke, the next six batters reached base, with King, Lind and Espy all getting their second hits of the inning.
Dennis Lamp (1-0) got the victory with one scoreless inning in relief of Zane Smith, who allowed nine hits and five runs in five innings.
Pittsburgh had enjoyed only one other 11-run inning this century -- in 1942, against St.
Louis -- and nearly matched the franchise record of 12 runs in an inning, set twice in the 1890's.
Braves 6, Cubs 1
CHICAGO (AP) -- The Chicago Cubs finally scored against Atlanta, but that's all they did.
The Braves won their fourth in a row against the Cubs as John Smoltz, Mike Stanton and Juan Berenguer combined on a five-hitter.
The Cubs were shut out by the Braves three times last week and had gone 34 innings since last July 28 without scoring a run against them.
The Cubs finally broke through in the eighth off Stanton on Jerome Walton's run-scoring fielder's choice.
Smoltz (3-2) had blanked the Cubs, 8-0, on seven hits last Wednesday.
This time, he yielded three hits, walked five and struck out eight in seven innings to improve to 8-2.
The Braves struck for three fourth-inning runs, two on Belliard's single off Frank Castillo (0-3).


For the 90's, National Security Begins at Home
To the Editor:
"Indefensible Defense" (editorial, April 12) is a welcome addition to the all-too-muted debate on reduced defense expenditures.
For the most part, our national decision makers have failed to recognize the extent of the reduced threat to our national security following the collapse of the Soviet Union and the Warsaw Pact.
What is needed now is a revised definition of national security that factors in the well-being and skills levels of our human resources as well as the dangerous pathologies of drugs, AIDS, domestic violence, substandard housing and inadequate health care.
A new definition of national security must also take into account our industrial base, levels of productivity, rates of capital formation, rebuilding of infrastructure and the state of research and development for civilian purposes.


SUIT DEPICTS FIGHT ON M.I.T. FACULTY
A literature professor at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology has startled the university by filing a lawsuit charging that she was harassed for putting traditional scholarly standards ahead of the radical political views of her colleagues.
The professor, Cynthia Griffin Wolff, an authority on Emily Dickinson and Edith Wharton, asserts in the suit that she has been subjected to "a pattern of professional, political and sexual harassment" with the acquiescence of M.I.T. administration officials.
The breach-of-contract and civil rights suit, filed last month in Middlesex Superior Court, seeks unspecified damages from the university.


Scuffle May Jeopardize Tribal Talks
Navajo Indians have been accused of interfering in a pilgrimage to one of the Hopi Indians' most sacred natural shrines, a dispute that threatens to jeopardize negotiations to resolve a century-old land dispute between the two tribes.
The incident occurred last month at a spring that flows under the ledge of a cliff and is captured in a water tank on what is now Navajo land near Pinon, Ariz.
The Hopis say they have made annual pilgrimages to the site for centuries to offer prayers to their deities.
But on April 17, some Navajos interrupted a group of Hopis at the shrine, and there were reports of a scuffle.
One Navajo was said to have removed a Hopi prayer bundle of eagle feathers that had been placed in the spring.


Masur Meets With Public
Kurt Masur, the music director of the New York Philharmonic, is to meet with the public in the second Philharmonic Forum of the season, on May 19 from 5:30 to 6:30 P.M. at Avery Fisher Hall.
He is to describe recent changes, discuss plans for the orchestra's 150th-anniversary season, which begins in the fall, and answer questions.
Deborah Borda, the orchestra's managing director, will be the moderator.
Admission is free.
Information: (212) 875-5709.


RIOTS IN LOS ANGELES: The Overview; As Rioting Mounted, Gates Remained at Political Event
As rioting and arson mounted last Wednesday night, Chief Daryl F. Gates left police headquarters for an hour and a half to attend a political fund-raising event, and after guests asked about beatings and violence that they had just seen on television, he remained there and casually took questions for 15 more minutes.
Chief Gates told fellow guests that his police officers would be unable to help many victims.


Data Measurement Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


CHRONICLE
ELLEN PHILIPS SCHWARZMAN was in Aspen, Colo., in March, warming up before a day of skiing, when she heard the news on television: the DUKE and DUCHESS OF YORK were separating.
"I will never forget it," Mrs.
Schwarzman said yesterday.
"I immediately lost my step and rushed to the phone." The news of the royal schism upset her because the invitations to the Crystal Ball "were stuffed, sealed and in the mail," she said.


GWC Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Abuses at Fish Market


Sharing Horrors of Childhood Sexual Abuse, 3 Join Legal Debate
In legislative testimony and emotional interviews, three women from Long Island have joined a national debate over incest and sexual assault involving children that has led 21 states to extend the statutes of limitations in sex-abuse cases.
The women, in their 20's and 30's, said they were assaulted repeatedly as children, and the experiences inflicted such horrible emotional wounds that they were repressed from memory and resurfaced only recently in nightmares and therapy.


Bally Manufacturing Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Kaneb Pipe Line Partners L.P.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Offshore PipelinesInc., Houston, has filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission for concurrent offerings through its OPI International unit of $70 million in guaranteed senior notes due 2002 and $30 million in convertible exchangeable preferred stock through Bear Stearns.
*
Silgan HoldingsInc. has filed for an offering of senior discount debentures due 2002 to raise $165 million.
The offering will be made through Morgan Stanley.


Pants Now Go Anywhere, Anytime
Uncertain about skirt lengths?
Sure you don't want to throw out your short skirts, but not at all convinced long ones will work for you?
You needn't get caught up in the dilemma.
You can try the pants alternative.
Designers all over the world, in one of those mass movements that traditionally affect the fashion business, have decided that pants are the way to go.
The movement affects traditionalists as well as avant-gardists.
It has resulted in pants that are simply styled classics and those that are boldly decorated, pants that fit the leg as snugly as tights and some that are full and flowing.


Cuts in Public Universities Imperil the Future
To the Editor:
In "Higher Education -- or Lower?" (editorial, April 22), you discuss cutbacks during tough times in New York State.
"But," you write, "the reductions imposed on public universities now cut so close to the bone that it's becoming impossible to ask them simply to take the pain. They cannot keep making cuts this deep and fulfill their assigned mission." In other words, the State University and City University systems cannot continue providing access while the Governor and State Legislature raise tuitions and reduce overall funds.
As chairman of the Hunter College English department, I am faced with cuts so heavy that we will be unable to provide places in required English courses for as many as 900 students who will register for the fall.


Jefferson-Pilot Managers Claim Victory by Proxy
The management of the Jefferson-Pilot Corporation claimed victory yesterday in a bitter proxy battle involving, among other things, the disputed issuance of stock grants to senior executives and directors.
Although ballots are still being counted, Jefferson-Pilot, an insurance and publishing company based in Greensboro, N.C., said a preliminary tally showed that shareholders "resoundingly supported" the company's seven-member slate for the 20-member board.
The company also predicted approval of a proposal retroactively ratifying the issuance of more than 220,000 shares of stock to senior executives and directors in 1990 and 1991.


Olympia &amp; York Denied Any Help From Ottawa
The Cabinet of Prime Minister Brian Mulroney has ruled out any help for financially hard-pressed Olympia &amp; York Developments Ltd., Finance Minister Don Mazankowski said today.
The world's largest privately owned real estate company, fighting to stave off a formal bankruptcy filing, had sought financial assistance from both Ottawa and the provincial government of Ontario, but Mr.
Mazankowski insisted the matter could best be resolved in the private sector.


Corrections
A report on April 26 about the engagement of Heidi C. Bruckner to Kurt B. Fliegauf misidentified Mr.
Fliegauf's mother.
She is Kathleen Fliegauf.


Nortek Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 28


With Pot of Fiscal Gold, Proposals for Mining It
In preparation for the fiscal year that begins July 1, the Dinkins administration is seeking various forms of financial help from the Municipal Assistance Corporation.
The state-run corporation was set up to borrow money for New York City during the city's fiscal crisis of the mid-1970's by issuing bonds that are backed by city sales-tax revenues.


Window-Smashing and Looting Spree Erupts in Toronto


Little-Used Leyritz Becomes Yankees' Designated Hit
Most of his time has been spent watching games from the dugout, but tonight Jim Leyritz stepped up to the plate and helped the Yankees end their losing streak at two games.
Leyritz, the designated hitter with a left-hander on the mound, had three hits and drove in four runs in the Yankees' 7-5 victory over the Seattle Mariners at the Kingdome.
It began a seven-game trip for the Yanks that moves to Anaheim, Calif., on Wednesday and to Oakland on Friday.


Algeria Sentences 12 Militants to Hang
An Algerian military court sentenced 12 men today to hang for the murder of three army soldiers.
The 12 were said to belong to an outlawed Muslim fundamentalist opposition party.
The sentence was the most severe punishment yet inflicted on opponents of the military-backed Government, which took over in January after a coup forced President Chedli Benjedid out of office and replaced him with a High State Council headed by Mohammad Boudiaf.


People
*
Raymond S. Caruso was named to the new position of executive vice president at Lord, Sullivan &amp; Yoder Inc., Columbus, Ohio.
He was previously executive vice president and general manager of the Midwest region for Backer Spielvogel Bates Inc. in Columbus.


Statesman Group reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Classical Music in Review
Sylvia McNair  Soprano Weill Recital Hall
Of all the annoying audience intrusions at Sylvia McNair's recital on Friday evening, the most puzzling was the riffle of turning pages during the song "Rabbit at Top Speed" from Leonard Bernstein's "Bonne Cuisine." Why did any listener who understood English have to follow a printed text with this most communicative of singers?


Vital Signs Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


MediaLogic reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Fulton Panel Gets Details On Violence
A parade of witnesses, some of them hooded in fear of retaliation, described yesterday how merchants were subjected to violence and intimidation at the Fulton Fish Market in Manhattan despite repeated attempts to wipe out corruption and abuses at the market.
For innocently parking in the wrong spot at the market, a Brooklyn restaurateur said, he was set upon by a gang of 25 men who clubbed him with dock hooks and wrecked his car.


Qume Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29


Newspapers Seek Way Out of Income Drought
The unusually down-to-business tone of this year's annual convention of the American Newspaper Publishers Association became apparent early Sunday morning, a day before the convention formally began at the Waldorf-Astoria Hotel in Manhattan.
A workshop was scheduled for 8:30 A.M., and it was so jammed with eager publishers that extra chairs had to be brought into the room, and there were not enough hand-out materials to meet the demand.


The Attack of the 8-Legged Vampires of Doom!
THIS is $ weep$ month for television, that vital time when someone somehow counts how many people watch which show.
Coincidentally, sweeps month happens to be when TV uncovers the hottest, sexiest, scariest stories of the year, the ones about women stealing their sisters' husbands, engagement-ring ripoffs, supermarket scams, sex after 60 and how your dinner plates just might be poisoning the children tonight.


Classical Music in Review
'Bitter Music'  Musicians Accord Lesbian and Gay Community Center
In 1935, Harry Partch went on the road and lived the hobo's life.
His travel journal from those eight months is interspersed with a curious form of incidental music.
Some takes the full form of songs with bare accompaniments; others are imitations of speech in which the inflections of conversational flow are aped simultaneously on the piano.
Partch's subjects were the unemployed itinerants of the Depression; he was one of them.


Veterinary Centers of America reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Chief of F.A.O. Schwarz Announces Resignation
Peter L. Harris, who has been right-hand man to Santa Claus since he joined F.A.O.
Schwarz in 1985, announced yesterday that he would resign as president and chief executive as soon as the parent company found a replacement.
He said his decision to leave the chain of 26 toy stores was "a really interesting quandary, because I have the best job in the world, but at the same time the only thing I love more than F.A.O. Schwarz is my family."


Ketchum Directory In Yellow Pages Deal
Underscoring the importance of Yellow Pages advertising, Ketchum Directory Advertising in Los Angeles said yesterday that it had acquired part of the operations of Mast Advertising &amp; Publishing in Kansas City, Mo., from the Southwestern Bell Corporation.
Terms were not disclosed.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League
BALTIMORE ORIOLES -- Activated Glenn Davis, first baseman, from the 15-day disabled list.
Optioned Luis Mercedes, outfielder, to Rochester of the International League.
CHICAGO WHITE SOX -- Optioned Roberto Hernandez, pitcher, to Vancouver of the Pacific Coast League.
Purchased the contract of Shawn Abner, outfielder, from Vancouver.
SEATTLE MARINERS -- Sold the contract of Alonzo Powell, outfielder, to the Chinichi Dragons of Japan's Central League.
TEXAS RANGERS -- Placed Julio Franco, second baseman, on the 15-day disabled list.
Activated Monty Fariss, infielder; Bill Haselman, catcher, and John Barfield, pitcher, from the 15-day disabled list.
Optioned Haselman and Barfield to Oklahoma City of the American Association.
National League
CHICAGO CUBS -- Purchased the contract of Jeff D. Robinson, pitcher, from Iowa of the American Association.
Optioned Heathcliff Slocumb, pitcher, to Iowa.
NEW YORK METS -- Activated Bill Pecota, infielder, from the 15-day disabled list.
Optioned Jeff McKnight, infielder, to Tidewater of the International League.
MONTREAL EXPOS -- Activated Gilberto Reyes, catcher, from the 15-day disabled list and designated him for assignment.
PITTSBURGH PIRATES -- Placed Kirk Gibson, outfielder, on waivers for the purpose of giving him his unconditional release.
Recalled Paul Miller, pitcher, from Buffalo of the American Association.
Southern League
CHATTANOOGA LOOKOUTS -- Activated Jason Satre, pitcher, from the 15-day disabled list.
Optioned Johnny Ray, pitcher, to Cedar Rapids of the Midwest League.
Basketball  United States Basketball League
NEW JERSEY JAMMERS -- Signed Jon Blalock, Walter Hurd, Tony Smith, Derrick Canada and Kevin Green, guards; Dan O'Sullivan, center; and David Van Dyke and Damon Patterson, forwards.
Named Jackie Kuhnert assistant for basketball operations and Dave Hopla director of scouting.
World Basketball League
DAYTON WINGS -- Activated Joe Ward, forward.
Waived Kato Armstrong, guard.
Football  National Football League
GREEN BAY PACKERS -- Signed Bryan Wagner, punter and kickoff return specialist.
LOS ANGELES RAIDERS -- Released Jerry Robinson, linebacker.
LOS ANGELES RAMS -- Signed Matthew Veatch, quarterback; John Fisher, center; Darian McKinney, tight end; Eric Buckley, safety, and Jessie Chavis, defensive back.
MIAMI DOLPHINS -- Signed Jeff Dellenbach, offensive lineman. Canadian Football League
TORONTO ARGONAUTS -- Re-signed Dave VanBellegham, defensive back.
Hockey  National Hockey League
LOS ANGELES KINGS -- Fired Tom Webster, coach.
TORONTO MAPLE LEAFS -- Fired Tom Watt, coach, and announced he will stay with the club as director of player development.
International Hockey League
PEORIA RIVERMEN -- Named Jim Small sales manager.
Soccer  American Professional Soccer League
TAMPA BAY ROWDIES -- Signed Jean Harbor, forward, to a two-year contract. College
BALL STATE -- Named Robyn Markey women's basketball coach.
BAYLOR -- Named football coach Grant Teaff athletic director, effective May 31.
LEHIGH -- Named Frederick D. LaPlante, track and field and men's cross country coach.
MANHATTAN -- Named Fran Fraschilla men's basketball coach.
MASSACHUSETTS -- Announced the retirement of Frank McInerney, athletic director, and that David Bischoff, dean of athletics, will step down to take the job of supervisor of the university's new hockey rink.
MERCY -- Announced the resignation of Carol Leib, women's basketball coach.
NORTHEAST CONFERENCE -- Promoted Denise Gormley, administrative intern, to assistant for public relations, championships and compliance.
PLYMOUTH STATE -- Named Winifred Ann Hohlt women's field hockey and lacrosse coach.


Delrina Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Corrections
An article on April 25 about European Community efforts to halt fighting in Yugoslavia misstated the religious makeup of the breakaway republic of Macedonia.
It is mostly Orthodox Christian.


Providence Energy Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


HIGH COURT VOTES TO FURTHER LIMIT PRISONER APPEALS
Overturning a precedent of the Warren Court era, the Supreme Court today effectively shut the door on an important route of Federal court appeals for state prison inmates.
By a 5-to-4 vote, the Court ruled that Federal courts were no longer obliged to grant a hearing on a state prisoner's challenge to his conviction, even if the prisoner can show that his lawyer had not properly presented crucial facts of the case in a state-court appeal.


BASKETBALL: DRIVING FORCE -- Can the Bulls Be Stopped?; Knicks May Have a Shot If They Get a Little Push
John Salley said it.
Bill Laimbeer said it.
Isiah Thomas said it.
The Detroit Pistons, whose two-time championship-team concept was badly broken, were still in near-perfect harmony off the court.
It was as if they had met to draft a statement regarding the Knicks' chances of competing with the defending champion and heavily favored Chicago Bulls.
The words weren't always exact, the depth of their conviction varied, but the message was unmistakably the same.


Penn Treaty American Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Pitt-Des Moines Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


INSIDE
House Subpoena Upheld
A Federal judge upheld a subpoena for the records of the House bank, rejecting the request of five Democratic Representatives.
Page A14.
Tonys Dance to 'Jelly's' Beat
"Jelly's Last Jam" led the musicals and "Dancing at Lughnasa" the plays in Tony nominations.
Page C13.


Grubb &amp; Ellis Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


TIE/Telecom Canada reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


RIOTS IN LOS ANGELES: An Assessment; For Police, Another Embarrassment
In this wounded city of smashed and smoldering buildings, one of the casualties is the Los Angeles Police Department, caught by surprise, overwhelmed and humbled by two days of uncontrolled rioting.
Already tarnished by the videotaped beating of Rodney G. King, a black motorist, at the hands of four white Los Angeles police officers, the department, under the leadership of its proud and combative Chief, Daryl F. Gates, had fought for its reputation, resisting calls for change.


Executive Changes
ABEX LTD., Battle Mountain, Nev., a mining company, appointed Giles H. Florence president.
CENFED FINANCIAL CORP., Pasadena, Calif., named Patrick Hartman senior vice president and chief financial officer of Cenfed Financial and its Cenfed Bank subsidary.
ESSEX BANCORP, Virginia Beach, Va., a savings bank unit of Essex Financial Partners, appointed Gene D. Ross president and chief executive.
FOSTER WHEELER CORP., Clinton, N.J., an engineering, construction, manufacturing and management concern, named Richard J. Swift executive vice president.
MONROE MUFFLER BRAKE INC., Rochester, a car-repair chain, named Robert W. August and Jarret J. Lobb senior vice presidents.
POE &amp; ASSOCIATES INC., Tampa, Fla., an insurance agency, named Bernard H. Mizel president of a newly formed division and a corporate executive vice president.
PROMUS COMPANIES, Memphis, parent of Harrah's Casino Hotels and other hotel chains, appointed Colin V. Reed senior vice president for corporate development.
SALOMON BROTHERS, New York, named Henry S. Miller managing director and head of the transportation group.
U.S.
BIOSCIENCE INC., West Conshohocken, Pa., a pharmaceuticals company, appointed Donald O. Brown senior vice president for pharmaceuticals operations.
UNITED DISTILLERS NORTH AMERICA, Stamford, Conn., a unit of United Distillers, London, named Ove Sorensen president and chief executive.


Niagara Exchange Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


'Jelly's Last Jam,' With 11, Leads in Tony Nominations
"Jelly's Last Jam," the musical that chronicles the life and times of the pioneering jazzman Jelly Roll Morton, came in first in the Tony Award nominations sweepstakes yesterday with 11 selections, including ones for best musical, best original score, choreography, lighting and scenic design.
Also chosen in the best-musical category were "Crazy for You," the Gershwin comedy set in the 1930's, which took nine nominations; "Falsettos," William Finn's tragicomic musical about a man who leaves his wife and son for a male lover, which won seven nominations, and "Five Guys Named Moe," the musical romp that celebrates the songs of the band leader and alto saxophonist Louis Jordan.
"Five Guys" took one other nomination, for best book of a musical.


Japan's Markets Closed
Japanese financial markets were closed for a holiday yesterday, and they are also closed today.
On Friday, the last trading day on the Tokyo Stock Exchange, the Nikkei index of 225 issues fell 87.32 points, or less than 1 percent, to 17,303.39.


Suffield Financial reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Revival on Broadway Is Broadway; Theater District Businesses Give the Season Rave Reviews
In a parking lot on West 46th Street, the measure of Broadway's success often comes down to this: At what time can Frank Gonzalez play chess?
With remarkable speed and even more remarkable dexterity, five guys -- none named Moe -- wheel the BMW's, Mercedes-Benzes and Lincoln Continentals of harried theatergoers into spaces prudent drivers might consider best suited for Volkswagens.


Serv-Tech Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
Toyota's production techniques at its Kentucky factory are being hailed as a model of how to change the American way of mass production and help factories make everything more efficiently, from cars to copiers, jets to dishwashers.  [ Page A1. ]  Detroit has been slow to adopt Japanese manufacturing principles.  [ D8. ]
Visa and Mastercard are fighting a heated battle to sign up banks to issue their debit cards -- the next generation of plastic competing for space in American wallets.  [ D1. ]


KN Energy reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Pfizer Agrees to Sell Coty Unit for $440 Million
Pfizer Inc. said yesterday that it had agreed to sell its Coty fragrance and cosmetics business for $440 million to Joh.
A.
Benckiser G.m.b.H., a German household products company.
Analysts said the price represented a premium for the division -- which markets fragrances like Stetson and Tribe -- and reflected Benckiser's eagerness to expand in the fragrance industry.
Benckiser paid 1.6 times Coty's annual sales of $280 million in 1991, which were 4 percent of Pfizer's total sales.


Cyanotech Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Trilogy Resource reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


GB Foods Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Where Executives' Vagabond Shoes Are Longing to Stray
START spreading the news.
A small but growing number of top advertising executives want to be a part of it -- New York, New York.
For the last decade, executives who could make it there have been making it, well, somewhere else, like Chicago, Los Angeles, Minneapolis, Portland, San Francisco and Seattle.
Now, though, some of the industry's best-known and most-respected names are moving to New York from other parts of the country.


Raids by Israelis and Allies Kill 5 in Southern Lebanon
Five Lebanese were killed and 15 wounded today when Israeli troops and allied militiamen struck villages in southern Lebanon, security officials said.
The officials said the deaths occurred in Mashghara, a few miles northeast of the enclave that the Israel Army occupies in southern Lebanon in cooperation with the South Lebanon Army.


Subpoena Upheld for House Bank Data
A Federal judge today upheld a subpoena for the records of the House bank, rejecting the request of five Democratic members of the House of Representatives who sought to have it blocked.
The lawmakers had asserted that investigation of the House bank by the Justice Department violated the lawmakers' rights of privacy, was motivated by politics and would impinge on the ability of the House to investigate and work with the executive branch.


A Pivotal Gene Commands Cells To Grow or Die
SEARCHING amid the twisted wreckage of chromosomes found at the heart of nearly all human cancer cells, scientists have identified a handful of molecular aberrations that seem to be, not the incidental debris that comes with malignant transformation, but the fundamental defects that helped spawn the cancer in the first place.
Among the most dangerous and widespread mutations they have found is one that disrupts a gene with the deceptively folksy name of myc, pronounced mick.
Whether in tumors of the breast, brain, bladder, blood, lung, colon or other body parts, myc has been seen skulking about in a state of frightening disrepair.


A Green Revolution in Printers
THE recent Earth Day observations provided an opportunity to observe how the personal computer can help people support ecological causes and how people can help make computers less taxing on the environment.
It may seem oxymoronic to call computer printers "environmentally sensitive." Printers are voracious consumers of paper, and thus of trees.
An intriguing new computer printer developed by Kyocera Electronics Inc. is said to be environmentally sensitive, however, not because it uses less paper, but because it has no disposable parts.


Westcoast Energy reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Care Group reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


2 Claims Adjusters Are Killed in Office
Two insurance adjusters were shot and killed today in their office here by a client who had made an appointment to see them, the police said.
Police Capt.
Lawrence Peryer said the victims were Lawrence Biller, 38 years old, and Bruce Horowitz, 46, both of Hamden.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Primaries; Easy Clinton Victory Is Expected In Capital's Democratic Primary
Already well on his way to capturing the Democratic Presidential nomination, Gov.
Bill Clinton is the runaway favorite to win the District of Columbia primary on Tuesday.
The only real issues in the contest are how many of the 17 delegates at stake the Arkansas Governor can win and whether, in the process, he can spark an enthusiastic voter turnout.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-13  JAPAN AFTER THE COLD WAR
The end of the cold war is forcing Japan to recast its dealings with the United States and to break out of a diplomatic stalemate with Asian neighbors.
The 90's are likely to test the ability of the Japanese to become an independent political force without arousing further fear of their economic might.
A1  DEATH SENTENCES IN ALGERIA
Algeria sentenced 13 to death, one in absentia, for killing soldiers.
The 12 were said to belong to an outlawed Muslim fundamentalist party, and their sentences were the most severe so far to opponents of the military-backed Government.
A3  NEW PLATFORM, OLD MESSAGE
Mikhail S. Gorbachev journeyed to an easier, sunnier summit meeting at Ronald Reagan's Presidential library in California, where he shared superpower nostalgia and warned of nationalism's lingering danger.
A3  A PLOT, SAVIMBI SAYS
Denying U.S. suggestions that he is responsible for repeated human rights abuses, the Angolan rebel leader Jonas Savimbi said two killings in his movement probably resulted from a C.I.A.-backed plot against him.
A7  NO RESPITE IN BOSNIA
As Bosnian leaders rushed to finish an appeal for foreign military help, Yugoslav Army jets rocketed targets above Sarajevo and Serbian forces stepped up attacks, news reports and officials said.
A10
An angry U.S. has largely withdrawn from the Yugoslav crisis.
A10  KABUL'S SOCIAL DIVIDE
Reporter's Notebook: The two cultures of triumphant Kabul, the war-dazed Afghan capital.
Those who returned from Pakistan with uncalloused hands smoke imported cigarettes, while weathered soldiers lug assault rifles.
A6  Moria Journal: A South African church for millions.
A4  Winnie Mandela says she will not abandon politics.
A5  Glancing nervously at Iraqi forces, Kurds rebuild in the north.
A8  A kickback scandal spreads around the Italian Socialist leader.
A9  Germany to offer strikers a better wage package.
A11  7 compete to replace Aquino in a close Philippine race.
A13  National A14-28  SHARP LIMITS ON INMATE APPEALS
The Supreme Court effectively shut the door on an important route of Federal court appeals for state prison inmates, ruling that Federal courts are no longer obliged to grant a hearing on an inmate's challenge to his conviction, even if his lawyer had mishandled the appeal.
A1  LIBERALS BLAMED FOR RIOTS
As President Bush met with advisers about the nation's worst urban riots in this century, the White House said the unrest was a result of social welfare programs that Congress enacted in the 1960's and 70's.
A1
Clinton surveyed the scars of South-Central.  A26  HELPING CHILDREN OF 'THE WAR'
Some Los Angeles children are already calling the violent days of last week The War.
In classes around the city, teachers put aside grammar to try to help students deal with worlds that had been shattered.
A1  GATES'S DELAYED RESPONSE
As rioting mounted last Wednesday, Chief Daryl Gates left Los Angeles police headquarters for an hour and a half to attend a political fund-raising and casually answered questions.
A24
One casualty: the Los Angeles Police Department.  A25  REASSESSING PRESIDENTIAL RACE
Like many other medium-size cities, Akron, Ohio, has spent the last few days watching Los Angeles and trying to figure out what it all means for their lives and for Presidential politics.
A25  BEHIND THE PEROT FOLKLORE
He presents himself as a Washington outsider, but lucrative Government contracts were central to his early success, and questions have been raised about how he got those contracts.
A1  A TOYOTA FACTORY'S LESSONS
Toyota's ideas for building cars in Kentucky at first seemed too simple to be significant, but many now say they could change the face of mass production in the U.S.
A1  SUBPOENA OF HOUSE BANK UPHELD
A Federal judge upheld a subpoena for the records of the House bank, rejecting the request of five Democratic Representatives who sought to have it blocked.
A14  TENSIONS RISE BETWEEN TRIBES
Navajo Indians have been accused of interfering in a pilgrimage to one of the most sacred natural shrines of the Hopi.
The dispute threatens to worsen a century-old land dispute between the two tribes.
A14  The mystery of an Oakland leftist who was murdered in Russia.
A14  Bail is toughest in San Diego, a study found.
A20  The number of black Ph.D.'s may be rising, a report said.
A21  Metropolitan Digest, B1 ELECTION REVISION IN ALBANY
In a pair of decisions that will leave a profound imprint on New York politics for at least the next decade, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo signed the State Legislature's redistricting plan and the Legislature approved sweeping changes in the state's arcane election laws.
A1  Business Digest, D1  Science Times C1-11  Humanity confronts the impact of mankind's hand on the globe.
C1  A gene emerges as a key in many kinds of cancer.
C1  Looking for the beginning of time: the scientist who led the team.
C1  Arts/Entertainment C13-18  Hollywood reacts to the riots.
C13  Theater: Tony Award nominations.
C13  Music: Georg Solti with the New York Philharmonic.
C13  Ella Fitzgerald.
C14  Word and Image: "The American Religion," by Harold Bloom.
C17  "Peter Jennings Reporting: Men, Sex and Rape." C18  Obituaries D31  George Murphy, former Senator  Burt Supree, writer on dance  Fashion Page B13  Pants now go anywhere, anytime  Sports B14-20  Baseball: Mets defeat Astros, 5-1.
B15  Basketball: Pistons are backing the Knicks B15  Columns: Berkow on the Knicks B15  On Baseball B17  Hockey: Rangers go back to drawing board.
B19  Editorials/Op-Ed A30-31  Editorials A30  The fight for Bush's mind.
Help for long-term jobless.
Tougher standards at CUNY.
Topics: Contagion complaint.
Letters A30  Russell Baker: Not about L.A.
A31  A. M. Rosenthal: If not now, when?
A31  David N. Dinkins: Will Washington heed the marchers?
A31  Jacqueline Jones: Forgotten Americans.
A31


Yugoslav Complication for the I.O.C.
The breakup of Yugoslavia and its reconfiguration into five separate republics may deprive athletes from two of them of the chance to represent their homelands in the Barcelona Olympics this summer.
Earlier this year, the International Olympic Committee confirmed recognition of the breakaway republics, Slovenia and Croatia, allowing their athletes to compete independently and apart from Yugoslavia at the Winter Olympics in France.
Yugoslavia's former national Olympic Committee remains in place, although now it represents only what was once Serbia and Montenegro.


Humanity Confronts Its Handiwork: An Altered Planet
HUMANS have always exploited nature in the belief that the all-encompassing biosphere -- the seamless, wondrously resilient fabric of life, land, water and air -- was so vast and enduring that people could never do it basic harm.
Events of the last decade have shattered that comforting perception.
The moment of awakening may have come in the mid-1980's when governments finally accepted and acted on the evidence that waste industrial chemicals were weakening the stratospheric ozone shield that protects living things from biologically harmful ultraviolet rays.


Ametech Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Go Ahead and Call 'Em Crazy But Knicks Won't Be Sent Away
Pat Riley was paying the Chicago Bulls their due respect today, describing them in a string of superlatives, when he was reminded that few sane people think the Knicks can beat the Bulls in a seven-game series.
Riley's tone quickly changed.


American Realty Trust reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Back to Starting Gate In Search for a Star
What happened in the 118th Kentucky Derby was that a $2,000 horse beat a $7,500 horse, and they both beat an $18 million horse.
What also happened was that the first seven horses were long shots, none of them less than 10 to 1, a couple of them at 33 to 1, the winner at 17 to 1.


Ohio Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Review/Music; In the War of Styles, a Conciliatory Approach
The American Composers Orchestra long ago declared itself a noncombatant in the war of contemporary compositional styles, and for the final concert of the season, on Sunday afternoon at Carnegie Hall, Dennis Russell Davies presented a program that in some ways seemed to reaffirm the organization's ecumenical stance.
The program included three works in distinct styles, each from a different camp.
Yet as diverse as the works were, the program ended up taking a side, however subtly.
For although the pieces occasionally strayed into the realms of atonality, symphonic jazz and exotic modalism, their common ground was conventional Western tonality.


AgriDyne Technologies reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


On My Mind; If Not Now, When?
In a sudden and intensely important way this country has become more united emotionally than it has been for decades -- and therefore has greater reason to hope.
Americans look at the case of Rodney King and most of them come to the same hard conclusions:


RIOTS IN LOS ANGELES: The '92 Campaign; Crisis Casts New Light on Candidates
With its rubber-processing plants and its Goodyear Boulevard and Goodyear Heights, there's no mistaking what city this is: it can only be Akron.
Yet with its mix of black and white faces, its rich and poor schools vying for dwindling money, its overall harmony in day-to-day life, it could be any small to medium-sized city in America.
And like the others, it has spent the last few days moving to the rhythms of Los Angeles, one minute holding its breath, the next sighing with relief, the next trying to figure out what it all means for people here and, this being an election year, for Presidential politics.


Topics of The Times; The Contagion Complaint
No sooner does big trouble arise than someone claims it was incited or inflated by the media.
During the Los Angeles riots last week, policemen and citizens alike insisted that if only the cameras hadn't rushed in for sensational live coverage, fewer people would have been prompted to join in the rioting, looting and arson.
The contagion complaint is often mistaken and, in any case, incomplete.
The Kerner Commission on Civil Disorders found that a voluntary news moratorium during the 1967 Detroit riot had little effect on the scale or scope of the violence.
Even though television news has increased dramatically since then, as long as coverage is responsible, there's no reason to assume the consequences are necessarily negative.


Masco Industries reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Reviews/Television; Geraldo Rivera as a Murder Victim on 'Perry Mason'
The tired but durable "Perry Mason" formula hits on an unusually tantalizing gimmick this evening: Geraldo Rivera as murder victim.
Before thousands weep or cheer, let it be noted quickly that Mr.
Rivera is not really the victim.
He is merely playing the title role in "The Case of the Reckless Romeo," tonight at 8 on NBC.
But the character's resemblance to Mr.
Rivera in several respects stretches coincidence very near to the breaking point.
Ted, as he's called, is the host of "Revelations," a cable-television show specializing in tabloid sensationalism.
"Watch yourself, because someone may be watching you," is Ted's warning to viewers.
A familiar story: The show is sleaze, the ratings are climbing.


Abaxis Inc. reports earnings for Year to March 31


Re Capital Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Perfect in Seven Innings
It wouldn't make the record books in the major leagues, but in the International League, PETE SMITH's performance will be listed as a perfect game.
Smith, a 25-year-old right-hander who has a 19-40 record with the Atlanta Braves, struck out 12 and didn't allow a base runner in seven innings Sunday as the Richmond Braves defeated the Rochester Red Wings, 1-0, in the second game of a doubleheader.


Moria Journal; South Africa's Best Drawing Card: The Church
Joanna Bevula sat patiently on the sun-baked ground in the ranks of pilgrim women as dust settled on their uniform yellow blouses and green scarves and skirts.
Her husband sat apart with the other men according to the custom of the Zion Christian Church.
"We are all Zionists," said Mrs.
Bevula, who brought along three of her seven children to worship at the church's home in the stony hills of the northern Transvaal.


BRIEFS
COLGATE-PALMOLIVE CO. , introduced Palmolive Sensitive Skin, a dish-washing liquid intended to help prevent irritation to hands.
COLLEGE BOUND INC. , Boca Raton, Fla., which prepares students for standardized tests, said its court-appointed receiver had agreed to sell the company's ACSI Inc. subsidiary to the unit's management for $990,000 in cash.
STAR BANC CORP. 's shareholders said they supported Fifth Third Bancorp's unsolicited $1.2 billion, or $40 a share, takeover offer for Star Banc.
Star Banc managers oppose the offer and prefer to stay independent.
Both companies are based in Cincinnati.
MOTOROLA INC. , Schaumberg, Ill., the electronics company, and Northern Telecom, Nashville, the maker of switching equipment, signed an agreement forming the Motorola Nortel Communications Co., a previously announced joint venture that will sell and service cellular telephone networks.
TOSHIBA AMERICA 's Information Systems Inc. said it had cut prices on 16 portable and notebook computers by 10 percent to 22 percent.
UNOCAL CORP., Los Angeles, the oil company, completed the merger of Unocal Exploration Corp. with Union Oil Co. of California.
Each outstanding share of Unocal Exploration common stock held by the public was converted in the merger.


Going to Georgetown
Saying it was always his dream to play for Coach JOHN THOMPSON, the two-time Mississippi high school player of the year, OTHELLA HARRINGTON, of Jackson Murrah High School, signed a national letter-of-intent with Georgetown yesterday.
Harrington, a 6-10 center who averaged 28.9 points, 24.9 rebounds and 5.4 blocked shots a game last season for Class 5-A state champion Murrah, chose Georgetown over Arkansas, L.S.U., Mississippi State and Oklahoma. (AP)


U.S., Frustrated, Backs Off From the Crisis in Yugoslavia
After assuming a leading role in trying to defuse the Yugoslav conflict three weeks ago, the Bush Administration has largely withdrawn from the issue "in anger and frustration," a senior Administration official has said.
This official and others remarked that Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d and his principal aides had been disappointed with the lack of success of earlier United States efforts to influence events in Yugoslavia.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.25-6.5
6.25-6.5
8.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.75
3.75
5.82
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.65
3.61
5.50
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.78
3.73
5.61
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.17
7.17
7.88
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
8.01
8.00
8.21
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.96
8.94
9.26
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.72
6.72
7.23
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


U.S. Banknote Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Christiana Cos.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


ITT Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Danninger Medical reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Concurrent Computer reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Cigna Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Lindal Cedar Homes Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Dow Soars 42.04 to Hit New High
Stocks surged yesterday, lifting the Dow Jones industrial average to another record, as Wall Street welcomed the return of calm in Los Angeles and the return of investors, who fled on Friday, back into the stock market.
The Dow gained 42.04 points, closing at 3,378.13, surpassing the previous record of 3,366.50, set on April 16.
It marked the 18th time since Jan. 1 that the Dow bettered its previous high, a streak of advances that has fed on the seemingly endless procession of hints -- without outright confirmation -- that an economic recovery has begun.


James River Account in Review
The James River Corporation has placed its consumer paper products accounts into review, a spokesman in Richmond said yesterday, confirming reports in this week's issues of the trade publications Adweek and The Delaney Report.
Lyle McGlothlin, manager of external affairs, declined to confirm the reported estimated billings of $15 million.


Royals Bang Out a Victory
Royals 11, Indians 6
CLEVELAND, May 4 (AP) -- Mike Macfarlane and Keith Miller hit two-run homers as the Kansas City Royals beat the Cleveland Indians, 11-6, tonight and won for only the fifth time in 24 games this season.
Kansas City, which began the game with a .214 average and 70 runs, banged out a season-high 15 hits and broke double digits in runs for the first time since last year.
The Royals have won consecutive games for only the second time this season.
Royals reliever Neal Heaton was ejected by home-plate umpire Terry Cooney in the eighth after consecutive inside pitches to Albert Belle.
Belle charged the mound several seconds after the ejection, both dugouts and bullpens emptied and several players exchanged punches.
Royals Manager Hal McRae received an automatic ejection because Heaton had been warned on the first pitch.
The game resumed approximately five minutes later.
White Sox 7, Brewers 0
CHICAGO (AP) -- Alex Fernandez pitched a one-hitter for his first career shutout, allowing a second-inning double to Dante Bichette as Chicago beat Milwaukee.
Fernandez (2-2) struck out seven and walked one.
After Bichette's hit, he retired 21 consecutive batters before walking Paul Molitor with one out in the ninth.
Milwaukee's only other runner was Robin Yount, who reached in the first on a throwing error by shortstop Esteban Beltre.
Twins 6, Red Sox 1
BOSTON (AP) -- John Smiley pitched seven shutout innings against Roger Clemens to gain his first victory for Minnesota, leading the Twins over Boston.
Smiley (1-2), without a victory in his first five starts for the Twins, allowed three hits, walked five and struck out one before Bob Kipper and Carl Willis finished with one-hit relief.
Orioles 8, Rangers 5
BALTIMORE (AP) -- Chris Hoiles hit a grand slam to cap a five-run seventh inning as Baltimore beat Texas for its sixth consecutive victory.
Baltimore has won nine in a row and 10 of 11 in Camden Yards, its best home start ever.
The game drew 36,511, the first time the Orioles failed to draw at least 40,000 to Camden Yards.
Tigers 6, Angels 2
DETROIT (AP) -- Bill Gullickson won his fourth successive start, allowing seven hits in eight and a third innings for Detroit.
Gullickson (4-2) struck out four and walked one as Detroit won its third game in a row, matching a season high.
Mark Leiter finished.
Jim Abbott (1-4) allowed a three-run homer to Dan Gladden in the fifth and a two-run homer to Travis Fryman in the sixth.
Abbott, winless in four starts, gave up five runs and five hits in six innings.
Blue Jays 7, Athletics 3
OAKLAND (AP) -- Todd Stottlemyre won his fourth successive start for Toronto, and Roberto Alomar and Candy Maldonado drove in two runs each.
Stottlemyre (4-1) gave up three runs and five hits in the first four innings before settling down to retire eight of the next nine.
Duane Ward and Tom Henke finished with hitless relief.
Ron Darling (1-2) was tagged for six runs and 10 hits in four and two-thirds innings as the Blue Jays won their second straight following three consecutive losses.
Rickey Henderson hit a leadoff homer for the A's, his first this season and the 51st of his career, a record.


Observer; Not About L.A.
"In your face" is on all lips.
It fulfills the present American urge to talk like a lout.
This singularly nasty way of expressing muscular, bust-skull contempt for one's fellow man and companionate woman is now so popular that it is even being used in an advertising campaign by ESPN.
And yet you tell me not to despair for civilization.
Not despair?
We live in a world where men, women and their small, ill-educated issue can say "in your face" without feeling vile, and I should not despair for civilization?


For the 90's, National Security Begins at Home; Transportation Focus
To the Editor:
"Indefensible Defense" (editorial, April 12) calls for major cutbacks in large, obsolete weapons programs.
You leave out making a responsible transition from military to commercial activity.
You are talking about layoffs for tens of thousands and destruction of many communities across the country at a time of feeble recovery, if any, from deep recession.
Why not use most of the billions saved by cutbacks for a national initiative that uses much of the talent we have?
I am thinking of the speech in which John F. Kennedy set this country on its course to the moon.
Areas that contain a vast range of technology are energy and transportation.
How about unifying this country's efforts in transportation and related energy research under a national transportation initiative?


Pizza and Persistence Win in Hungary
It is close to midnight and George F. Hemingway, a one-man American locomotive for the nascent market economy in Hungary, is swinging his Isuzu Trooper through the gloomy streets here, pointing out the extent of his business empire.
"That's mine," says the burly entrepreneur from Los Angeles, gesturing toward a gourmet food store called Bon Bon Hemingway.
"That's mine also," he adds, as he passes a sports outfitter named USA Sport.
"Mine too," he declares, indicating a Chinese restaurant that, he reckons, serves Europe's finest caramelized bananas.
"And this is my big favorite," he roars, lurching to a halt beside Hungary's first Pizza Hut.


Hollywood Reacts to the Riots With Concern and Bewilderment
Even in normal times, most of the movie stars' palaces in Beverly Hills and Bel Air are heavily gated, with signs on lawns reading "Armed Response." But over the weekend and today, the enormous chasm between the super-rich overlooking the city and the underclass living in it seemed to narrow just a bit.
Although many in the film industry hunkered down even further than usual while the city burned and others fled north to Santa Barbara, a number of prominent figures in show business sought to help out in the riot-torn areas of South-Central Los Angeles.


Thor Energy Resources reports earnings for Year to Jan 31


Wisconsin Public Service reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


11 Arrested in Scuffles at Manhattan Protests
It was a largely peaceful demonstration: some 300 high school students went to City Hall yesterday to add their voices to the nationwide protest over the Rodney G. King verdict, and some of them later joined another gathering outside the Borough of Manhattan Community College, three blocks away.
In the context of the terrible violence that wracked Los Angeles and other cities last week, it was only a footnote.
But for some of the students who later described it to their principal, it was a bitter lesson in the frailty of the social contract when citizens and the police face off on the streets.


Realty South Investors reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Chess
Shortly before the Dutch grandmaster Jan Timman turned 40 in December, he told Dirk Jan ten Geuzendam, his assistant editor for the magazine New In Chess: "It's not only a matter of experience. I've also become stronger." And now he has a chance to challenge the world champion, Gary Kasparov of Russia, in the title match in Los Angeles in the fall of 1993.
Timman's 6-4 victory over Artur Yusupov of Germany in the semifinal world championship candidates match on April 27 in Linares, Spain, has put him into the final.
If he can defeat the British grandmaster Nigel Short in the final elimination, to be held in January 1993, again in Linares, he will get his wish.


Kaneb Services reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


After the Cold War -- Views From Japan; Tokyo in the New Epoch: Heady Future, With Fear
No country prospered more during the cold war than Japan, and perhaps no country is more wistful for that era's comforting certainties.
While the United States and Europe were preoccupied with throw weights and satellite photographs, Japan was able to focus almost entirely on building an economy that became the envy of the world, largely undistracted by, and often profiting from, the superpower rivalry.
For several years now the Japanese have known that those heady days were coming to an end.
Nonetheless, the cold war's demise caught this country strangely ill prepared, forcing it to recast its dealings with its main ally, the United States, and break out of a four-decade stalemate in its diplomatic relations with its most powerful Asian neighbors.


A Neocapitalist Basks With Reagan
Mikhail S. Gorbachev journeyed to an easier, sunnier summit today to share super-power nostalgia with Ronald Reagan and had a word of warning about the lingering "demons" of nationalism threatening the world.
Cautioning that the evil of an "all-embracing xenophobic hatred" is contained in the new wave of "nationalist exclusiveness," the former Soviet President surveyed the world scene from the California mountainside that is the site of the Ronald Reagan Presidential Library.


West Fraser Timber reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Bowmar Instrument reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


ARX Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Seibels Bruce Group Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Vernitron Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


RIOTS IN LOS ANGELES: The Next Chief; Gates's Replacement Refuses to Criticize Response to Riot
The man who is to replace Daryl F. Gates as the Los Angeles police chief at the end of June, Police Commissioner Willie L. Williams of Philadelphia, refused today to criticize the way Chief Gates responded to the riots last week.
But in discussing the wave of violence in an interview in his office here, he made some implicit criticisms as he outlined the way he would have handled the situation.


700 in Alabama Protest Activities of Neo-Nazis
More than 700 people gathered in the heart of Birmingham this evening to remember a homeless black man who was killed here last month and to protest the growing presence and violence of white supremacist "skinheads" here.
"We must bear witness to the fact that this is a city of conscience, a city of concern," said Birmingham Mayor Richard Arrington Jr. to the mostly white audience.


Fortis Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Crestbrook Forest


Detroit Slow to Learn From Japan
Twice in the last 60 years, the Toyota Motor Corporation's top engineers came to Detroit to study America's mass-production system, went back to Japan and figured out ways to improve theirs.
But Detroit has been slow to take what the Japanese have done and bring it back to the United States.
That failure is partly due to the fact that the Big Three have first had to slim down as well, all under intense pressure from the Japanese.
The Big Three must also find a way more fully to involve hourly workers in improving factories.


By Design; Shoulders in a Cameo Role
It's time to turn a cool shoulder.
Some of the newest dresses, sweaters and shirts are designed to leave this part of the anatomy on display.
"It's the most sensual part of a woman's body," says Donna Karan.
Some might disagree with the designer, though no one could miss the provocative aspects of her new dresses and sweaters that have cutout shoulders, but high turtlenecks and long sleeves.


Total Pharmaceutical Care reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Ex-Employee of King Says Promoter Swindled Tyson
Has the promoter Don King fleeced the boxer Mike Tyson?
That was the question raised by emerging revelations from a former financial officer of King's, Joseph A. Maffia.


Fernandez Suspends a Bronx School Chief
Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez took the unusual step yesterday of suspending the president of a Bronx school district that has long been plagued by corruption.
The suspension of Carmelo Saez, who was on the board of School District 9 for 17 years, involves charges that he used district money and workers for private purposes.
But it was only the latest uproar in the southwest Bronx district, where scandal has frequently competed with education.


Inner City Group Needs Volunteers
Reviving Baseball in the Inner Cities, a youth organization sponsored by Major League Baseball, is looking for volunteer coaches, umpires and administrative personnel.
R.B.I., which was started in Los Angeles in 1989 by John Young, a Florida Marlins scout, and began operating in St.
Louis last year, is conducting its first season in New York this year at its field on 100th Street and First Avenue in East Harlem.
Anyone interested in lending a hand should contact Jay Acton, the organization's New York chairman at 212-722-1608.


Henley Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


7 Andy Awards For Chiat/Day
Chiat/Day/Mojo Inc. in New York took top honors last night at the 28th annual International Andy Awards presentation sponsored by the Advertising Club of New York.
Chiat/Day/Mojo won seven of the top awards, called excellence winners, followed by Follis DeVito Verdi in New York, with five.
In terms of total awards, combining the excellence winners with the honors known as awards of distinction, Chiat/Day/ Mojo finished first again, with 14, followed by BBDO New York, with nine.


Mastercard and Visa in a Debit-Card Battle
Visa and Mastercard are fighting a heated battle to sign up banks to issue their debit cards -- the next generation of plastic competing for space in American wallets.
With debit cards, the costs of purchases are deducted immediately from consumers' checking accounts.
Merchants accepting debit cards -- primarily those with high volumes like supermarkets and gas stations -- thus receive immediate payment with consumers' funds, and consumers do not receive monthly bills.


Kings Dismiss Coach
After an underachieving season in which they were bounced from the Stanley Cup playoffs in the first round, the Los Angeles Kings dismissed TOM WEBSTER yesterday after three seasons as head coach.
No replacement was named.


Regal International reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Fernandez, Citing Los Angeles, Urges a School 'Marshall Plan'
Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez yesterday called for an "educational Marshall Plan" to rebuild and recharge the nation's decaying urban schools, arguing that a small investment in Los Angeles's classrooms might have averted the losses in life and property left by the rioting last week.
In making his appeal, at a hearing in the Bronx, the Chancellor joined other political leaders yesterday who invoked the bitter lessons of Los Angeles to buttress the case for some programs they have long sought.


New Chairman Named At Ballet Theater
Stephen J. Friedman has been named chairman of American Ballet Theater, succeeding Charles Dyson, who will remain on the board.
The appointment is effective immediately.


Rise in Number of Black Ph.D.'s Is Reported
The number of black Ph.D.'s has risen after a decade of decline, according to new figures made public today by the National Research Council.
The council report showed a 13 percent increase in the number of blacks earning Ph.D.'s from 1989 to 1991.


Kenan Transport Co. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


In Untangling Election Laws, Albany Votes Spending Caps
The New York Legislature today passed the first comprehensive revision in years of the state's notoriously cumbersome election laws, but the new lower limits it sets on campaign contributions in New York City races would not take effect until after the 1993 Mayoral election.
The delay would benefit City Council President Andrew J. Stein, the only likely major contender who is not accepting public matching money, by allowing him to continue to accept individual contributions of up to $100,000, rather than the limit set by the new law, $37,000.
Legislators agreed to the delay after lobbying by Mr.
Stein and his father, Jerry Finkelstein, a politically influential publisher of legal and community newspapers in New York City.


Belmac Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Suave Shoe reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Winnie Mandela Refuses to Abandon Politics
Winnie Mandela's separation from her husband, Nelson, and her forced resignation as the head of social welfare operations in the African National Congress have failed to dampen her voice or remove her from South Africa's political scene.
She demonstrated her staying power on Sunday when she was re-elected regional chairwoman of the congress's Women's League in greater Johannesburg.
She won after two other nominated candidates declined to oppose her.


Review/Music; A Lifetime Of Joyous Improvising
Ella Fitzgerald's sold-out show at Radio City Music Hall on Saturday night picked up a bit during the second half.
The trumpeter Clark Terry came out and did a short set, playing a trumpet and a fluegelhorn at the same time, running through a funny scat solo that mimicked various accents and playing a gorgeous version of "God Bless the Child." When Ms.
Fitzgerald joined him, singing "Willow Weep For Me," her voice became supple, and she suddenly found her pitch.
She began to improvise, rolling phrases that moved gracefully, until her voice darted up to hit high notes.
Like most other jazz musicians, Ms.
Fitzgerald likes a challenge, and Mr.
Terry provided it.
Memory serves all sorts of functions, and one of its best is allowing the past to change a tattered present for the better.
Like Miles Davis in his last decade, Ms.
Fitzgerald, by the simple act of being on stage and throwing off a few choice notes, can recall for an audience a lifetime's worth of her work.
Ms.
Fitzgerald's singing has consistently exemplified a carefree ethos, linked to a joyous sense of improvisation, and she has left American music better for it.


Classical Music in Review
'King David'  Riverside Church
Arthur Honegger complained bitterly that true fame and recognition had passed him by.
Sunday afternoon's performance of "King David" by the Riverside Choir and the Chancel Choir of the Congregational Church in Danbury, Conn., helped a little to explain this Swiss composer's larger presence in the 1920's and his absence from most musical pantheons today.


Jerry Robinson Let Go
JERRY ROBINSON, a standout for the Los Angeles Raiders and Philadelphia Eagles for more than a decade, has been released by the Raiders "by mutual decision" between him and the team, the Raiders said yesterday.
Robinson, 36, recently cleared waivers.
In 1990, he led Los Angeles with 63 tackles and started all 16 games.
But in 1991, his playing time diminished significantly. (AP)


Topics of The Times; A Fine Day
Last Friday, work-bound New Yorkers, their thoughts conditioned by Los Angeles, felt the racial chill in subways and coffee shops.
On Sunday, in Central Park, they felt warmth, and not just from the temperature.
Suddenly, with the first fine weather of a gray spring, there were as many people in the park as new leaves on the trees.
And in every corner of the park, people seemed eager to display a relaxed acceptance of diversity.
An Asian couple in denim jackets strolled hand in hand through Strawberry Fields, and joked with a black man shepherding eight children.
A young white man in a T-shirt was talking movies with a young black woman: "Goldie Hawn is unbelievable!" A woman in a straw hat spoke French to her little girl, who answered in English.


AlaTenn Resources reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Maple Leafs Drop Watt
With the Toronto Maple Leafs having failed to reach the playoffs the last two seasons, TOM WATT was dropped as head coach.
He will stay with the National Hockey League team as director of player development.
No new coach was named.
Watt coached the Maple Leafs to a 52-79-17 record after replacing DOUG CARPENTER on Oct. 20, 1990. (AP)


American Locker Group reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Quotation of the Day
"There seems to be so much more going on. Everyone who comes in these days is filled with excitement. It's in the air. And it keeps us all up." -- JON DIETRICH, a theater district memorabilia salesclerk.  [ B2:2. ]


Flower Vendors, Many Without Permits, March to Improve Relations With the Police


Homicide Charges Sought In Upstate Bus Accident
Officials will seek criminal charges against the driver of a bus that careered off a wet road and down an embankment in upstate New York, killing two Long Island schoolchildren and injuring 27 students and teachers last month, the Essex County District Attorney said yesterday.
The District Attorney, John McDonald, said he would present to a grand jury evidence for possible charges of criminally negligent homicide, a felony, against Dennis D. Ellis, the driver of the Gray Line Company bus.


Basic American Medical reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Classical Music in Review
New York Philharmonic  Avery Fisher Hall
Tchaikovsky said that his Fifth Symphony was really about fate; he even identified its main theme, first introduced by the melancholic clarinet, as the voice of fate itself.
But this is not the sort of fate that trumpets inevitability or pushes events forward with the rush of frenzy (that would have been Beethoven's way of hearing the knock on the door).
Tchaikovsky's is an almost casual fate, leaving its imprint on events without seeming to control them; sometimes they even threaten to rush out of control.
The symphony really seems to be about the composer's shifting reaction to fate, his fear and his recourse to dream and memory.
The work ends, as he said, with "complete submission."


Bridge
It was a weekend of surprises.
Following the success of Lil E. Tee in the Kentucky Derby on Saturday, another long shot came home Sunday night in the Cavendish Invitational Charity Pairs, played at the Young Men's Philanthropic League at 4 East 80th Street in Manhattan.
With one session of 24 deals remaining on Sunday night, it appeared that this prestigious title would go to Europe for the fourth time in five years.
Pyotr Gawrys and Krzysztof Lasocki of Poland had a commanding lead over their nearest rivals, giving Gawrys the prospect of repeating his 1990 victory with a different partner.
But Sam Lev of Forest Hills, Queens, who has made many international appearances for Israel, and Amos Kaminski of Manhattan surged strongly, gaining more than 1,000 imps in the session to take the title.


Expeditors International of Washington reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Waters Instruments Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Gaylord Container reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


OHM Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


For Russians, the Quest for Money Comes Before the Quest for Gold
Just as Russia and the other former Soviet republics are reorganizing with a capitalistic flavor through aid from Western countries, the Russian Olympic Committee is struggling to find new sources of income in some of the same places.
While debate continues in Congress over how much support the United States should be offering, the Russian committee has found at least one willing donor in the private sector: The Turner Broadcasting System, the Atlanta-based cable company that sponsors the Goodwill Games, has given the Russians $250,000.


Theater in Review
Canal Zone
Downtown Art Company
64 East Fourth Street Manhattan Through Sunday
By Roger Arturo Durling; directed by Eduardo Machado; set by Donald Eastman; costumes by E. G. Widulski; lighting by Ken Posner.
Presented by Downtown Art Company.
WITH: John Billeci, Vicente Castellanos, Elzbieta Czyzewska, Nancy Franklin, Ryan Gilliam, George McGrath, Troy Michael Rowland and Paul Alexander Slee.
Set in Panama during the final months of Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega's dictatorship, Roger Arturo Durling's play "Canal Zone" portrays an upper-middle-class family whose duplicitous relationships symbolize the corruption of the country under General Noriega's rule.


New York Holds Together
New Yorkers will never know why they escaped the rioting that hit other cities following the Rodney King verdict, but Mayor David Dinkins's sensitive leadership certainly contributed to a sense of calm and control.
Although the city suffered sporadic incidents after the verdict, there was no wide-scale violence, arson or looting.
The reasons may lie as much in the sociology of New York and its distance from Los Angeles as in the actions of its leaders.
But surely it was beneficial that City Hall had prepared itself -- long ago -- for trouble.


FORCES IN BOSNIA BEGIN TO UNRAVEL
Yugoslavia attempted today to ward off possible international sanctions by announcing that it was relinquishing control over Yugoslav army units in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The decision, which came as a senior United Nations official arrived in Bosnia and Herzegovina to study the prospects for a peacekeeping mission, will effectively offer the largest and best equipped force in the republic to those members of the Serb minority who are fighting against ethnic Croats and Muslim Slavs.


Review/Film; Multi-Faceted Animator's Retrospective
Caroline Leaf has been labeled an animator, for lack of a better word.
But there is nothing Saturday-morning cartoonish about the visual daring and variety of her work: adaptations of "Peter and the Wolf" and Kafka's "Metamorphosis" created in lines and shadows made of sand; "The Owl and the Pussycat," set to Stravinsky's music, with live actors in oversized masks; "The Street," a funny and emotionally stirring version of a Mordecai Richler story about a boy waiting for his grandmother to die.
Each frame of "The Street" was painted on glass and photographed, so that it resembles a vibrant watercolor brought to life.


Market Place; Finger-Pointing In Sulcus's Slide
THE Sulcus Computer Corporation and its critics agree on some things: Somebody is trying to manipulate the company's stock by spreading misinformation, and it is time for the courts to step in.
But they disagree about who is doing the manipulating.
Sulcus, a software company that has been expanding rapidly through acquisitions, is suing Reich &amp; Company, a small New York brokerage firm, contending it is spreading lies about the company in an effort to drive down the stock price.


Conner Already Looking Ahead
Don't cry for Dennis Conner.
Sure, he has been shut out of the America's Cup final for the first time in two decades, but Conner was in New York yesterday to share the secret of his resilience.
"I'm an America's Cup addict," the yacht racer said, meaning that his eye is not on the last fix but the next.
That will come in 1995, when Conner expects to be in the cup spray once again, as either a putative defender or challenger.


Health Insurers Pay Bizarre Hospital Charges; Care Restructured
To the Editor:
"Do They Want My Wife to Die?" by Jesse Lemisch (Op-Ed, April 15) reflects one side of a disheartening personal story.
It omits important facts and events necessary to comprehend the full picture.
While Mr.
Lemisch's experience with managed care is unfortunate, it does not warrant condemnation of the managed care's goals or process.
Managed care is more than an isolated series of utilization review decisions or a cost-cutting measure; it is a fundamental restructuring of how we deliver and finance health care.
Its goal is to improve the quality of care by coordinating the delivery of care and using effective and appropriate medical treatments.


Accounts
*
Swatch Watch U.S.A., New York, to Deutsch Inc., New York, in a review on the creative portion of its account, estimated at $5 million to $7 million, that also included as a finalist Della Femina, McNamee Inc., New York.
Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Advertising will continue to handle media placement.
A print campaign, centering on the new Swatch Automatic watch, will be introduced next month.


Canadian Occidental Petroleum reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  MORE TROUBLE ON 14TH STREET
The Transit Authority plans to rip up portions of 14th Street that were repaved just last fall.
The new work could delay resumption of two-way traffic along the street, much of which has been narrowed to two lanes of eastbound traffic since the $23.7 million 14th Street reconstruction project began in 1990.
Officials of the Transit Authority and the city's Transportation Department blamed each other for the latest snag in the project.
B3.
REZONING IN MIDTOWN IS UPHELD
The rezoning of a parcel in midtown Manhattan was upheld by the State Court of Appeals against an environmental challenge by neighborhood residents.
The court said city officials had sought to minimize the environmental impact of rezoning the parcel, a block bounded by 11th and 12th Avenues, from 41st to 42d Street, where that vital crosstown thoroughfare approaches the Hudson River.
B5.
SYRIAN JEWS PREPARE FOR INFLUX


New Creative Chief At Hill, Holliday
Jonathan Mandell, 37 years old, senior vice president and acting creative director at Hill, Holliday, Connors, Cosmopulos in New York, was promoted to creative director yesterday, succeeding John Ferrell, 50, who left on Friday because of what the agency called "stylistic differences."
When Mr.
Mandell joined Hill, Holliday's New York office six months ago, from the Los Angeles office, his position was meant to be temporary, said Susan R. Smith, managing director.
But it was made permanent, she added, because since his arrival "we have already seen a dramatic improvement in our creative product."


BASKETBALL: What Losing Streak? It's a Stunner for Knicks; Incredible. Awesome. Ewing!
The first hypothesis that was challenged tonight was that the Knicks did not belong in the same building as the Chicago Bulls unless Patrick Ewing was shooting, and scoring, until he couldn't lift his arms.
The second was that Ewing without spectacular point totals is a superstar unworthy of his millions.


Realigning the Pieces at Omnicom
Sometimes in advertising, it seems that reorganizing the agencies is almost as creative a pursuit as actually creating the ads.
One such realignment was disclosed yesterday by the Omnicom Group, ending months of speculation that fundamental changes were imminent at the world's fourth-largest agency company.
Delaying the reorganization were clashes between executives jostling for power in a reorganized Omnicom, atop complications that included abrupt job changes for two top agency leaders.


Book Notes
Barbara Taylor Bradford, one of the best-selling commercial fiction authors, has signed a contract with HarperCollins to write three novels for more than $20 million, making her one of the highest paid authors in the world.


Vehicle Sales Jumped 18.3% In Late April
Sales of North American-built cars and light trucks rose 18.3 percent in late April.
While automotive analysts said the gain fell short of a full-fledged recovery, it provided a lift to beleaguered auto makers and retail dealers.
Sales of domestic cars rose 10.8 percent in late April, to 235,864, and domestic light-truck sales rose 31 percent, to 163,389.
The total sales of domestic vehicles, 399,253, compared with 300,075 in the corresponding period of 1991.


Pittway Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Aon Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Permanent Site Set for Tennis
The organizer for the Pathmark Tennis Classic, an exhibition event staged for the last 14 years on a temporary site at Ramapo College in Mahwah, N.J., yesterday announced plans to build a permanent, two-court home for the event, near the college at the Crossroads Corporate Center in Mahwah.
The project is expected to cost between $300,000 and $400,000 and will be ready in time to be the site for this year's $150,000 event, from July 13-19, said the organizer, John Korf, who runs the exhibition with contributions from 200 regional sponsors.
For the 50 weeks of the year when they are not needed for the six-day event, the two hard courts will be maintained and used by another tenant of the office complex, the Sheraton Hotel.





The War Against the Poor
As if, after Los Angeles, there were any doubt: America's cities need help.
So far, President Bush mainly offers them gratuitous insult.
For the White House to assert that liberal social programs of the 60's and 70's set off rioting last week assaults the truth.
The evidence, plain to anyone willing to take an honest look, shows that:
1.
Lyndon Johnson's War on Poverty help cut the poverty rate nearly in half, and poverty among the elderly even more.


The Cancer Freed Me. It Freed Me.
Cancer survivorship, Presidential politics, people's fears about cancer, the public's right to know.
This volatile mix of forces swirled around me for the past year, and even managed to outlive my candidacy.
More than once during those months I wondered whether it was possible to have a rational discussion about surviving cancer in a society that equates cancer with a death sentence.
Put simply, how does someone who has entered the hell of cancer and emerged from the other side help others truly understand how to cope with "thinking" about cancer.
This applies not just to would-be Presidents but to all survivors.
If you have absorbed the terror of cancer and learned to process it, how do you expect people who have not had this experience to ever comprehend how you think?


Gitano Group reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Respite Done With, Bulls Need a Wakeup
They finished the regular season looking sort of bored.
They began the playoffs by sweeping the Miami Heat, but feeling somewhat stale.
No alarm was sounded, although concern was certainly voiced.
"There's always the threat of being lackadasical," Chicago Bulls Coach Phil Jackson said.
"It's the problem of assuming there are going to be victories. You recognize it in your own attitude."


Alexander De La Garz; Surgeon, 62
Dr.
Alexander De La Garza, a surgeon and former president of the Queens Medical Society, died at his home in Manhattan on April 25.
He was 62 years old.
He died of a heart attack, said his wife, Dr. Anita Louise Cloutier De La Garza.


Overseas Press Club Gives Award to Terry Anderson
Terry A. Anderson, the Associated Press correspondent held hostage in Lebanon for nearly seven years by pro-Iranian kidnappers, will be honored tonight by the Overseas Press Club of America with the President's Award for "distinguished and exemplary service" in journalism.
"His courage and deep faith in God during 2,455 days as a hostage of terrorists in Lebanon earned Terry Anderson the admiration and respect of journalists and the public alike and will serve always as a reminder of the dangers confronting reporters all over the world," says the citation by the club's president, H. L. Stevenson, former editor in chief of United Press International.


Corrections
A brief report yesterday with the article about the Tony nominations misstated the date by which Tony voters' ballots must be received by the accountants.
It is May 29.


First N.Y. Bank For Business reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Rangers Rally With a Few Whacks Here and There
Playing without the injured Mark Messier and trailing by a stubborn goal deep into the third period, the Rangers defied their own playoff history last night at Madison Square Garden with a stirring third-period comeback.
This was everything the Rangers are not supposed to be about: persistence, nasty stickwork and good fortune.


Campus Journal; Los Angeles Riots Stir Students in Connecticut
They heard it, even here.
They heard the streets of Los Angeles howl, heard the sirens blast and the windows break, and they stopped to ask what had gone wrong.
The children of privilege at Connecticut College are as far away from the riots in South-Central Los Angeles as are almost any young people in the country.
On their hilltop New England campus overlooking the Thames River, 2,907 miles from Los Angeles, they can pursue their liberal arts degrees in splendid seclusion.


Olympia to Sell Big Stake In Santa Fe to Raise Cash
In a desperate effort to raise cash to stave off bankruptcy, Olympia &amp; York Developments Ltd. moved today to sell its 18 percent stake in the Santa Fe Pacific Corporation, the giant United States railroad conglomerate.
The proceeds, which would be more than $400 million at the current stock price, would help the real estate company meet some of the payments it missed over the last month, as it negotiated intensely with banks to restructure its $12 billion (American) in debts.


Stringent Package of Ethics Rules Is Proposed by Florio
Gov.
Jim Florio proposed an ethics package today that would give New Jersey some of the nation's most stringent ethical rules for lawmakers and senior government appointees, including a ban on legislators' voting on bills in which they have a personal interest and an end to all honorariums for officials.
Though tougher ethics laws and limits on campaign financing have wide bipartisan support, Mr.
Florio's plan, which would supersede a host of bills pending in the Republican-controlled Legislature, touched off a round of partisan bickering.


Yankees Muster Steam, but Can't Escape a 7-4 Loss
It could have been worse.
The Yankees didn't get a hit tonight until the fourth inning.
They didn't get another one until the seventh.
For a time, it didn't look like they would get a run.
By the end of the night, things didn't look so bad, but they still left here with a loss and a split of their two-game series with the Seattle Mariners.


3-Judge Panel Hears Appeal In Spira Case
A three-judge appeal panel heard arguments yesterday on behalf of Howard Spira, who was convicted a year ago on charges of attempting to extort money from George Steinbrenner.
Arguments in the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit in New York centered on the relationship between Spira and a New York lawyer, Edward Schauder, who spoke with Spira shortly after his arrest in 1990.
Henry Steinglass, Spira's lawyer, contended that attorney-client privilege should have precluded Schauder from testifying against Spira.
Gregory Kehoe, the prosecutor, argued that no such privilege existed.


Universal Foods Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29


Strike Shuts Germany's Biggest Airport
As the public employee strike in Germany entered its 10th day, firefighters, security officers and baggage handlers failed to appear for work today at the Frankfurt airport, the biggest in continental Europe, forcing the closure of the airport and the cancellation or rerouting of more than 900 flights.
Airports in most other German cities, including Munich, Nuremberg, Dusseldorf, Hamburg and Cologne-Bonn were also shut, as were both major airports in western Berlin.


McColgan Enters a Mini Marathon
LIZ McCOLGAN of Scotland, the 10,000-meter world champion and winner of the women's division of the New York City Marathon last fall, has entered the Advil Mini Marathon on May 30.
The 10,000-meter (6.2-mile) event will be run in Central Park.


Sigma-Aldrich reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Drawing Albany's Maps: Justice or Gerrymander?
With Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo's grudging 11th-hour approval, the New York State Legislature's intricate redistricting plan has cleared one major hurdle.
But it still faces at least two others: the United States Justice Department and the courts.
And today two disparate groups -- minority voting-rights organizations and lawmakers from the parties now out of power in either chamber of the Legislature -- criticized the Governor's decision and vowed to make full use of those other forums.
Their challenges, if successful, would force an overhaul of the lines intended to form the state's political map for the next decade.


New Study Backs Ulcer-Cure Theory
NEW research has lent more support to the belief that a common bacterium lies behind most ulcers.
The researchers, from Baylor College of Medicine in Houston, said almost all ulcer patients could be completely cured by taking a combination of drugs to eradicate the bacteria.
The idea that the bacteria, Helicobacter pylori, could be linked to ulcers has long been the subject of debate.
Gastroenterologists say the new study is the most convincing one to be conducted in this country, and the researchers said they hoped it, along with previous research in Europe and Australia, would promote general acceptance of the idea that killing bacteria could cure ulcers.


Encor Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Investigation Of Iraqi Ties
Kennametal's technology management achievements have been overshadowed in the last year by some highly publicized Congressional investigations of American companies with business ties to Iraq.
The investigations, based partly on sworn testimony by a former Kennametal lawyer, are examining whether the company illegally exported products used in Iraq's military and nuclear buildup and later violated President Bush's 1990 ban on dealings with Iraq.


BASEBALL: American League; Viola Stymies Twins
Red Sox 4, Twins 1
BOSTON, May 5 (AP) -- Frank Viola, the most valuable player of the 1987 World Series for Minnesota, won his first game against his former team as the Boston Red Sox beat the Twins, 4-1, tonight.
Viola (3-2) scattered nine hits in seven and two-thirds innings.
He struck out five and walked one in outpitching rookie Pat Mahomes (2-1).
After losing his shutout bid in the eighth on a walk and two-out singles by Chuck Knoblauch and Kirby Puckett, Viola was replaced by Greg Harris.
Jeff Reardon took over in the ninth to earn his sixth save this season and No. 333 of his career, 8 behind the career leader, Rollie Fingers.
Rangers 5, Orioles 3
BALTIMORE (AP) -- Nolan Ryan isn't pitching like he did last year, and neither is Jeff Robinson.
That's bad and good news for Texas.
Texas overcame another skaky performance by Ryan and beat Baltimore, ending the Orioles' six-game winning streak.
Dickie Thon drove in the tie-breaking run with a sixth-inning single and Robinson pitched five innings of two-hit relief to help the Rangers end Baltimore's nine-game winning streak at home.
The Orioles are 10-2 at home.
Ryan, who gave up seven runs in two and one-third innings at Chicago in his last outing, allowed the first five Orioles to reach base.
He gave up three runs, three hits, two walks and hit a batter before being replaced after a 62-minute rain delay after the second inning.
Tigers 2, Angels 1
DETROIT (AP) -- California Manager Buck Rodgers says Detroit's most important offensive weapon may be Tiger Stadium.
"I've been coming to this park for a thousand years, and I've seen a lot of teams go south in a hurry," Rodgers said after the Tigers beat the Angels on Mickey Tettleton's leadoff home run in the ninth.
"You see those orange seats that look like they are right on top of you, and you start trying to jerk the ball out."
Scott Aldred and John Doherty combined on a four-hitter for Detroit, with Doherty (1-0) pitching two perfect innings of relief.
Indians 8, Royals 6
CLEVELAND (AP) -- Shortstop Mark Lewis drove in two runs and scored twice, atoning for his 10th error in the last seven games as Cleveland beat Kansas City.
Jack Armstrong (1-3) got his first American League victory despite giving up five runs and six hits in six and two-thirds innings, including home runs by Wally Joyner and Rico Rossy.
There was no repeat of the hostilities that erupted in the eighth inning Monday night, when the teams brawled after an exchange of bean balls and brushback pitches.
White Sox 12, Brewers 2
CHICAGO (AP) -- Jack McDowell became baseball's first six-game winner and George Bell hit his eighth career grand slam to lead Chicago.
McDowell (6-0) is off to the best start for the White Sox since Joel Horlen won his first eight games in 1967.
McDowell pitched eight innings and gave up two runs on seven hits, striking out five and walked one.
McDowell has a 2.87 e.r.a. after six starts.
In 47 innings, he has struck out 29 and walked five.


Seaboard Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 21


Insomniacs for Dollars: Traders, TV and Numbers
AT 1:30 A.M. yesterday, the floor of New York's principal commodity exchanges on the eighth floor of 4 World Trade Center was eerily quiet.
The floors were bereft of the slips of paper that drift like snow during trading hours; the hundreds of video screens displayed nothing but dull green, and not a scream could be heard in darkened pits where huge quantities of everything from oil to orange juice raucously change hands during the day.


INTERNATIONAL PAPER IS BUYING 11% OF SCITEX
The Scitex Corporation said yesterday that it had reached a definitive agreement to sell an 11 percent stake to the International Paper Company in a private placement worth $209 million.
The agreement, first disclosed in February, calls for Scitex to sell 4.75 million newly issued shares for $44 each.
The deal requires the approval of shareholders at a meeting on May 13.


Muslim Attack on Egypt's Copts Leaves 14 Dead
A feud between Muslim militants and Coptic Christians has exploded into one of the deadliest civil clashes in Egypt in a decade.
A band of Muslim militants, carrying rifles, pistols and knives, marched into the dirt streets of this largely Christian farm village on Monday and opened fire, killing 14 people and wounding five children aged nine to eleven.


The U.N. Today
General Assembly Meets at 10:30 A.M. and 3 P.M.
CLIMATE CHANGE COMMITTEE -- 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
COMMISSION ON INTERNATIONAL TRADE LAW -- 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
General information phone: (212) 963-1234 Tours are conducted 9 A.M.-5:45 P.M.


Oxford Health Plans reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Amoskeag Co. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Standard Motor Products reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Imo Appoints New Chief And Hires a New President
Imo Industries Inc. named several new executives yesterday as part of a management succession plan, including the appointment of Robert R. Womack to the post of vice chairman and chief executive.
He replaces W. J. Holcombe, who is 66 and will remain as chairman.
Imo also named Thomas J. Flaherty, 54, as its president and chief operating officer.


Total Canada Oil &amp; Gas reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Anacomp Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Lancaster Colony reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Caribbean Exodus: U.S. Is Constant Magnet
Before dawn on many days, in a ritual repeated across the Caribbean, long lines of people anxious to build new lives in the United States begin forming outside the high white walls of the American Consulate here.
Inevitably, many fail to clear the barrier before the building's sprawling courtyard is filled and no new applicants are admitted.
But for those turned away, there are touts outside buzzing like eager ticket scalpers, offering illicit passage aboard small boats to Puerto Rico, the perilous first stop for many on the way to New York or Miami.


A Tough Choice for Ireland: Europe's Cash or Autonomy
The voters of Ireland, who are being asked to vote in a referendum next month on whether to approve the Treaty on European Union, are in a "Jack and the Beanstalk" situation.
The Government of Prime Minister Albert Reynolds is urging them to exchange the sick cow of Irish economic autonomy for the shiny beans of billions in promised European Community subsidies.
Today, at the start of parliamentary debate on the treaty, Mr.
Reynolds told the nation that Ireland would get as much as $9.8 billion from the community if it voted yes on June 18.


Los Angeles Mayor Comes Under More Attacks in Police Chief's New Book
A cease-fire emerged today on the city's political front, where officials have been trying to assign blame for the failure to quickly stop the rioting last week after the acquittal of four white police officers charged with the beating of a black motorist, Rodney G. King.
Mayor Tom Bradley held meetings in his office to plan reconstruction, while Police Chief Daryl F. Gates was out of sight, tending to police business.


Delicate Path to U.S. For Jews From Syria
The people at Ahi Ezer synagogue burst out in laughter and tears.
They hugged each other and shouted "Mabrouk!" -- Arabic for congratulations -- upon hearing the news that flooded the phone lines from Damascus: the Syrian Government had suddenly given its 4,000 Jews freedom to travel.
The timing of the announcement late last month was not lost on the deeply observant, tightly knit Syrian Jewish enclave tucked away in the Midwood section of Brooklyn.
It came on the last two holy days of Passover, which marks the Jewish liberation from Egypt 3,200 years ago.


Forest Labs reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Injury Sidelines Messier In Game 2
The injury to Pittsburgh's Mario Lemieux overshadowed the other superstar injury last night, the one to Mark Messier of the Rangers.
Less than an hour before Adam Graves put Lemieux out of the game with a slash to the wrist, Messier was scratched from the lineup for something that happened two weeks ago.
The Ranger captain missed only the second playoff game of his career because of back spasms caused by what he described as a muscle tear suffered in Game 2 of the first-round series against New Jersey.


Bay Ridge Beach Gets a Bath


Purchasing Managers Raise Forecast for Manufacturing
Citing signs of an improving economy, the National Association of Purchasing Management today raised its forecast for growth in manufacturing this year.
In its semiannual forecast, the association said its members expected 5.1 percent growth in factory revenues in 1992, before adjustments for inflation, which were expected to be minimal.


Kennametal Finds the Right Tools
Kennametal Inc., a leading producer of metalworking and mining tools, quietly spent the 1980's investing heavily in new technology to reverse a market slide and stave off powerful foreign competitors.
By last year, that strategy had propelled it into the ranks of the nation's 500 largest companies, with net income of $21 million and revenue of $618 million.
And a more visible sign of success, Kennametal's stylish new $25 million research and development center, opened next to the company's headquarters on the rural outskirts of this small city, an hour's drive east of Pittsburgh.


Giant Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Schooling at Home Draws Lawsuits to Doorsteps
Stephen and Lois Pustell decided last fall to teach their 7-year-old daughter at home in the belief they could do a better job than the public schools in Lynn, Mass.
After working for weeks to meet numerous state regulations to be able to teach their daughter at home, the Pustells reached the end of their patience last November, when the district named yet another requirement: visits by local school officials to the Pustell home to observe their daughter's instruction.
Failure to comply, the couple was told, would result in criminal truancy charges.


Corrections
A sports article on Tuesday about the Chicago Bulls misidentified one of the basketball team's assistant coaches.
He is John Bach.


3 Who Nosh On Numbers: Demography Served Here
THE Third World Cafe, a 30-seat diner in the shadows of the Riverside Drive viaduct on 125th Street, is the sort of dining concept that particularly intrigues Francis P. Vardy, Ronald J. Ortiz and Joseph J. Salvo.
The three are demographers who work for the city of New York, and they can usually be found squinting over immigration and population statistics in their offices at the Department of City Planning in lower Manhattan.
But when they heard about the Third World Cafe, they pushed away from their desks and headed for the dinner table.
Any place where dinner includes data is their kind of place.


John Marshall Weir; Disease Expert, 80
John Marshall Weir, an expert on tropical diseases and an official with the Rockefeller Foundation, died on April 27 at his home in Manhattan.
He was 80 years old.
He died of complications from cancer, said a son, Michael.


A Platform of Fun For the Democrats At the Convention
The Democratic National Convention will bring 35,000 delegates, reporters, editors, producers and technicians to New York City in July: almost enough to fill Lincoln Center and Carnegie Hall twice.
Yesterday, the group managing the city's convention preparations announced a menu of cultural events intended to show the delegates the city's museums, theaters and concert halls.
"This is a fabulous opportunity to show off our best homegrown product, the arts," Barbara J. Fife, the Deputy Mayor for planning and development, said yesterday at a briefing at Lincoln Center.
And the public will benefit, too, for many of the institutions are planning special exhibitions open to all.


A Degree in History Is Apt, at 88
For most of her long life, Doris Eaton Travis confesses, she felt inferior to people with formal educations because she had neither a high school diploma nor a college degree.
Nothing could help her shake that feeling -- not her three-year stint as a member of the Ziegfeld Follies, nor her movie career in the early years of Hollywood, nor her business success from owning and selling 19 Arthur Murray dance studios.


Quebec-Telephone reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Deutsche Bank Pursues Diversity for Its U.S. Unit
When Ronaldo H. Schmitz was an executive in the United States at BASF, the giant chemical company, he used Deutsche Bank, Germany's largest bank, as a valued lender but a less-than-complete financial partner.
"The bank had its traditional competence as a lender, but for more sophisticated products I found that my American colleagues turned to American banks," he said.


Wine Talk
IT'S not too early to think about investing in some warm-weather wines.
This is particularly true for those New Yorkers who interpret the appearance of the first scraggly forsythia as a sign to begin fleeing the city on weekends.
Along with the cat and children, consider bringing your wine with you.
With some exceptions, selection goes down and prices go up with the distance between yourself and city.


Theater in Review
Endgame
Jean Cocteau Repertory Bouwerie Lane Theater 330 Bowery, at Bond Street Manhattan Through May 31
By Samuel Beckett; directed by Eve Adamson; set design by John Brown; costume design by Jonathan Bixby; lighting by Ms.
Adamson; production manager, Patrick Heydenburg; production stage manager, Julie Bleha.
Presented by the Jean Cocteau Repertory, Robert Hupp, artistic director; David Fishelson, executive director.
With: Harris Berlinsky, Joseph Menino, Angela Vitale and Mark Waterman.
Few plays in any language so rapidly quicken the mind as Samuel Beckett's "Endgame." When it is reasonably well produced and acted, as it is now at the Jean Cocteau Repertory Theater, it expands one's awareness of the puzzling fragility of time and human life and blows up storms of questions about personal identity and the mystery of friendship.
And it arouses new questions and gives new pleasures every time it is seen.


Inquiry Fails to Find Source Of Leak at Thomas Hearing
A special Senate counsel reported today that after a nearly five-month investigation he was unable to determine who disclosed the accusation of sexual harassment against Judge Clarence Thomas last fall as he was being considered for a seat on the Supreme Court.
The special counsel, Peter E. Fleming, a New York lawyer, submitted a report, which was then released by Senate leaders.


Review/Music; Muti Says Farewell to America as Head of the Philadelphia
Riccardo Muti and the Philadelphia Orchestra, it seems, enjoy long farewells.
Mr.
Muti took leave of his Philadelphia constituency with a televised gala two weeks ago and concerts last week.
Later this month, he is to tour Europe and Israel with his orchestra, but on Monday evening, he brought his musicians to Carnegie Hall for another step in this parting dance, his final American concert as the Philadelphia's music director.
It might seem odd that this last performance took place away from the orchestra's home.
But Carnegie has been virtually a second home to the Philadelphia ever since the Stokowski era, and the orchestra has an enthusiastic following here.
When the concert ended, the audience paid homage to Mr.
Muti with a five-minute standing (and, at times, stamping) ovation.


Night People Wake to City of Sadness
The city's night people have begun to reclaim their domain, and as dawn broke today after the first night without a curfew, an eerie calm permeated the streets of bungalows and high-rises.
A man jogging in Beverly Hills, a store owner in the South-Central section, and derelicts in Hollywood all made tentative steps into the darkness for the first time since the dusk-to-dawn curfew was imposed on Thursday.


Democrats' New Peril; Tack in Blank Case Could Assist G.O.P.
By turning over the microfilmed records of the House bank in response to a subpoena, House Democrats say they have surrendered to the Republican-run Justice Department a mass of highly personal financial data that could be used against them in the November election campaigns.
To them, the investigation by Malcolm R. Wilkey, the department's special counsel and a retired Federal appeals court judge for the District of Columbia, is a politically motivated inquiry in which the demand for their bank records far exceeds anything justified by the scope of possible wrongdoing.


Cherry Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29


Mysterious Fire Destroys 16 Houses in Mississippi


NBC in a CBS Promotion? Well, It's Not That NBC
CBS will join forces with NBC to promote the CBS lineup of prime-time programs for the 1992-93 season.
But before the Justice Department gets inquisitive, in this instance the initials stand for the Nabisco Biscuit Company.
At a news conference in New York this morning, CBS will announce that Nabisco Biscuit, part of the Nabisco Foods Group of RJR Nabisco Inc., will replace the Kmart Corporation as the lead partner in the network's fourth annual consumer promotion tied to its fall-season series.


Two Previous Owners Buy Strike the Gold at Auction
Strike the Gold, who has lost 12 races in a row since winning the Kentucky Derby last year, was bought back at auction yesterday by two of his three feuding owners, Bill Condren and Joe Cornacchia, who paid a rousing $2.9 million to keep him.
The third partner, B. Giles Brophy, stopped bidding at $2.45 million and said: "He's a wonderful horse and he afforded some unparalleled moments. But the price was a million dollars higher than his potential as a stallion."


Citadel Holding reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Thermo Electron Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 28


Results Plus
TENNIS  Seles Prevails Over Baudone, 6-0, 6-4
Top-seeded Monica Seles ended a string of upsets by Italian women yesterday by hammering Natalya Baudone, 6-0, 6-4, in the second round of the Italian Open in Rome.
Making her first appearance after a first-round bye, Seles ran off nine straight games in what seemed no more than a workout for her.
But then Baudone, ranked 134th, suddenly began scoring with power forehands down the lines, bringing cheers from nearly 10,000 fans packing center court at the Foro Italico.
Baudone twice broke Seles's serve and, now down by 5-4, found herself nearly back in the match.
But then the 18-year-old Yugoslav broke the Italian at love to win the match.
Earlier yesterday, Flora Perfetti of Italy stunned 15th-seeded Barbara Rittner of Germany with a 6-2, 6-2 victory to begin the second day of play in the clay-court tournament.  (AP) Becker Wins on Clay: Boris Becker, still looking for his first clay-court title, won his second-round match at the German Open in Hamburg yesterday, defeating Thierry Champion of France, 6-3, 7-6 (7-5).
Andre Agassi won his first-round match, beating Martin Jaite of Argentina, 6-2, 6-3, in 1 hour 3 minutes.
Agassi will next play Carlos Costas of Spain, who defeated Patrick Kuhnen of Germany, 6-2, 6-2.
Thirteenth-seeded Aleksandr Volkov of Russia lost, 2-6, 6-1, 6-7 (5-7), to unseeded Horst Skoff of Austria.
Andrei Cherkasov of Russia defeated Markus Naewie of Germany to advance to the second round against Michael Chang of the United States. (AP)


Hoechst Celanese Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Theater in Review
Like to Live/Tissue
One Dream Theater 2 North Moore Street,
at West Broadway SoHo
Through Sunday
By Louise Page; directed by Edward Berkeley; sets and costumes by Miguel Lopez-Castillo; lighting by Jane Reisman; production stage manager, Julie Lancaster; stage manager, Roy Kokoyachuk.
Presented by the Willow Cabin Theater Company and Alexander E. Racolin.
WITH: Laurence Gleason, Meg Wynn Owen and Maria Radman.
" 'Afterward,' they said, 'you'll feel an aching and a sense of loss,' " reflects Sally Bacon (Maria Radman), the central character in "Tissue," Louise Page's one-act play about a 29-year-old woman who has undergone a mastectomy.


Mr. Cuomo Blinks on Election Reform
New York's once-in-a-decade chance to restore democracy has slipped away because of Republican opposition and timidity by Gov.
Mario Cuomo.
Mr.
Cuomo sent strong signals that he would veto the Legislature's reapportionment plans unless accompanied by serious election reform.
But on Monday he signed the redistricting plan, which even he assailed for illegally protecting incumbents.
He thereby settled for a bad deal that keeps the unjust election system largely intact.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Political Memo; Decoding the Remarks By Fitzwater on Riots
President Bush's political supporters and opponents agree that when his spokesman, Marlin Fitzwater, said Monday that the social welfare programs of the 1960's and 1970's were responsible for the Los Angeles riots, Mr.
Fitzwater was talking in code.
But they disagree about what he meant.
The supporters say Mr.
Fitzwater was referring to an attitude that they say prevailed during the Great Society era, with Democratic encouragement, that poor people were not responsible for deviant behavior.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Democrats; CLINTON, IN ATTACK ON PRESIDENT, TIES RIOTS TO 'NEGLECT'
In a counterattack on the Bush Administration, Gov.
Bill Clinton said yesterday that the riots in Los Angeles resulted in part from "12 years of denial and neglect" of festering social problems under Presidents Ronald Reagan and George Bush.
Mr.
Clinton said he was amazed and appalled at comments on Monday by the White House press secretary, Marlin Fitzwater, suggesting that the riots resulted from social welfare programs created by Democrats in the 1960's and 1970's.


Thermo Instrument Systems reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Petro-Canada reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Talley Industries reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


WOMAN IN DIVORCE IS SLAIN IN COURT
A middle-aged man pulled two pistols from his briefcase yesterday in a suburban St.
Louis courtroom, shot to death his estranged wife and wounded four other people, including the two lawyers in the divorce case.
As the first shots rang out, a meeting was ending on an upper floor of the building to discuss increased security at the courthouse.


Theater in Review
Empty Hearts  Circle Repertory Company 99 Seventh Avenue South, at West Fourth Street Manhattan  Written and directed by John Bishop; sets by John Lee Beatty; costumes by Ann Roth and Bridget Kelly; lighting by Dennis Parichy; music by Robert Waldman; production stage manager, Leslie Loeb; production manager, Jody Boese; sound by Stewart Werner and Chuck London; concert sequence staged by Marcia Milgram Dodge.
Presented by the Circle Repertory Company, Tanya Berezin, artistic director; Terrence Dwyer, managing director.
WITH: Cotter Smith, Mel Harris, Edward Seamon, John Dossett, Joel Anderson, Susan Bruce and Claris Erickson.
What more can a play add to "Law and Order," "L.A. Law" and all the other legal cases crowding the small-screen docket?
Obviously there is always room for a novel variation on a familiar theme, but if John Bishop's "Empty Hearts" were on television, one would change the channel.


KOHL URGES JAPAN TO INCREASE HELP FOR EAST EUROPE
Chancellor Helmut Kohl of Germany said today that his country had "reached the limit of our capacity" to help the countries of the former Soviet Union and Eastern Europe, and he launched an unusually blunt appeal to Japan to offer them more aid.
Addressing members of the American Newspaper Publishers Association gathered at the United Nations, Mr.
Kohl said that Germany had done as much as it could to help these countries make the transition from Communism to democracy and market economies.
He insisted that the time had come for Japan "to contribute more than it has up to now toward this reform effort."


Arson Blamed in New Jersey Pineland Fires


New Line Cinema reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Review/Television; A Rundown of Real-Life Grifters' Games
"Scam," at 10 tonight on CBS, is a quick tour of some of the most popular con games now being played around the country.
The "48 Hours" reporters give the ins and outs of calling-card and lottery cons, auto-insurance and loan frauds, the good old "pigeon drop" and more.
The camera is put to particularly good use in Grand Central Terminal in Manhattan, where "shoulder surfers" move in on Erin Moriarty as she is making a credit-card call.
They will then sell the card number at a bargain rate to people who want to call home, home being Romania, Egypt, the late Soviet Union and other distant places.
No time limit.


Riots Inflamed a Festering South-Central Economy
As officials develop plans for the future of the ravaged South-Central area, residents say that rebuilding and restocking stores there will not be nearly enough to address the resentment generated over the years by the community's racially fractured, barely functional economy.
Even before last week's spasm of violence, South-Central Los Angeles was close to an economic wasteland, with few stores, banks or well-paying jobs for its predominantly black and Hispanic residents.
Per capita annual income, at $7,600 for the core of South-Central in 1990, was 52.6 percent lower than for Los Angeles County as a whole.
There is one supermarket for every 40,646 residents in South-Central's core, as against one for every 23,224 residents in the county.


Bridge
Study the diagramed deal and consider whether South, in four hearts, should cover the opening lead of the diamond queen with dummy's king.
Does it matter?


Specter of Execution Hangs Over Murder Trial
His name is Thomas Pitera, but friends call him Tommy Karate because of his devotion to martial arts.
He is 37 years old, with a compact build, neatly trimmed black hair and a tough-guy manner reminiscent of old gangster movies.
And he is on trial for his life.
Federal prosecutors describe him as a murderous, drug-dealing member of the Mafia, and they want to have him executed under a law that provides the death penalty for intentional murders in drug operations.


Kuwait Journal; A Peace That Still Can't Recover From the War
Kuwait's National Museum continues to admit visitors, but they do not get to see what was once an impressive collection of Arab and Islamic art.
Instead, visitors who tour the four wings of the museum look at blackened walls perforated by bullets, strings of wires dangling from the ceiling, and broken slabs of concrete, the legacy of retreating Iraqi troops in February 1991.


In Mississippi Education Battle, New Governor Loses on First Veto
In its continuing effort to improve the state's historically poor record of supporting education, the Mississippi Legislature has voted to override the new Governor's veto of a sales tax increase to $168 million for school buildings, books and supplies.
The dramatic defeat for Gov.
Kirk Fordice, the state's first Republican governor in 115 years, came as an unusual weekend session of the Legislature extended into Monday.
On a vote of 82 to 38, the House finally provided the necessary two-thirds margin for an override.
The voting capped months of bickering in which Mr.
Fordice, who had campaigned on a platform of no new taxes, had vetoed the measure without offering any alternative.


2 Accused Of Favoritism In Bid Process
New York City investigators accused two Correction Department officials yesterday of violating city regulations and improperly helping a company win a $1.9 million contract for the electronic surveillance of released prisoners.
A report by the city's Department of Investigation found that Allison Lewis-Smith, the department's chief lawyer when the contract was tentatively awarded last year, and Burton Schall, a Correction Department contracting officer who was primarily responsible for overseeing bidding procedures, had acted improperly.


AT LUNCH WITH: Studs Terkel; 'Everyone Around Here Knows Me'
THE Mercedes came tooling down Michigan Avenue.
It swerved to the curb and a white woman in her 30's poked her head out the passenger side window.
"Mr. Terkel," she called.
"Oh, Mr. Terkel! We read your book. We loved it! Thank you so much."


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: White House; Bush and Justice Dept. Step Up Response to Riot
President Bush accelerated his efforts today to demonstrate concern about last week's riots, moving up a scheduled trip to Los Angeles as the Justice Department dispatched 50 officials there to oversee Federal investigations of riot-related violence.
The actions raised the Federal resources committed to restoring order in the Los Angeles area to 5,100 people, mostly military troops, and more than $600 million.
Since the weekend, the White House has issued a growing stream of announcements about riot-related assistance.
Some of Mr.
Bush's political critics had asserted at the end of last week that his response to the crisis had been slower and more modest than was demanded.


Confessions of a Star-Struck Looter
When Frederick's of Hollywood, the lingerie emporium, was being stripped bare by looters Thursday night, a little voice inside Jim B. told him: "Do it. Do it. Take it. It's yours."
So he ran into the showrooms on Hollywood Boulevard and helped himself to Ava Gardner's bloomers and a push-up bra once worn by Katey Sagal, an actress on the television comedy "Married . . . With Children."


Cuomo Visits New Hospital in Harlem


Personal Health
PLAYGROUNDS are magnets for children.
They give them a chance to run around outdoors, interact with others their age, explore and extend the abilities of their developing bodies while having fun.
Adults, too, appreciate the opportunity to visit with like-minded grownups while their children play in a safe setting.
Unfortunately, many playgrounds are not as safe as they should be.
Each year, about 250,000 children under the age of 15 require hospital treatment for playground injuries, ranging from bad cuts and bruises to broken bones and head injuries, according to statistics gathered through the National Electronic Injury Surveillance System.


First Brands Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


United Cos. Financial reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Damon Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Official Seeks Building Jobs For Students
H.
Carl McCall, the president of the Board of Education, yesterday called on the agency that oversees construction of school buildings to offer apprenticeships to high school students and graduates that could lead to union membership in the construction industry.
In making his appeal, Mr.
McCall invoked the specter of riot-torn Los Angeles and seized on an opportunity to provide jobs to the kind of poor and discontented young people that engaged in looting and burning.


'Why I Am a Pastry Chef,' by Women Who Know
"BEING a line cook is like going through a war every night," said Melissa DeMayo, the pastry chef at Restaurant 44 in the Royalton Hotel in New York.
"I think that's why they call it 'behind the line.' It's like a battlefield."
Ms.
DeMayo was explaining why so many women who are professional cooks are pastry chefs rather than line cooks -- the people who stand in front of the hot stoves -- or executive chefs.


Dodgers Are Trying to Put Turmoil Behind Them
The talk was of wanton death and destruction, turmoil and tears, anger and pain, scars and healing.
The Dodgers, away from their wounded city for the first time since riots wracked South-Central Los Angeles last week and forced postponment of four games at Dodger Stadium, came to the quiet of Philadelphia in an effort to regain their batting eyes, their pitching strength and their emotional equilibrium.


Reserve of $6 Billion May Let Russia Free Ruble Rates in July
Russia intends to make the ruble a fully convertible currency by Aug. 1 at a rate fixed to the dollar, a senior Government official said today.
The rate would be supported in the currency markets by a $6 billion fund made available by Western nations.
If managed successfully, the ruble will become a currency as ordinary as the French franc, encouraging Western companies to invest in Russia and giving Russian companies, for the first time in many decades, a clear measure of prices and costs.


Crimea Parliament Votes to Back Independence From Ukraine
The parliament of the Crimea voted today to declare a conditional independence from Ukraine, adding a perilous new twist to the confrontation between Russia and Ukraine.
The decision must still be confirmed by a referendum of the peninsula's 2.5 million residents, and in the convoluted regional politics of the former Soviet Union it was not immediately clear what "independence" would mean.


Newsday Seeks to Cut Work Force
Newsday announced yesterday that it would seek to reduce its total work force by about 10 percent by offering enhanced severance pay to up to 300 employees who volunteer to resign.
Chiara Coletti, a spokeswoman for the newspaper, said the cost reduction had been prompted by the depressed economy on Long Island, which has significantly weakened advertising.


Only Flowers, Nothing Else, Survive in an Afghan Town
Fatullah last saw his home a year ago when a rocket killed two of his sons, destroyed the mud house and forced him to flee to Kabul, the capital.
On Monday, the 65-year-old farmer began his trek back, waking at 4 A.M. and walking four hours in rubber shoes, a woolen blanket wrapped around his shoulders, up the winding dirt roads to the town of Paghman, 15 miles west of Kabul.


Incumbency Protection; Changes in the Election Laws in New York Are Less Monumental Than They Appear
By almost any objective standard, the election law changes passed by the State Legislature on Monday will still leave New York with one of the country's most efficient incumbency protection machines.
It is a striking critique of state government, therefore, that even those modest alterations were produced only after Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo issued an implicit challenge to an even greater monument to incumbent protection: redistricting.


Left Behind by AIDS; A Parent Dies and a Teen-Ager Aches
For two years, Jennifer Torres kept her anger to herself.
She went to school, tutored children part time and helped raise two younger sisters, never speaking of being unable to forgive her mother for dying of AIDS.
But sometime last year, the 17-year-old, as a member of a Lower East Side improvisational theater group, was asked to come up with a skit about somebody's parent's dying.
There, for the first time, the words and the tears came rushing out.


N.J. Transit Girds for Reduced Service With Possible Budget Cuts
New Jersey's mass-transit agency would halt or reduce service on scores of bus lines around the state, eliminate two entire rail lines and raise fares as much as 35 percent under contingency plans drawn up in the face of possible budget cuts.
But officials of the agency, N.J.
Transit, said today that major losses of state and Federal aid requiring large increases in fares or steep cuts in service were by no means a certainty.


Money Store reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


COMPANY BRIEFS
AURA SYSTEM INC., Los Angeles, a computer software concern, said that Coors Brewing Co. had agreed to withdraw a preliminary injunction it had obtained against Aura Systems in October 1991.
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORP., Armonk, N.Y., is offering its low-end personal computers to consumers through a toll-free telephone number: 800-IBM-2968.


China Is Reported to Plan Release Of Some Political Prisoners Soon
Government officials have told an American businessman that some jailed dissidents will be released from prison this month and released photos of two prominent political prisoners whose family had feared were being mistreated.
John T. Kamm, an American who lives in Hong Kong and whom the Chinese authorities often use as an intermediary to release information about prisoners, said today that officials had told him that a number of political offenders would be released in May and that several other dissidents who are free would be granted exit permits and allowed to leave China.


Microwave Cooking
I HAVE a great affection for rhubarb, which has nothing to do with its long-honored role as a spring tonic, providing the first welcome acidity and vitamins of the new growing season.
I love to see its dark green leaves unfurl in the center of the vegetable garden when nothing else is poking up.
Even more, I like the flavor of rhubarb.
I was lucky enough not to have had the experience of Jane Grigson, the late food writer, of slimy, stringy rhubarb as an almost penitential rite of nursery and school cooking.
But even she had to admit that the Persian combination of lamb and rhubarb was an unexpected pleasure.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-17  GERMAN LARGESSE HAS LIMITS
Chancellor Helmut Kohl said Germans had "reached the limit of our capacity" to help the former Soviet and East European Communist lands make the transition to democracy and free enterprise, and he urged Japan to offer more aid.
A1
A spreading public-employee strike closed Frankfurt airport.  A6  GIVE US YOUR MOBILE
Caribbean nations have been among the largest sources of recent immigration into the United States.
The newcomers' effect is evident on the East Coast, where they have created communities or revitalized old ones in Miami, New York and New Jersey, among other places.
A1  A TOWN DIES IN AFGHANISTAN
Paghman, 15 miles west of Kabul, was once Afghanistan's royal showpiece.
The war reduced this once-gentle place to rubble, turning it into a graveyard and a stark symbol of man's inhumanity to man.
A1
Artillery and rocket barrages emptied parts of central Kabul.
A3  CRIMEA LOOKS TO INDEPENDENCE
Lawmakers in the Crimea voted to declare conditional independence from Ukraine, adding a perilous new twist to the confrontation between that republic and Russia.
A8
Russia intends to make the ruble fully convertible by Aug. 1.
A8  CHINA OFFERS HOPE ON PRISONERS
Chinese officials have told an American businessman that some imprisoned dissidents will be freed this month, and they released photos of two prominent political prisoners whose relatives feared they were being mistreated.
A12  ISRAEL'S HOSTAGE CRISIS
Senior Israeli Government officials are haunted and frustrated by their continuing inability to bring home, or get information about, four servicemen missing in Lebanon.
A14  CONCESSION BY BELGRADE
Authorities of the new, smaller Yugoslavia sought to ward off the possibility of international sanctions, saying they were relinquishing control over Yugoslav Army units in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
A16  HAPPY OUTCOME FOR ESKIMOS
Voters in the Northwest Territories of Canada approved the division in two of far-northern lands, creating an Eskimo homeland.
A17  Kuwait Journal: A people depressed in the aftermath of war.
A4  National A18-26  CLINTON BLAMES G.O.P.
FOR RIOTS
Governor Clinton said the rioting in Los Angeles had resulted in part from "12 years of denial and neglect" of festering social problems during Republican Administrations.
He said he was appalled by the White House's suggestion that the upheaval was a result of Democratic social welfare programs of a generation ago.
A1
When Fitzwater blamed the Great Society, what did he mean?  A24
Bush ordered Federal prosecution of rioters.  A24
In a new book, Chief Gates assails Mayor Bradley.  A22
South-Central still seethes over economic disparities.  A23
With curfew lifted, the city's night people re-emerged. A22
A beating-trial juror said she wanted at least one conviction.
A23  THE JUSTICES AND HABEAS CORPUS
News analysis: Of all the important issues on the Supreme Court's docket, few are so jargon-encrusted and technically complex as habeas corpus.
But at this moment in the Court's evolution, habeas corpus provides, as does no other area of the law, a window directly into the Justices' mood, their agenda and their view of their own role.
A1  CONGRESSMAN IS INDICTED
A Federal grand jury charged Representative Joseph M. McDade of Pennyslvania, the ranking Republican on the House Appropriations Committee, with accepting bribes from military contractors and their lobbyists.
A1  DISCLOSURE INQUIRY FAILS
A special Senate counsel said his investigation had been unable to determine who made unauthorized disclosure of Anita F. Hill's sexual-harassment accusations against Clarence Thomas.
A18  NEW VICTORIES FOR CLINTON
Clinton moved closer to capturing the Democratic Presidential nomination, winning primaries in the District of Columbia, North Carolina and Indiana.
A26
Ross Perot will cut back appearances to spend time on issues.
A26  THE HOUSE BANK AFFAIR
News analysis: The Justice Department denies that its special investigator for the House bank inquiry will use his power to fan the scandal stemming from thousands of overdrawn checks.
But House Democrats remain skeptical of the Administration's motives.
A18  SHOOTINGS IN TWO COURTROOMS
A principal in a divorce hearing drew two pistols from his briefcase inside a suburban St.
Louis courthouse, then killed his estranged wife and wounded four other people before he himself was shot.
And in Grand Forks, N.D., a judge was critically wounded by a defendant in a child-support proceeding.
A21  Education Pages B14-15  Mississippi legislature overrides the governor's veto of school finance bill.
B14  More parents are suing and being sued over teaching children at home.
B15  Campus Journal: The Los Angeles crisis rousts Connecticut College.
B15  Metropolitan Digest, B1 PROTECTING ALBANY INCUMBENTS
News analysis: The election-law changes passed by the Legislature still leave New York with one of the country's most efficient incumbency-protection machines.
So it is a striking critique of state government that even those modest alterations came only after Governor Cuomo issued an implicit challenge to an even greater monument to incumbent protection: redistricting.
A1  Business Digest, D1  The Living Section C1-10  "Why I am a pastry chef," by the women who are.
C1  At lunch with Studs Terkel: "Everyone around here knows me." C1  Three who nosh on numbers: Demography served here.
C1  Health Page C14  Personal Health: Guidelines for playground safety.
Arts/Entertainment C17-24  Entertaining the delegates.
C17  Music: Muti's farewell.
C17  Word and Image: "Lawrence After Arabia." C17  Obituaries B16  Sports B17-24  Basketball: Knicks stun Bulls.
B17  Hockey: Rangers beat Penguins, 4-2.
B17  Editorials/Op-Ed A28-29  Editorials A28  The war against the poor.
The aggressor in Bosnia.
New York holds together.
Cuomo blinks on vote reform.
Letters A28  Anna Quindlen: No there there.
A29  Paul Tsongas: The cancer freed me.
It freed me.
A29  Jason C. Deuchler: Race, hate and my new bike.
A29


State Auto Financial reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


No Passenger Surge Materializes for Airlines
Airline traffic rose in April as the big carriers introduced their simplified price structure, but the percentage of seats occupied by paying passengers lagged behind industry expectations.
Because of increased capacity, partly in anticipation of a surge in passengers, American, Delta Air Lines and Northwest carried a smaller percentage of paying passengers on their flights last month than they did in April 1991, when the world's airlines were just emerging from one of the worst quarters in airline history.
Figures for United were not available.


Where Sentencing Guidelines Go Wrong
To the Editor:
Re your front-page article of April 12 on the judicial critics of mandatory Federal prison-sentencing guidelines: To someone familiar with the national movement for determinate sentencing, the debacle of the Federal system comes as no surprise.
Between the mid-1970's and mid-80's, all 50 states and the District of Columbia sought to repeal their discretionary sentencing systems and replace them with guidelines or other flat sentencing structures.
Throughout the country, pundits and policy makers rolled out a tread-worn litany of justifications for determinate sentencing: less discretion, disparity and discrimination; more proportionality, honesty and justice.


I.R.S. Says Dinkins Didn't Violate Tax Laws in Stock Transfer
The Internal Revenue Service has determined that Mayor David N. Dinkins did not violate Federal tax rules in a stock transaction involving his son that became a critical issue in the 1989 mayoral campaign.
Mayoral aides said the Government's ruling resolves an important outstanding issue on the transfer, which was investigated by the city and the United States Attorney's office: whether the Mayor sold the stock to his son for less than it was worth and failed to file proper tax forms or pay taxes that may have been due.


Sports of The Times; The League Will Now Go To the Tapes
SINCE this is the electronic age, the National Hockey League has the chance to get things a little more right today.
Like a modern family borrowing a tape from the local video emporium, the league officials can make some popcorn and view the latest horror film, "The Slasher From Seventh Avenue."
This latest slasher epic is not available in all outlets, but a league official named Dave Newell will send a copy to the league's executive vice president, Brian F. O'Neill.


Lawmakers in Hartford Pass Compromise Budget
The Senate approved and sent to Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr. today a compromise $8.08 billion budget that resolves Connecticut's fiscal woes without an election-year tax increase.
And even more important to many lawmakers, it gets them out the door and prevents a repeat of last year's prolonged budget stalemate, which kept the state without a budget for most of the summer.


60-Minute Gourmet
PRODUCE in my local market on eastern Long Island is looking better and better each day, but we are still far from summer's luscious peak ripeness.
For that reason I still rely on winter vegetables like carrots, turnips and squash for many dishes.
I recently bought a good-looking pork tenderloin with the idea of roasting it with garlic, mushrooms and potatoes.
I then picked up some carrots, turnips and snow peas to make a quick and inexpensive vegetable dish on the side.


Treasury Auction Well Received
The first leg of the Treasury's $36 billion quarterly refunding auctions went well yesterday, as a $15 billion offering of new three-year notes was met with good demand.
The securities were sold at an average yield of 5.96 percent, up from an average yield of 5.54 percent at the last three-year note sale on Feb. 11.


Schwitzer Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 29


Computer Sciences Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to April 3


Executive Changes
ABIOMED INC., Danvers, Mass., a medical-products company also active in heart support systems, named Bruce Hanson president and chief operating officer.
BECHTEL ENVIRONMENTAL INC., San Francisco, an environmental engineering and construction concern, named Roger Strelow executive vice president.


New Envoy to Canada
President Bush today nominated Peter B. Teeley, his former press secretary and a veteran political strategist, to become Ambassador to Canada.
Upon Senate confirmation, Mr.
Teeley would replace Edward N. Ney, a New York advertising executive who was named to the post in 1989, shortly after Mr.
Bush took office as President.


Health Insurers Pay Bizarre Hospital Charges
To the Editor:
Blue Cross and Blue Shield can avoid insolvency by other means than a rate increase: it can reduce expenditures by taking a closer look at each hospital bill before settling the claim.
Each item of a bill is paid by Blue Cross and Blue Shield according to a standardized schedule of prices, but no question is raised about the necessity of the services charged.


Infrastructure Cracks And a Rally by Mets Comes Tumbling Down
Mets pitchers, betrayed for years and the early part of this season by bad defense, had come to feel secure in the field recently.
When in need of an out, the pitchers said they no longer felt fear about throwing a strike.
One pitcher said he'd gone away from his fastball because of his confidence in the infield's infrastructure.
Another said he no longer lost sleep with thoughts of third basemen losing grounders.
"We've played super defense," said Manager Jeff Torborg.


COMPANY NEWS: Phone War Escalation; Service Makes It Harder To Override Caller ID
In the cold war between those who find Caller ID appealing and those who find it appalling, Bell Atlantic is marketing a service that will disconnect callers who try to mask their telephone numbers using another service, also available from the Bell Atlantic Corporation.
A unit of the Philadelphia-based regional phone company, the Chesapeake and Potomac Telephone Company of Virginia, said the new service, known as Anonymous Call Rejection, might be so attractive that even people who do not have Caller ID devices may want to subscribe.
"It's a deterrent to people who block their calls and who could be a pain in the neck," said Susan J. Rubin, Bell Atlantic's product manager for Caller ID.


First American Trustee Job
First American Bankshares Inc. said yesterday that it planned to recommend Harry W. Albright, a former New York State Banking Superintendent, as the independent trustee to oversee its sale.
First American, based in Washington, had been secretly owned by the Bank of Credit and Commerce International through a group of Middle Eastern front men.
The Federal Reserve Board last year ordered that First American be sold to sever all links with B.C.C.I.


Corrections
A brief article in Business day on Saturday about the Lillian Vernon Corporation misidentified the stock exchange on which its shares are traded.
It is the American Stock Exchange.


Corrections
A picture caption yesterday about an attempt by two Congressmen to halt the subpoena of House bank records misidentified them.
Sidney R. Yates was at the top and Henry B. Gonzalez at the bottom.


Federal Inquiry Into Bias Charges Against CUNY
The United States Department of Labor has begun an investigation into discrimination charges by 40 Italian-American faculty and staff members against the City University of New York.
"There are no preliminary findings of probable cause, but we have started an investigation," said Harold Busch, the New York district director of the Labor Department's Office of Federal Contract Compliance.


First Night of Auctions Shows Art Market in Slow Recovery
Dealers and auction-house experts heaved a sigh of relief last night after Christie's two-part sale of contemporary art.
After the poor results in auctions over the last 18 months, bidding, while controlled, showed signs of a slow improvement.
Of the 70 works up for sale, 51 were sold.
Sales totaled $11,261,032, near the auction house's high estimate of $11.7 million.
Private collectors dominated the buying.
The totals weren't much of an improvement over last May's sales of $11.03 million.
Still, experts said they had been afraid things could have been worse.
"Auction houses were trying to jump-start the market by putting a lot of works up for sale," said Richard Gray, a Chicago-based dealer.
"The question is, how much can the market absorb?"


A Window on the Court; Limits on Inmates's Habeas Corpus Petitions Illuminate Mood and Agenda of the Justices
Of all the important issues on the Supreme Court's docket, few are as inaccessible, as jargon-encrusted and technically complex as habeas corpus.
Even the name itself, Latin for "you have the body," appears to signify an ancient and remote legal doctrine, lacking the obvious relevance of such modern concerns as abortion or civil rights.
But at this moment in the Supreme Court's evolution, habeas corpus provides, as does no other area of the law, a window directly into the Court's mood, its agenda and its view of its own role.


Brand the Aggressor in Bosnia
Too complicated, says Lord Carrington, the European Community negotiator, as he refuses to fix blame for the bloodshed in Bosnia.
Too complicated, says Lawrence Eagleburger, Deputy Secretary of State, finding fault with all sides.
Too complicated, say aides to Secretary of State James Baker, who shies away from Bosnia after desultory efforts to stem the violence.
But what's so complicated?
Serbia's strongman, Slobodan Milosevic, is responsible for the aggression in Bosnia.
Why not isolate Serbia, politically and economically, until Mr.
Milosevic calls off the aggression and withdraws?


Seawolf Cuts Fail in U.S. Senate
The Senate today rejected, 52 to 46, an attempt to slash the Seawolf submarine program by eliminating two of three vessels now budgeted.
The Bush Administration had recommended that the Seawolf program be cut to save $2.8 billion because it was not needed in the post-Cold War era.
The Seawolfs were designed to monitor Soviet submarines.


Resort Income Investors Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Daly Resigns as Pistons Coach
After nine winning seasons, including three conference titles, two consecutive National Basketball Association championships and a final dissension-ridden campaign, Chuck Daly bid adieu to the Detroit Pistons yesterday, leaving the team he helped build into a perennial powerhouse with an increasingly uncertain future.
Daly, whose resignation as head coach had been widely expected, said he had told the team's management of his decision on Monday, a day after the Knicks knocked the Pistons out of the first round of the 1992 playoffs, Detroit's earliest departure since 1986.


Congressional Redistricting Deadline Given
A Federal court panel yesterday gave the New York State Legislature and Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo one week to agree on a Congressional reapportionment plan for the state, or face the appointment of a special master who would be ordered to draw 31 new Congressional districts under court supervision.
The ruling, by a three-judge panel headed by Judge George C. Pratt of the Second Circuit Court of Appeals in Manhattan, seemed aimed at pressing the Republican-led State Senate and the Assembly's Democratic majority to compromise or risk surrendering their authority on the politically sensitive task of paring three seats from the state's current 34-member delegation.


Tyson Isolated for Threatening Guards
MIKE TYSON, who is serving a six-year rape sentence at the Indiana Youth Center, has been lodged in a disciplinary unit after he threatened several guards in two separate incidents Monday night, a corrections spokesman said yesterday.
The 25-year-old Tyson will remain isolated from the rest of the prison population and face curtailed privileges until a disciplinary hearing, which is likely to be held tomorrow or Friday, KEVIN B. MOORE, a spokesman for the Indiana Department of Correction, said.


Eating Well
THE word is out that the McLean Deluxe, the lower-fat burger at McDonald's that was going to save fast-food franchises from the nutrition police, is not doing so well.
Some people have concluded from the less-than-exciting performance of the McLean Deluxe and other reduced-fat burgers that healthful fast food is a goner.
Wrong!
Grilled chicken sandwiches are never likely to reach the celestial heights achieved by down and dirty burgers, but they and their health-oriented companions -- baked fish, fresh salads, lower-fat milk and yogurt -- have carved out a niche for themselves in the cutthroat world of eat-and-run meals.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Primaries; CLINTON IS GIVEN 3 SOLID VICTORIES
Gov.
Bill Clinton moved closer today to locking up the Democratic Presidential nomination, decisively winning primaries here and in North Carolina and Indiana.
With almost 90 percent of the ballots counted in each contest, the Arkansas Governor had better than 60 percent of the vote in North Carolina and Indiana and almost 75 percent in the District of Columbia, a solid demonstration of political strength.


Digital Radio: Static Is Only Between Owners
Radio music as bright and resonant as the best CD's?
Maybe, if some broadcasting engineers have their way -- and if FM station owners and AM broadcasters can overcome their squabbling.
In a technical development that could pump new vibrancy into the listless radio broadcasting market, several companies are making rapid progress on systems that would allow radio stations to transmit sound as clear and free of unwanted noise as the music on digital compact disks.


Theodora Wiesner, 83; Headed Dance Festival
Theodora Wiesner, the former director of the American Dance Festival and of the dance division of Brooklyn College, died on Saturday at her home in Greenwich Village.
She was 83 years old.
She died of cancer, said her brother, Alwin, of Lake Nebagamon, Wis.


Top Republican on a House Panel Is Charged With Accepting Bribes
A Federal grand jury today indicted United States Representative Joseph M. McDade, the ranking Republican on the House Appropriations Committee and on its military subcommittee, on charges of racketeering, conspiracy and accepting bribes from five military contractors and an industry lobbyist.
According to the five-count indictment, Mr.
McDade was charged with receiving scores of bribes and gifts, including a golfing umbrella, $7,500 for his son's college tuition and $15,750 in "sham campaign contributions" from one contractor.
The document said Mr.
McDade had solicited some of the gifts.
In all, prosecutors say, Mr.
McDade received about $100,000 in cash, gifts and services from contractors and their lobbyists from 1983 to 1988.
In return, the indictment says, Mr.
McDade used his powerful position in the House to obtain Government contracts for the companies.


What Losing Streak? It's a Stunner for Knicks
What the Knicks did tonight startled the Chicago Bulls, stunned the capacity crowd of 18,676 that witnessed it, and shocked people who expected the Bulls to walk all over the Knicks like an old rug.
Riding a dominant performance by Patrick Ewing (34 points, 16 rebounds, 6 blocks) and relentless team defense, the Knicks dumped the Bulls, 94-89, at Chicago Stadium.
In winning the opener of the four-of-seven-game Eastern Conference semifinal series, the Knicks have taken the home-court advantage away from the Bulls.
Game 2 is here Thursday night, and the Bulls will be under enormous pressure to win it.


Review/Television; Confused, Complex Lawrence Of Arabia
T.
E.
Lawrence, one of the century's most elusive heroes, is taken down the dramatization path yet again in "A Dangerous Man: Lawrence After Arabia," the "Great Performances" presentation on Channel 13 at 9 tonight.
The subtitle intentionally echoes the acclaimed David Lean film that, much to the distress of T. E. experts, had Peter O'Toole portraying a rather flamboyant, almost swashbuckling Lawrence, ostentatiously given to deep thoughts.
Picking up where that film left off, "A Dangerous Man" is more authentic and, making things undeniably difficult for nonexperts, almost as complicated as the man himself.


Transit Agency Plans to Rip Up Parts of a Repaved 14th Street
In a move likely to prolong congestion along an already scarred and bottlenecked 14th Street in Manhattan, the Transit Authority is planning to rip up portions of the roadway that were repaved just last fall.
The six-week job, scheduled to start sometime this spring, will involve digging large holes near both Eighth Avenue and Avenue of the Americas, and is likely to cause new bottlenecks in those areas, city officials said.


Bow Valley Industries reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


2 Officers Shot and Hurt While Pursuing Suspect
A New York City housing police sergeant was shot once in the lip in a Bronx apartment last night as he tried to arrest a man suspected in the shooting of a corrections investigator earlier in the day, the police said.
After he opened fire on the housing officer, at about 10 P.M. last night, the suspect barricaded himself in the apartment, said Sgt.
John Rodriguez of the housing police.
The man remained in the apartment, at 1141 East 229th Street in the Edenwald Housing Project, until just after 2 A.M. today, when the police said they were able to talk him into surrendering.


INSIDE
Hill-Thomas Inquiry Fails
A Senate counsel said he had been unable to learn who made the unauthorized disclosure of Prof.
Anita F. Hill's sexual-harassment accusations against Clarence Thomas.
Page A18.
Suit Against Officer Settled
The settlement of a civil suit against a white police officer from upstate New York in the death of a black man includes the unusal provision that the two sides sit down and talk.
Page B1.
Generation of AIDS Orphans
AIDS is creating a class of particularly troubled youth, in which a parent's death is compounded by embarrassment, secrecy and blame.
Page B1.
France's Unlikely Merger
The troubled French publishing giant Hachette S.A. plans to merge with the Matra defense group.
Page D1.


The Pop Life
Across-the-Board Pop
Caetano Veloso's new album, "Circulado" (Elektra Nonesuch), is music by adults and for adults.
Sung in Portuguese (Mr. Veloso is one of the biggest Brazilian pop singers to arrive during the tropicalia movement in the 1970's), the album moves from gentle samba to harder funk and bits of experimentation, mixing mild dissonance with Mr.
Veloso's gentle voice.


Fierce Artillery Barrage Empties Kabul
Fierce new fighting erupted in and around Kabul today when a dissident guerrilla leader hostile to the new Government fired dozens of rockets and artillery shells at the city.
The Government responded with artillery and rockets of its own, and columns of tanks and soldiers headed south, toward the dissident commander's stronghold.
As the fighting raged, with rockets and shells slamming into the airport and the center of town, the interim President, Sibgatullah Mojadedi, declared that instead of serving for two months until a broad Government can be formed, he intends to remain in office for two years.


Thermedics Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 28


Accustomed to Not-So-Smooth Sailing
Bill Koch likes to call himself a contrarian, and his neighbors here might agree.
Despite their protestations over the bronze sculpture of a bulbous, nude woman perched in a reclining position on Koch's bayside front lawn, the Kansas-born billionaire has refused to remove it.
In fact, Koch has considered turning the sculpture, which he calls Roseanne, around so that her bare backside faces the harbor.
It would be his way of thumbing his nose at a community that has been less than hospitable since his America
yachting team's arrival here more than a year ago.
Koch has received hate letters, and he says his crew has been refused service at the San Diego Yacht Club.


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
May 1
April 24
May 3
1992
1992
1991
Gasoline production, daily
7.1
7.2
6.8
Distillate production, daily
3.1
3.0
2.9
Gasoline stocks
216.4
218.4
204.3
Distillate stocks
93.3
94.6
101.3
Crude imports, daily
5.8
6.0
5.2
Product imports, daily
2.4
1.9
2.0
Crude stocks
353.0
350.7
338.6
Crude production, daily
7.3
7.3
7.4
Refinery utilization (%)
85.9
87.2
86.1
Source: American Petroleum Institute


Union Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Health Insurers Pay Bizarre Hospital Charges; Community Rating
To the Editor:
The New York State Legislature, in adopting the budget, went a long way toward the reforms required if all New Yorkers are to receive adequate, affordable health care.
One important piece of legislation remains: adoption of a community rating bill that would prohibit insurers from picking and choosing who they insure based on pre-existing conditions or perceived risk.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  National League
CHICAGO CUBS -- Placed Shawon Dunston, shortstop, on the 15-day disabled list.
CINCINNATI REDS -- Placed Billy Hatcher, outfielder, on the 15-day disabled list.
Activated Glenn Braggs, outfielder, from the 15-day disabled list.
MONTREAL EXPOS -- Placed Ivan Calderon, outfielder, on the 15-day disabled list, retroactive to April 30.
Purchased the contract of Jerry Goff, infielder, from Indianapolis of the American Association.
Basketball  National Basketball Association
DETROIT PISTONS -- Announced the resignation of Chuck Daly, coach.
SAN ANTONIO SPURS -- Announced they will not offer Paul Pressey, guard, a contract for next season, making him an unrestricted free agent on July 1.
World Basketball League  FLORIDA JADES -- Waived Darryl Kennedy, forward, for the purpose of giving him his unconditional release.
Football  National Football League
GREEN BAY PACKERS -- Traded Blair Kiel, quarterback, to the Atlanta Falcons for an undisclosed future draft choice.
MIAMI DOLPHINS -- Signed Jim Jensen, wide receiver.
NEW YORK GIANTS -- Signed Michael Poloskey, Kevin Carroll and Scott Van Bellinger, linebackers; Eric Bruun, punter; Robert Dressel and Randall Wallace, center; Torrey Wright and Anthony Lynn, running backs; Ramsey Bradberry and Corey Raymond, defensive backs; Nick Fineanganofo, Adam Johnson and Kevin Mancini, offensive linemen; and Micah Haley and Lubo Zizakovic, defensive linemen.
NEW YORK JETS -- Signed Kelvin Fisher, running back; Richard Holt, safety; Claude Jones, guard; Scott McAllister, punter; Clarence Miller and Patrick Nelson, wide receivers; Brad Sullivan, offensive lineman; and Wayne Wicka and Matt Willig, defensive tackles.
Arena Football League  CINCINNATI ROCKERS -- Signed Leon Cole and Karl Morgan, offenive linemen.
TAMPA BAY STORM -- Signed Paul Singer, quarterback.
Canadian Football League  BRITISH COLUMBIA LIONS -- Signed Greg Delaine, defensive end, and Paul Franklin, defensive back.
World League  BARCELONA DRAGONS -- Activated Matt Kelley, linebacker.
BIRMINGHAM FIRE -- Signed Kirk Kirkpatrick, tight end. Activated John Wyche, safety.
FRANKFURT GALAXY -- Signed Jeff Bridewell, quarterback. Activated Bill Ragans, safety.
MONTREAL MACHINE -- Claimed Billy Owens, safety, off waivers.
Waived Elliott Smith, safety.
SAN ANTONIO RIDERS -- Signed Roderick Manning, linebacker. College
CAMPBELL -- Announced the retirement of Wendall Carr, athletic director.
CITADEL -- Named Kevin Purcell men's assistant basketball coach.
DREXEL -- Announced the retirement of Lillian Haas, women's basketball coach, effective in June.
Named Kristen Foley women's basketball coach.
INDIANAPOLIS -- Named Scott Bless assistant football coach and Larry Bledsoe women's golf coach.
KANSAS -- Named Matt Doherty men's assistant basketball coach.
ST.
LOUIS -- Announced that Julian Winfield, basketball guard, will transfer to Kansas next season.
TEXAS-ARLINGTON -- Announced the resignation of Jerry Isler, women's basketball coach.


Columbia Hospital Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Court Approves A Rezoning In Clinton
The rezoning of a key parcel in mid-Manhattan was upheld yesterday by the State Court of Appeals against an environmental challenge by neighborhood residents, who argued that New York City was handing a "blank check" to the developer of the site.
The state's highest court said city officials had "identified and sought to minimize the significant environmental impacts" from rezoning the parcel, a full block bounded by 11th and 12th Avenues, from 41st to 42d Street, where that vital crosstown thoroughfare approaches the Hudson River.


Hachette Announces A Merger
Jean-Luc Lagardere, the humbled king of the French media business, today announced an unlikely merger of his publishing giant, Hachette S.A., and the Matra defense group in an apparent attempt to shore up Hachette's troubled finances.
Hachette's rapid growth during the 1980's in Europe and the United States -- its magazines include Elle and Woman's Day -- propelled its chairman, Mr.
Lagardere, to the status of international media baron.


CHRONICLE
"It a provocative title, isn't it?," BERNARD M. W. KNOX," said yesterday. And there was no question that the name he gave the speech he will deliver Thursday in Washington is likely to be controversial: "Oldest Dead White European Males."
Asked yesterday how he chose this title for the National Endowment for the Humanities' 21st annual Jefferson Lecture in the Humanities, Dr.
Knox explained, "I only added the word 'oldest' to 'dead white males,' a phrase that has been bandied about quite a bit." In fact the phrase has come to symbolize the long-running debate about the Eurocentric emphasis in American university education.


Judge Orders Communication In Brutality Case
A Federal judge yesterday approved an unusual settlement in a civil suit filed against a white police officer charged with killing a black man, saying he hoped to head off unrest like that which wracked Los Angeles after the Rodney G. King verdict.
An undisclosed financial award was a central part of the settlement reached with the family of an upstate New York man, Jimmy Lee Bruce Jr., who died in a 1986 scuffle with an off-duty officer.
Yet the judge also added a less tangible element: he is requiring the two sides to sit down and talk.
His aim, Judge Gerard L. Goettel told a packed Federal courtroom in White Plains, is to "bring something out of this tragic situation which will be of value."


No Reason to Doubt an Israeli Role in Technology Transfers
To the Editor:
A.
M.
Rosenthal's accusation against us in "Evans-Novak &amp; Popeye" (March 20), the first of his columns criticizing us, does us a disservice.
He wrote that we published a "demonstrably false" column suggesting that Israel is negotiating with China for sale of a missile "believed by the Pentagon to contain" United States technology secrets barred from transfer to third countries.
The technology contained in the missile is not only highly sensitive.
It is also so secret that intelligence officials term it a "black project." No reporter experienced in the ways of Washington would consider asking an Air Force "spokesman" to confirm or deny anything about a "black" project.
It would be a rare "spokesman" who would know any facts about such a clandestine project.


Flight of the Legislators
To the Editor:
Many of the 50 or so members of Congress who have announced they will not seek re-election have cited paralysis in government for their decision.
I suggest there is another, perhaps more compelling reason.
This is the last year members of Congress can take unexpended campaign funds and stick them in their pockets on retirement.
Thus their protestations that life in Congress has got too difficult ring hollow.


Stocks Higher in Tokyo
Stock prices opened higher in Tokyo today.
A half-hour after trading began on the Tokyo Stock Exchange, the Nikkei index of 225 issues was up 80.59 points, or 0.47 percent, to 17,383.98.
The market was closed Monday and Tuesday for a holiday.


Dentists May Rush to Treat A Toothache That Isn't One
WHEN Terah Biszantz felt a sharp pain in her upper right jaw four years ago, she went to a dentist who carefully examined her teeth but could not find anything wrong.
After the pain continued for 10 weeks, the dentist diagnosed the problem as an infection of nerve-laden soft tissue at an upper molar and persuaded her to undergo root-canal surgery.
But the pain did not go away, and Mrs.
Biszantz went to a specialist, an endodontist, who performed a second root canal.


Quotation of the Day
"Now especially it is time for Japan, an exporting nation, to assume a larger share of the West's common responsibility." -- CHANCELLOR HELMUT KOHL of Germany.  [ A7:2. ]


Sturm, Ruger &amp; Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


France Renounces Pact With U.S. Over Flights
France renounced its 46-year-old commercial aviation agreement with the United States yesterday, escalating the dispute with American carriers over their drive to have more flights to France this summer.
But Dan Kasper, an expert on international airlines, said the step was largely symbolic since the agreement will stay legally in effect for 12 more months.


House Likely to Take Up a Trade Bill Soon
House Democrats, looking to seize an issue after a stalemate on tax law changes, will try to pass far-reaching trade legislation before their party's convention this summer, representatives and Congressional aides said today.
Representative Dan Rostenkowski, the Illinois Democrat who heads the Ways and Means Committee, will introduce a bill by Thursday that would bring the first important changes in trade law since the Omnibus Trade and Competitiveness Act of 1988, the aides said.


National Pizza Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Patrick Industries reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Israel, as It Honors the War Dead, Is Haunted by 4 Missing Soldiers
As Israelis paused in silence tonight to honor their war dead, senior Government officials were haunted and frustrated by their continuing inability to bring home -- or even get information about -- four Israeli servicemen missing in Lebanon.
The missing men were pivotal figures in the long Middle East hostage drama that, from the United States' viewpoint, ended five months ago when Lebanese kidnappers freed their last American captive, Terry A. Anderson, a reporter for The Associated Press who had been held nearly seven years.


MBIA Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Third-Party Candidate; Perot to Curtail His Appearances to Study Issues
Ross Perot's incipient Presidential campaign has drama, visibility and considerable support in the polls.
Yesterday, Mr.
Perot announced that he was devoting himself to another important ingredient of any Presidential campaign: the issues.
In a speech to the American Newspaper Publishers Association, the Texas businessman said he was cutting back his interviews and public appearances to "spend all my time building an organization, finalizing a strategy and developing carefully thought out positions on each of the major issues."


Economic Scene; Willkommen To Amerika's Sky
WHEN word got out that BMW was thinking of assembling cars in South Carolina, the only question anyone asked was "How soon can you come?" But whenever Lufthansa has hinted that it would like to fly Americans around the United States on American-made aircraft operated by American pilots, the company has been no more welcome than a snowstorm in Miami.
There are explanations for this apparent contradiction.
For one thing, it's the law.
The Civil Aviation Act of 1938 prohibits foreign control of a United States airline.
For another, it makes for a plausible bargaining strategy: Investment rights remain a useful chip in Washington's sometime effort to increase global airline competition.


Wall St. Trade Group's Head Leaving After Eventful Term
Edward I. O'Brien, who has been the voice of Wall Street through some of the most turbulent years in its history, announced yesterday that he would retire by the end of the year as president of the Securities Industry Association.
His departure from the trade group will bring to a close a career that saw the securities industry through the end of fixed commissions on May Day in 1975, the birth of one of the longest and strongest bull markets in history in 1982, the scars and strain of the insider trading scandals of the mid-1980's, and the most severe market crash in history, on Oct. 19, 1987.


Clinton and Bush Win Easily
Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas and President Bush scored primary victories in North Carolina, Indiana and the District of Columbia.
Page A26.


CANADA TO DIVIDE ITS NORTHERN LAND
Maps of Canada are about to be redrawn after a vote that carves up Canada's north, setting the boundaries of what is to become a self-governing homeland for Eskimos.
By a 54 percent majority, the voters of the Northwest Territories took the momentous step on Monday, authorizing the split-up of their huge area into two separate territories divided by a zigzag line stretching from the Saskatchewan-Manitoba border practically to the North Pole.


Hampton Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 28


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.25-6.5
6.25-6.5
8.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.75
3.80
5.79
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.60
3.65
5.52
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.74
3.78
5.65
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.13
7.17
7.91
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.99
8.01
8.24
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.95
8.96
9.30
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.71
6.76
7.22
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Connecticut Legislature Passes a Budget With No Tax Increase


Reebok Vote on Pay Issue
A proposal by the New York City Employees Retirement System that Reebok International Ltd. set up a committee of independent directors to evaluate executive compensation won approval of 26.9 percent of the company's shareholders at yesterday's annual meeting.
Reebok officials opposed the proposal.
Elizabeth Holtzman, City Comptroller and the fund's trustee, noted that the proposal received far more than the 3 percent needed to permit reintroduction next year.
If Reebok's management does not change its practices, "we intend to be back," she said at the shareholders' meeting, which was held in Boston.


J. P. Morgan's One-Year Notes
J.
P.
Morgan Delaware yesterday priced $200 million in one-year notes through the First Boston Corporation as sole manager.
The one-year notes have a 4.3 percent coupon and will be offered to the public at various prices after the initial price of 100.


Integon Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Metropolitan Diary
THE place: York Video in the East 70's.
The time: 8:30 P.M. on a recent rainy Friday.
Ellen Grant, checking out the latest releases, is witness to the following scene.
A thirtysomething fellow stands in front of the "L" shelf, a cellular phone jammed between between his shoulder and ear.
As he peruses the titles, he speaks into the phone.
"You saw that? Well, what about 'L.A. Story'? I heard it was pretty good. No? Why not? All right, then. 'Little Man Tate' just came out. Jodie Foster's in it. Oh? So how about . . ?
Ms.
Grant moves on to "M." SATURDAYS up the narrow stairs for an egg roll lunch after we met under the Astor clock and before we enjoyed the second show at the Paramount a big band or "swooner" crooner plus a feature movie with change left from a dollar bill sufficent for the subway home -- HARRIET BERNSTEIN  Dear Diary:
My neighbors are making themselves conspicuous again.
They stand out on their terraces, shaking the dust from rugs.
There's nothing particularly bizarre about the flapping of a rug.
After all, it is spring.
And an activity that rids a yearlong supply of dust from rugs should not provoke ridicule.
But rug shaking does have its detractors, including the recipients of the dust and lint, which trickles down and settle on the terraces below.
As for myself, I admire the shakers.
They signal the arrival of spring.
The mere sight of a rug flapping takes my breath away.
I'm charmed to the point of inspiration.
I'm happy.
It isn't a rug anymore.
It's a cause, a celebration.
Spring blooms with all rugs, inexpensive as well as exotic.
Persian, Oriental, East Indian, Navajo, camel's hair, mohair, bathroom mats.
Rich mingling with poor.
Reds, greens, yellows, blues leaping in midair, ends curled up, middles dancing wildly, joyously.
Sunlight striking them like a gong.
Suddenly, with a snap of the wrists, the rugs straighten out, flat and smooth.
The sudden jerking motions cause each rug to produce a giggle, an ouch.
A crisp flapping sound.
Quip, quip, quipple.
Sounds like spring to me. -- ERNEST SLYMAN Dear Diary:
If anyone is interested in whatever became of the Brooklyn Jewish Hospital, it is now Interfaith Medical Center and it served "Filter Fish" for Passover. -- JANET WEISBERG
Last week's Metropolitan Diary included an entry from Merv Goldstein of Manhattan.
Mr.
Goldstein, a movie fan and would-be writer, related his delight at discovering that some United States Government Copyright Forms, for registration of published or unpublished works of the performing arts, use the name of film characters to illustrate how the forms should be filled out.
Mr.
Goldstein also included a plea to other film buffs: Could anyone tell him in what movie the names Henry Leek and Priam Farll (used as examples on recent forms) turn up?
Could they ever!
Cut to montage of movie fans rising to the challenge -- phoning, faxing, writing (favorite stamp: Abbott and Costello).
The answer(s): "Holy Matrimony," (1943), or its lesser-known 1933 version, "His Double Life." Based on Arnold Bennett's novel "Buried Alive," the story concerns a famous but reclusive British painter (Priam Farll), who assumes the identity of his dead valet (Henry Leek).
Roland Young and Lillian Gish starred in the 1933 film; Monty Wooley and Gracie Fields in the better-known "Holy Matrimony," with Eric Blore as the valet.
First respondents: Marty Rabinowitz, Roger Sturtevant, Frank M. Shanbacker.
The three New Yorkers were among the many who added that Bennett adapted his novel for the stage as "The Great Adventure," which inspired "Darling of the Day," a 1968 musical with Vincent Price, Patricia Routledge and Mitchell Jason.
Mr.
Jason played Duncan Farll, Priam's cousin, in the musical.
Others deserving of thanks: Ring Lardner Jr., John Springer, Joe Lobel, Miriam Pellman, Helen Merber, Dorothy M. Brown, Edward Starr, Maxine F. Salamon, Jack C. Thompson, D. M. Marshman Jr., M. C. Clark, James Morgan, Ronald B. Schroeder, Carl Hartman, Betty S. Waterhouse, Stanley Kushner, Joe Kapner and Michael Cohen.
All are winners of the first annual Merv Award.
A special Merv awaits that Government employee with the sense of humor who started all this.


BASEBALL: National League; Odd Homer Helps Expos Beat Padres
Expos 5, Padres 2
MONTREAL, May 5 (AP) -- The Expos won their first night game of the season tonight after 12 consecutive losses as Larry Walker hit a ground-rule inside-the-park homer to lead Montreal to a 5-2 victory.
John Vanderwal, a late substitution in left field, and Walker hit back-to-back bases-empty home runs in the third off Greg Harris (1-2) to support the pitching of Dennis Martinez (2-4).
Martinez gave up one run on seven hits in seven innings before Bill Landrum relieved.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on Monday about the budget debate in the Connecticut legislature misstated the position of the Senate Majority Leader, Cornelius O'Leary.
Mr.
O'Leary said a dispute between the House and Senate was not about a bill to legalize slot machines so much as it was about providing aid for cities, regardless of the source.


Terex Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Somatix Therapy Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Bruins Sweep on Road to Lead, 2-0, in Series
Bruins 3, Canadiens 2
MONTREAL, May 5 (AP) -- Peter Douris deflected in a pass from Ted Donato at 3 minutes 12 seconds into overtime, giving the Boston Bruins a 3-2 victory over the Montreal Canadiens and a stranglehold on their Adams Division final series tonight.
Douris redirected a pass into an open side past goaltender Patrick Roy, with the Canadiens complaining he had kicked the puck in.


Yields Fall Once Again At Banks
Yields on bank money market accounts and certificates of deposit were lower for the week ended today, according to The Bank Rate Monitor.
The week was the 13th consecutive one in which overall yields have been lower or flat, the longest such period in more than two and a half years, The Monitor noted.
Robert K. Heady, publisher of The Monitor, said that since February yields on one-year certificates had been unchanged, while five-year certificates were up an average of 35 basis points.
A basis point is one-hundredth of a percentage point.


Public &amp; Private; No There There
On a campaign trip to a South Carolina college campus 12 years ago, George Bush told his audience, "I'll be glad to reply to or dodge your questions, depending on what I think will help our election most."
At the time it was a throwaway line.
In retrospect it sounds like something that should have been needlepointed on a pillow.
Maybe that's unnecessary; the do-what-sells gene in George Bush's character seems so overdeveloped as to be ineradicable.


Review/Dance; New Casts In 'Beauty' At City Ballet
The young dancers Ethan Stiefel and Margaret Tracey breathed fresh life into the New York City Ballet's production of "The Sleeping Beauty" on Sunday afternoon at the New York State Theater.
Peter Martins's staging is a youthful, spirited reading of the classic, and Mr.
Stiefel and Ms.
Tracey brought their own impressive gifts to bear on it.
Mr.
Stiefel, a corps dancer just 19 years old, is new to the role of Prince Desire, but he danced it with the kind of technical and dramatic authority one has come to expect of him.
Like Ms.
Tracey, whose eloquently finished dancing as Aurora was a perfect complement, Mr.
Stiefel doesn't cheat or bother with bravura tricks, though he looks capable of almost any challenge of technique.


Health Insurers Pay Bizarre Hospital Charges; A Wrong Answer
To the Editor:
The paean to managed competition by Michael M. Weinstein (Editorial Notebook, April 25) identifies the need to contain costs and the folly of allowing unlimited deductibility of health insurance premiums.
Unfortunately, Mr.
Weinstein appears to expect the tooth fairy to make the allocation of resources between heart transplants and prenatal care.
We have a self-defeating romance with medical technology, and no capacity for innovation will substitute for a commitment to illness prevention at the primary care level.
Mr.
Weinstein acknowledges these issues fleetingly in recommending regionalization of some high technology procedures, but does not mention that specialists vastly outnumber primary care physicians, or how fear of malpractice litigation influences the ordering of tests and procedures.


CHRONICLE
"Don't go yet," GAEL GREENE asked the 300 women at the annual Citymeals-on-Wheels "Power Lunch" yesterday.
"I know you want to dash out the door, but there are Secret Service men heading into the Rainbow Room complex at this very moment."
Ms.
Greene, the co-founder and chairwoman of Citymeals-on-Wheels, had learned only 20 minutes earlier that Gov.
BILL CLINTON would stop in to talk to the assembled executives, publishers, entrepreneurs and theatrical figures -- everyone from BARBARA WALTERS to LISA SLIWA to KATHLEEN TURNER.


Robbery Conviction In Wells Fargo Case
The leader of a Puerto Rican terrorist group was convicted in absentia today in the $7.1 million Wells Fargo robbery in 1983 that the authorities said was staged to finance the group's activities.
The leader, Filiberto Ojeda Rios, jumped a $1 million bond while awaiting trial and is believed to be hiding in Puerto Rico.
He was the first defendant tried in absentia in a Connecticut Federal court.


Jan Bell Marketing reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Thomas O. Paine, 70, Led NASA During Its First 7 Apollo Missions
Dr.
Thomas O. Paine, who oversaw the nation's space program during the first manned missions to the moon, died on Monday at his home in Brentwood, Calif.
He was 70 years old.
He died of cancer, said David Garrett, a spokesman for the National Aeronautics and Space Administration.


Food Notes
New Food Boutique
It was only a matter of time before a French department store would offer food.
Next week Galeries Lafayette, 10 East 57th Street, is opening a shop on its lower level with French foods and accessories for the home.
Through the end of May, the shop will feature products from the south of France, including olive oils, vinegars, jams, honeys and mustards from Baumaniere and Soleillou.
To celebrate the introduction of the food products, Jean-Claude Terrettaz from the Ottawa branch of the Cordon Bleu cooking school will give free, hourlong cooking demonstrations at noon next Monday through Friday.


Phone Companies Oppose Cox's Plan to Buy Teleport Stake
Local telephone companies, in a new skirmish with the cable television industry, have asked the Federal Communications Commission to block Cox Enterprises Inc. from acquiring control of a company that provides high-speed local communications services for large business customers.
The filing marks a new round in the looming competition between the two industries, both of which are trying to expand beyond their traditional niches and provide everything from telephone calls to pay-per-view movies.


'Green' Wine Adds Spice to Summer
NOW that spring has come and summer beckons, light, thirst-slaking vinho verde -- green wine -- can't be far behind for the Portuguese communities in Mineola, L.I., and Newark's Ironbound section.
It also holds appeal for other, economy-minded consumers and for Pasquale (Pat) Iocca.
Many in the wine world call Mr.
Iocca the nation's No. 1 authority on Portuguese wines.
Last week, guests at the International Wine Center, a Manhattan wine school, quickly saw why when he pronounced the name VEEN-you VEHRD; even buffs call this white wine VAIR-dee.


Books of The Times; A Dirty Little Precursor Of Sound Bites and Polls
The Campaign of the Century Upton Sinclair's Race for Governor of California and the Birth of Media Politics By Greg Mitchell Illustrated. 665 pages.
Random House. $27.50.
"The eyes of the world are on California," wrote a columnist for The San Francisco Chronicle.
"From the end of the earth, we have become almost its center."


George Mandel-Montello Is Dead; Special Envoy, 90, Rescued Jews
George Mandel-Montello, a financier and businessman who played a central role in saving thousands of European Jews from Nazi death camps in World War II, died in Rome on April 25 of natural causes, according to David Kranzler, a professor emeritus of the City University of New York.
Mr.
Mandel-Montello was 90 years old.
Born of Jewish parents in the Transylvanian region, in what is now Romania, Mr.
Mandel-Montello was "one of the hidden heroes of the European rescue effort," Professor Kranzler said yesterday.
Aided Rescue Operations
He put aside his business activities in the early 1940's, after having been briefly detained by German forces in Yugoslavia, to devote himself to rescue operations, Professor Kranzler said.
Mr.
Mandel-Mantello escaped to Geneva, where he was given refuge by diplomats of El Salvador he had come to know through his business affairs.


BUSINESS DIGEST
International
Hachette will merge with the Matra defense group, Hachette's chairman said.
The unlikely pairing is apparently an attempt to shore up the publishing giant's troubled finances.  [ Page D1. ]
Olympia &amp; York moved to sell its 18 percent stake in Santa Fe Pacific.
The proceeds -- more than $400 million at current prices -- would help it meet some missed payments.  [ D1. ]


Publishers Face Clash Of Values
The nation's newspaper publishers grappled yesterday at their annual convention with the troubling clash of journalistic and marketing values as newspapers try to accommodate advertisers without sacrificing principles and credibility.
Traditionally, publishers have responsibility for all aspects of a newspaper's operation, including news and business, but the difficult economic climate for newspapers has created concern that publishers have made business matters their priority in recent years, sometimes to the anger and distress of editors and reporters.


FoxMeyer Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Pacific Northern Gas reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Brunswick Mining reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Sanford M. Farrer, 61, Brooklyn Pathologist
Dr.
Sanford M. Farrer, the chairman of the pathology department of the Brooklyn Hospital Center, died at the hospital on Saturday.
He was 61 years old and lived in Manhattan and Pawling, N.Y.
He died of pancreatic cancer, a hospital spokesman said.


Midwest Grain Products reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Donegal Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Vornado Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


SCOR U.S. Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Gendex Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


BUSH SAYS LARGESS WON'T HELP CITIES
President Bush, whose Administration on Monday blamed failed Democratic social-welfare policies of the 1960's for the Los Angeles riots, said today as he left for California that this was no time for name-calling.
But he also contended that the nation could "do better" than Lyndon B. Johnson's Great Society programs in combating urban ills, and he said that "it is far more important to give people a piece of the action than simply to have the Federal Government dump largess on them."


Ewing Faces the Basket. Yessss!
Before sending Pat Riley's jar of mousse off to the Hall of Fame, before nominating him for sainthood and championing him as a man-of-the-people running mate for Ross Perot, just this one minor quibble:
What took him so long to get Patrick Ewing to turn around and look at the basket?


Criticized as Greedy, School District Drops Opposition to Shoreham Demolition
The school district that became one of the wealthiest in the nation on the strength of property-tax revenues from the ill-fated Shoreham nuclear power plant today dropped its longstanding public opposition to the final demolition of the plant.
The district gave up the fight only after it was publicly excoriated for greed by the chairman of a state authority set up to close the plant, who then threatened to withhold a $14 million tax payment.


Strange Feeling: Bulls Facing Some Pressure
For the first time all season, someone has given the Chicago Bulls reason for genuine concern.
It may not last.
It may be that the Knicks' shocking victory over the Bulls in Game 1 of their four-of-seven-game playoff series was only a temporary stumble on Chicago's march to another title.


Ex-Detective Offers Plea in Bank Robberies
A former police detective has worked out a plea bargain in a string of eight bank robberies that his lawyer says he committed because he was mentally ill.
But the agreement, in a bizarre case of a model cop turned robber, says nothing about the whereabouts of $363,000 of the $593,000 he admitted stealing from August 1989 to October 1991.


Adaptec Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Now It's the Bush Court
Clarence Thomas and David Souter, the two Supreme Court Justices appointed by President Bush, have just made moderates of Sandra Day O'Connor and Anthony Kennedy, two Reagan appointees.
The newest Justices tipped the balance in a 5-to-4 decision stripping another right of access to the Federal courts for prisoners who believe their rights have been denied.
Justices O'Connor and Kennedy, who had been part of Chief Justice William Rehnquist's wrecking crew in earlier cases involving state prison inmates, felt compelled to file dissenting opinions.
They charged, rightly, that the Court had carried its deconstruction too far.


TriMas Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Noble Drilling Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Minerex Resources reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Broken Promises, Empty Dreams
During the ghetto riots in the 1960's, whites, who didn't understand the depth of black alienation, expressed incomprehension.
They believed, however, that Government programs could heal the breach.
Some efforts were made, with mixed results; some were abandoned after disappointment, and others were discussed, then ignored.
After an uneasy calm returned, there was a consensus, born of impatience and apathy, that nothing would make much of a difference.
The ghetto dwellers would have to make it mostly on their own -- or not.


Esquire Radio &amp; Electronics Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Leslie's Poolmart reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


La Quinta Motor Inns L.P.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


PARENT &amp; CHILD
ALTHOUGH the immediate crisis has passed, many children are still having trouble making sense of the issues underlying the beating of Rodney G. King by police officers more than a year ago and the riots that followed the officers' acquittal last week.
The repeated images of both on television simultaneously fascinated and horrified children.
Some of their concerns may only be coming out now.
Children express their anxieties over situations like this differently than adults.
Preschoolers and early elementary-school children may worry that the violence they saw on television will erupt in their neighborhoods, even though they live on the other side of the country.
It's a fear they may harbor for days or weeks, unable to talk about their feelings.
Instead, they may change the patterns of their play, becoming more violent or acting out scenes of rescue and protection.
Play, not words, is the language of their emotions.


TRM Copy Centers Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Four A's Rebuked By Promotion Group
Escalating the debate over trade promotion and its effect on advertising spending, Jeff McElnea, the president of the Council of Sales Promotion Agencies, yesterday criticized the American Association of Advertising Agencies for its attacks on the practice by which marketers pay retailers to buy, stock and display their products.
In a speech at the council's semiannual conference in Chicago, Mr.
McElnea termed the criticism, made at the Four A's annual meeting last month, a "whining diatribe," and called the trade association's efforts "naive and misguided."


Medical Imaging Centers of America reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Hammond Manufacturing reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Yankees Silently Slip Into A 3-2 Loss
The Yankee bats began to fall silent in Seattle, and tonight it didn't get better.
Left-hander Mark Langston took a one-hit shutout into the eighth inning, and although he didn't finish the game, he still helped the California Angels gain a 3-2 victory at Anaheim Stadium.
The Yankees, who now have lost four of five games, got a single from Jesse Barfield in the second inning and didn't get another hit off Langston until Jim Leyritz led off the eighth with a single.
Langston left with no outs in the ninth after an infield hit by Charlie Hayes and a triple by Dave Silvestri.


High Plains Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Energy Ventures Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


HOME IMPROVEMENT
MAKING concrete has a reputation for being difficult, but with some basic knowledge, the right equipment and a helper or two, most amateurs can successfully build projects like walkways, patios, steps, and foundation footings for storage sheds. (Being in good physical condition is a must; a standard bag of cement, containing one cubic foot, weighs 94 pounds.)
Concrete contains a mixture of aggregates -- sand and either gravel or crushed stone held together by portland cement, which is a kiln-fired blend of limestone and other minerals.
Adding water creates a chemical reaction, binding the portland cement with the aggregates to form a mass that, when dry, is known as concrete.


Debentures Priced By Norsk Hydro
In its first offering of long-term bonds since 1927, Norsk Hydro, the largest publicly owned company in Norway, priced $350 million in 20-year debentures yesterday through underwriters led by Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company.
The debentures of the Norwegian company have a 9 percent coupon and are priced at 100, to yield about 95 basis points more than Treasury securities with a similar maturity.


Homeplex Mortgage Investments Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


New Premier Boosts Mitterrand
After suffering a succession of political setbacks in recent months, President Francois Mitterrand appears to be slowly regaining popularity with his decision last month to name Pierre Beregovoy in place of Edith Cresson as Prime Minister.
According to the latest poll, Mr.
Beregovoy, a former Finance Minister, has an approval rating of 54 percent, more than twice as high as that enjoyed by Mrs.
Cresson when she left office.
Confidence in Mr.
Mitterrand has in turn risen by four points, to 37 percent.


Miscellany
*
Magazine Publishers of America, New York, said 10 percent of gross revenues from its Stephen E. Kelly Award dinner would be donated to the Rebuild L.A. fund.
This year's dinner, scheduled for May 19 in Los Angeles, is the first held outside New York.


Franco-Nevada Mining reports earnings for Year to March 31


Starrett (L.S.) Co. (N) reports earnings for Qtr to March 28


Puerto Rican Cement Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Hadson Energy Resources reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Senate Panel Hears of Human Toll in Workplace
Against the background of President Bush's moratorium on workplace regulations, witnesses at a Senate committee hearing today gave sometimes graphic testimony on the human and economic costs of occupational injuries.
One young woman described in a halting, emotion-laden voice how her 20-year-old brother and two other workers in a meat packing plant in Liberal, Kan., died in a vat of blood after they were overcome by the fumes it gave off.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Eddie Palmieri and Friends The Village Gate
There was a stretch of pure musical ecstasy during Monday's first set when discipline met serendipity.
Eddie Palmieri's band had romped through an elaborate arrangement of "Azucar," full of shifting jazz harmonies and brassy syncopation, then moved into a modal vamp behind the guest piano soloist, Hilton Ruiz.
The concert was part of the weekly Salsa Meets Jazz series.


Badger Paper Mills Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Viatech Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Dynasty Classics Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Cimflex Teknowledge reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


A Less Aggressive Salomon Sees Its Profits Decline 30%
Amid a flurry of reminders that Salomon Inc. has yet to emerge fully from the fallout caused by last year's Treasury auction scandal, the company reported yesterday that its first-quarter profits were down 30 percent from the period last year.
The profit decline reflected the retreat by Salomon Brothers, the company's investment banking unit, from the trading prowess it demonstrated a year ago, before the scandal broke.
But the profits also marked a turnaround from the $29 million that Salomon lost in the quarter that ended Dec. 31.


Acme Steel reports earnings for Qtr to March 29


Calendar: A Potpourri Of Roses and Gardens
Sale and Seminar
New York Botanical Garden, 200th Street and Southern
Boulevard, Bedford Park section of the Bronx; (212) 220-8700
.
A sale of wildflowers, vegetables, cactuses, orchids, trees and ferns will be held from 10 A.M. to 4 P.M. tomorrow and Saturday.


Ramsay-HMO Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


HemaCare Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Vacu-Dry Co. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-17  FLYING DOWN TO RIO
Ending one of the more fractious debates in his Administration in recent months, President Bush is expected to announce soon that he will fly to Brazil for a United Nations environmental conference.
A1  CURTAIN CALL FOR GORBACHEV
History came full cycle as the former Soviet leader added a postscript of global reconciliation to the "Iron Curtain" speech Winston Churchill gave 46 years ago.
A1
Members of Congress said aid to Russia was in jeopardy.  A14
Violence erupts after protests against the Tajik Government.
A14  A PEEK AT NORTH KOREA'S A-PLANTS
Possibly resolving one of the biggest mysteries surrounding its secretive nuclear program, North Korea has described a web of previously unknown sites to the International Atomic Energy Agency.
A8  PERU BATTLES REBELS AT PRISON
Clashes broke out when Peruvian police officers tried to remove some Shining Path guerrillas from a cell block at a maximum-security prison in Lima.
At least one person was killed and 13 wounded.
A9  ISRAEL TO SKIP PART OF NEXT ROUND
Israel has given formal notice that it will boycott two phases of regional peace talks scheduled to begin next week because Palestinians from outside the occupied territories will be taking part, officials said.
A3
Israel explains its policy on shooting armed Palestinians.
A5  LEBANESE GOVERNMENT QUITS
Prime Minister Karami announced his resignation after two days of nationwide riots over the worst economic crisis the country has experienced since independence.
A3  QUIET IN KABUL
As suddenly as it began, the shelling of Kabul stopped as an informal cease-fire between the new Government and a dissident guerrilla leader took hold.
A6  THE RUSSIA-INDIA CONNECTION
India said that Russia had pledged to honor a commitment undertaken by the former Soviet Union to deliver sophisticated rocket technology despite a threat by Washington to suspend technical cooperation with both Moscow and New Delhi if the deal went through.
A7  TALKS IN GERMAN STRIKE
Talks between western Germany's public employee unions and the Government resumed in Stuttgart as a 10-day strike continued to severely disrupt air traffic, other transit and garbage collection.
A10  AUSTERITY REJECTED IN POLAND
Defying pleas from the Government and the International Monetary Fund, the Polish Parliament refused to cut retirement pensions or trim raises for state employees.
A11  IT'S MACEDONIA.
PERIOD.
The former Yugoslav republic, denied recognition by the European Community and the United States because of a dispute with Greece over its name, has rejected pressure to compromise.
A16  France's President seems to be regaining popularity.
A8  Jerusalem Journal: Israel's highest literary honor goes to an Arab.
A4  National A18-25, B10-12  BUDGET AMENDMENT GAINS
Momentum is building for a constitutional amendment that would require a balanced Federal budget.
Even lawmakers who oppose the amendment concede that its approval by Congress this year is almost inevitable.
A1  FOR KEMP, A NEW POPULARITY
Beset by the accusation that the Administration has let urban problems fester, the White House has suddenly reached out to Housing Secretary Kemp, declared interest in his antipoverty proposals and attacked Congressional Democrats for not enacting them.
A1
Bush leveled criticism at Great Society programs.  A22  WHO WERE THE LOOTERS?
The people who stripped many businesses as the rioting broke out in South-Central Los Angeles last week varied markedly, from angry gang members intent on settling scores to poor immigrant families unable to resist the lure of goods.
A1
Evidence suggests police force could have prevented the riots.  A22
For Ueberroth, ambitious plans but an enormous task.  A23
The riots reverberated in a courtroom in Florida.  A23  CLINTON IN THE CROSSHAIRS
Four blocks from the White House, a corps of young Republican researchers are doing their best to come up with derogatory information about Governor Clinton.
A24
In Clinton's Arkansas, another execution is at hand.  A24  NEW PUSH ON CHILD WELFARE
Hoping to show that they can get something done legislatively in a generally dismal session, House Democrats are trying to add a major child welfare program to a popular unemployment bill.
A18
A Senate panel heard testimony on occupational injuries.
A25  MAIDEN VOYAGE FOR A SHUTTLE
More than six years after history's worst space accident destroyed the shuttle Challenger and killed its crew of seven, a $1.8 billion replacement ship, Endeavour, is ready to soar aloft tonight, weather permitting.
B10
The C.I.A.'s satellite photos may help global-warming experts.
B10  NEW FETAL-TISSUE FINDINGS
Two new reports provide intriguing evidence that fetal-tissue transplants can alleviate symptoms of Parkinson's disease.
B11  Richmond Journal: Arthur Ashe goes home.
A18  For Agnew, once disgraced, enshrinement may be near.
A18  A report found many older women lacking health insurance.
A19  Metropolitan Digest, B1 CHARGES IN IMPORT SCHEME
Federal prosecutors in Manhattan accused Chinese officials of conspiring with two American companies to defraud the United States of more than $100,000 in duties on imported textiles and clothing.
The case comes as the Bush Administration is looking toward another battle with Congress over China's favorable trade status.
A1  Business Digest, D1  Obituaries B16-17  MARLENE DIETRICH DIES
Marlene Dietrich, the magnetic movie star and singer who was an international symbol of glamour and sex for more than half a century, died yesterday at her home in Paris.
She was 90 years old.
A1  The Home Section C1-12  Children saving the planet.
C1  Sports B18-23  Baseball: Mets lose to Reds.
B19  Basketball: For Bulls, pressure feels strange.
B19  Hockey: Slash leaves Lemieux with a fracture.
B19  Arts/Entertainment C13-28  Spring auction sales.
C15  Editorials/Op-Ed A26-27  Editorials A26  Young black men.
Now it's the Bush Court.
Spring, unstrung.
North Korea defuses fears.
Letters A26  William Safire: Old pro Perot.
A27  Anthony Lewis: Court against Congress.
A27  Ronald Steel: Broken promises, empty dreams.
A27  Georgy A. Arbatov: Neo-Bolsheviks of the I.M.F.
A27


MediVators Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Continental Materials reports earnings for Qtr to April 3


Guerrillas Halt Shelling of Kabul But Political Fever Remains High
As suddenly as it began, the shelling and rocketing of Kabul ceased this morning as an informal cease-fire between the new Government and a dissident guerrilla leader took hold.
For more than 12 hours on Tuesday, forces loyal to the hard-line Islamic fundamentalist guerrilla leader, Gulbuddin Hekmatyar, bombarded Kabul with high explosives, killing more than 40 people and wounding as many as 200.
The fighting broke out because the new Government apparently refused to give in to Mr.
Hekmatyar's demands for a prominent role.


Chapter on Sex Restored to Child-Care Book
Under pressure from Congressional Democrats, Blue Cross-Blue Shield has decided to send 275,000 Federal employees a chapter on contraceptives and adolescent sexuality that had been deleted from a child-care manual before the insurer distributed the manual to the employees earlier this year.
The decision to delete the chapter was made by the Office of Personnel Management, the Government's central personnel agency, where a senior official had found the material "too controversial."


BUSH LIKELY TO GO TO ECOLOGY TALKS
Ending one of the more fractious debates within his Administration in recent months, President Bush is expected to announce soon that he will fly to Brazil for a United Nations environmental conference that his conservative advisers call a trap and his economic experts see as a fiscal debacle.
The prospect of that announcement is likely to cheer a worldwide alliance of environmental advocates and political figures involved in environmental issues, who have long feared that Mr.
Bush might single-handedly wreck the meeting simply by staying home.


Seats of Honor For Any Garden
NO self-respecting gardener admits to sitting down on the job.
But when a seat is needed -- for visitors -- it may as well offer a stylish place to tarry.
Today, the choices in outdoor furniture are seemingly infinite, whether for city terrace or country yard.
Here's a sampling of wood and metal chairs to satisfy even the most persnickety gardeners and their guests.


Unions Agree to Cut Costs For Javits Center Vendors
After six years of grievances by show managers and exhibitors about high labor costs and featherbedding at the Jacob K. Javits Convention Center in Manhattan, the unions there have agreed to new procedures that center officials say will significantly reduce costs.
The agreement means that exhibitors at the center will now be able to screw in a light bulb without having to pay an electrician.


Marten Transport reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Marlene Dietrich, 90, Symbol of Glamour, Dies
Marlene Dietrich, the magnetic movie star and singer who was an international symbol of glamour and sex for more than half a century, died yesterday at her home in Paris.
She was 90 years old.
In her films and record-breaking cabaret performances, Miss Dietrich artfully projected cool sophistication, self-mockery and infinite experience.
Her sexuality was audacious, her wit was insolent and her manner was ageless.
With a world-weary charm and a diaphanous gown showing off her celebrated legs, she was the quintessential cabaret entertainer of Weimar-era Germany.


DeLamielleure to Make a Comeback
His father was a boxer, and as a boy he messed around with boxing a bit before he got sidetracked by football.
Now at age 42, JOE DeLAMIELLEURE, who played 13 seasons as an offensive lineman for Buffalo and Cleveland, is looking to make up for lost boxing time.
He plans to take on CHARLIE (THE PREACHERMAN) HOPKINS in a 10-round heavyweight bout at the Charlotte (N.C.) Motor Speedway on May 20.
DeLamielleure should get in about 20 days of intensive training.
Should he fail, he plans to play this summer with the Charlotte Rage of the Arena Football League. (AP)


Panel Begins Budget Review For Transit
In a meeting that began and ended with partisan finger-pointing and shouting, the Assembly Appropriations Committee today began to review the budgets of the State Transportation Department and N.J.
Transit.
The mood of the session was set on Monday, when N.J.
Transit's executive director, Shirley A. DeLibero, warned of drastic service cuts and the possibility of a 35 percent fare increase if there were reductions in its proposed $791 million budget for the fiscal year that begins on July 1.


Marinovich Gets a Year's Probation
Six months after he played his stereo a bit too loudly a bit too late, TODD MARINOVICH has faced the music.
After pleading guilty to a misdemeanor disturbance charge stemming from a loud party at his home in Manhattan Beach, Calif., late last Halloween night, the Los Angeles Raider quarterback was sentenced yesterday to a year's unsupervised probation and fined $705.
Marinovich, who makes an average of about $750,000 a year under his three-year contract, was given until June 8 to pay the fine. (AP)


A Public Battle Over Secret Codes
An issue long relegated to testy grumbling between software engineers and intelligence agents has suddenly grown into a public dispute between the Bush Administration and business executives.
In a digital age that finds more and more information protected by elaborate coding techniques, both sides are asking: Who should hold the keys to the codes?


New Shuttle Is Set for First Mission
More than six years after history's worst space accident destroyed the shuttle Challenger and killed its crew of seven, a $1.8 billion replacement ship is ready to soar aloft Thursday night on its first flight, returning the nation's shuttle fleet to full strength.
Weather and equipment permitting, the new shuttle, Endeavour, and its seven crew members are to blast off at 7:06 P.M., with the launching window extending to 7:55 P.M.
Forecasters said there was a 70 percent chance that low clouds and rain showers could delay the liftoff a day or more.


Medicine Shoppe International Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Agnew's Blemished Image Could Be Carved in Stone
Thanks to a small group of conservatives, former Vice President Spiro T. Agnew, who resigned in disgrace almost two decades ago, may soon be enshrined in marble and placed on a prestigious perch in the United States Capitol.
His name conjures up dark historical images for most Americans, from dim memories of scandal to vivid impressions of betrayal at the highest levels of Government.
Mr.
Agnew was Vice President from 1969 to 1973 when in an agreement with prosecutors he pleaded no contest to charges of tax evasion and resigned from the second-highest office in the land.
Except for Mr.
Agnew, every former Vice President from John Adams to George Bush has a bust of his likeness in niches or hallways in the Capitol.
Absence Noted
Last June, when workers shifted several of the 41 marble busts displayed above the Senate gallery and in its hallways when Mr.
Bush's stone likeness was added, someone noticed that Mr.
Agnew was not represented.
With that, Matthew Scully, an editor for The National Review at the time, began a campaign in the magazine to get a bust of Mr.
Agnew installed.
"It was one of those small, gnawing slights that could easily be righted," said Mr.
Scully, who is now a speech writer for Vice President Dan Quayle.
Mr.
Scully, who has never met Mr.
Agnew but whose editorials turned the spotlight on the issue of the missing bust, said: "We're talking about a fellow whose getting on in years. Eventually, they'll put up a bust of him. Why not put it up while he's still around?"
Some supporters of a bust for Mr.
Agnew have found justification for his bust in the records of other Vice Presidents.
They said Mr.
Agnew's crimes might not be as bad as those of some predecessors.
Rogues' Gallery?
"We have a gallery of Vice-Presidential busts, including John C. Breckinridge, who became a Confederate general," Mr.
Scully said in an interview.
Senator Ted Stevens, Republican of Alaska, pointed to "Schuyler Colfax, who was involved in a major bribery scandal, and even Aaron Burr," who killed Alexander Hamilton in a duel and was accused of treason for his vague plans of an empire in the West and South; he was acquitted.
The bust is not based on merit, Mr.
Scully said, but on "a sense of historical thoroughness," Mr.
Scully said.
So, toward the goal of historical thoroughness, the Capitol architect's office is selecting a sculptor to make the marble carving that would likely cost as much as $50,000.
But before it is commissioned the plan must be submitted to the Senate Rules Committee for approval, which it is expected to grant.
Mr.
Agnew quit after Federal prosecutors accused him of taking bribes and cash kickbacks on highway contracts starting in the early 1960's, when he was the executive of Baltimore County, Md., and while governor of Maryland from 1967 to 1969.
In the end, Mr.
Agnew pleaded not guilty to one count of tax evasion for not reporting the income from bribes.
He resigned as Vice President on Oct. 10, 1973, and was given a $10,000 fine and a three-year suspended jail sentence.
Mr.
Agnew virtually disappeared from public view until 1989, when he made news by applying for a tax deduction for the reimbursement that a court had ordered him to pay the State of Maryland for the bribes he took.
His request was rejected by a tax appeals board in California.
Mr.
Agnew now lives in Rancho Mirage, Calif., and describes himself as "an international businessman."
Mr.
Agnew refuses to discuss whether his likeness deserves a place in the Capitol.
But he did write a letter to The Baltimore Sun last June, that hinted how he felt about the missing monument.
"Frankly, I do not want to discuss the matter," Mr.
Agnew wrote.
"It seems to me that it should not require any initiative on my part. If the American people feel that my bust should be placed with the others, they should so indicate and I will be glad to cooperate.
"However, there seems to be little interest in the matter," Mr.
Agnew continued.
"You may remember that former Gov. Harry Hughes removed my portrait from the Maryland State House and put it in storage in the basement amid some publicity. So far as I know, it is still in the basement."


Market Place; Less Flexibility In Europe's Rates
A FUNNY thing happened in Europe when the British Government moved to cut interest rates this week.
The British bond market rally came to an abrupt end.
The market reaction points up the complicated relationships among European countries, as well as the continued focus in Germany on its own problems, to the exclusion of those of the rest of Europe.


Telebyte Technology reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Charter Medical reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Bob Looks Back on His Partnership With Ray
In 1954, as the nation watched the Army-McCarthy hearings, a strange subplot infiltrated "Mary Backstayge, Noble Wife," the parody soap opera created by the radio comedy team of Bob and Ray.
In the little town of Skunk Haven, it seemed, suspicious characters were trying to destroy the Skunk Haven way of life, and a stuttering, blustering town official, Commissioner Carstairs, armed with a list of names, was determined to stop them.
"After our radio show on WINS we'd go into a nearby bar and watch the hearings," said Bob Elliott, the Bob of Bob and Ray, in an interview at the Museum of Television and Radio in Manhattan.
"Then we'd use the material in the next day's show. I consider that, from a creative point of view, one of the top things we did." Time magazine later praised the duo for being the only comedians with courage to touch the subject.


Commerce Dept. Aide Quits
J.
Michael Farren, the Under Secretary of Commerce for International Trade, will leave the Commerce Department soon to become a deputy manager of President Bush's campaign, Administration and Republican officials said today.
The shift, scheduled for announcement on Thursday, reflects a move by the campaign to expand its ranks with longtime Republican operatives in preparation for the general election campaign this autumn, a Republican official said.
Mr.
Farren has alternated between senior Commerce Department posts and Republican campaigns since 1981.
The re-election campaign already has three other deputy campaign managers: James Lake, Mary Matalin and Will Feltus.


Review/Music; Met Opera Orchestra Plays at Carnegie Hall
The Metropolitan Opera Orchestra is far from just a pit band.
Not only has it been led by such conductors as Toscanini, Walter, Szell, Bohm, Karajan and Reiner, but over the last decade James Levine has devoted to it almost as much time and attention as the old-fashioned music directors gave to symphony orchestras.
Mr.
Levine has made the ensemble a powerful instrument that can healthily exist away from the house.
In recent years, for example, the orchestra has made its first recordings in a generation -- a new version of Wagner's "Ring" along with other recordings under way for Deutsche Grammophon, Sony Classical and Philips.
The orchestra went on its first concert tour last spring.
And there have been times in the house itself (as in last September's "Idomeneo") when the playing has had a grace and subtlety that both supported the drama and created autonomous musical worlds.


Cause of Passaic Fire Is Laid to Toddlers Playing With Matches


The Haves Always Have 'Monday Night' in N.F.L.
Like a barometer of who's in and who's out, the schedule for ABC's "Monday Night Football" reflects the National Football League's placement of the best potential teams and matchups in the marquee prime-time slot.
It's no different for the 1992 season.


Option Care reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Ero Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


The Noble Savage Doesn't Stand a Chance
To the Editor:
"Noble Savages? We'll Drink to That" by Michael Dorris (Op-Ed, April 21) is another attempt to portray the American Indian as something he is not.
As Francis Parkman makes perfectly clear in "The Conspiracy of Pontiac," the noble Eastern Indian had been thoroughly corrupted by the British within 100 years of their arrival by the introduction of the rifle, the plow and whisky.
The skills of the hunt were lost along with indigenous agricultural know-how.


The Secret's Out: Top British Spy Identified
Sir Colin McColl was swept in from the cold today.
Breaking a longstanding policy shrouding the identity of Britain's chief spy, Prime Minister John Major unexpectedly acknowledged that Sir Colin was the head of the British Secret Intelligence Service, known as M.I. 6.
Mr.
Major's revelation before the House of Commons was surprising, but it was not news.
Sir Colin's title was one of Britain's most open secrets.
Until now, however, no one in the Government ever officially acknowledged what Sir Colin did.


CytoTherapeutics reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Mesa Airlines reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Omni Films International reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Bridge
In the history of American tournament play the smallest state has never had any big success.
But that pattern has changed in the last three years.
Russ Ekeblad of Providence, R.I., was a member of a team that finished second in the 1990 world team championship and has done well in several national tournaments.
A week ago he was a member of a foursome that won the Cavendish Teams playing with his wife, Sheila, who recorded her first major success.
Their teammates were Barry Goren of Chicago and Peter Weichsel of Encinitas, Calif.


ESI Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Books of The Times; Killer on the Loose, Trying to Get Lost
Sleeping Dogs By Thomas Perry 337 pages. Random House. $22.
Michael Schaeffer, the unusual hero of Thomas Perry's hyperactive new thriller, "Sleeping Dogs," has been living for 10 years in Bath, England, just rattling about.
The sort of thing he does is attend lectures given by believers in the lost continent of Atlantis.
At one of these he meets Margaret Holroyd, a footloose, aristocratic woman who amuses herself by playing pranks like telling the Atlantis people that she has spiked their punch with a rare aphrodisiac, which they believe, to their embarrassment.


Northwestern Public Service reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Mercury General reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Visual Stimuli Are Implicated in Sex Crimes; Moral Responsibility
To the Editor:
In "A Damaging Remedy for Sex Crimes" (editorial, April 13), opposing the pornography victims' compensation bill, you imply that the bill would encourage leniency by the criminal justice system toward rapists who argue that pornography is to blame for their crimes.
We share your concern that individuals not be allowed to shift moral responsibility onto inanimate objects.
But fear that the bill would do this is ill founded.
The theory behind the bill is not that the sex criminal is not responsible, but that the victim has been harmed by the crime itself and by the introduction into commerce of material that was likely to, and did, contribute to the crime.
The victim is in the same position legally as the victim of an auto accident where the car was both negligently built and negligently driven.
The driver is answerable; but if the negligent building of the car also contributed to the accident, no one would argue that holding the manufacturer liable constitutes immoral blame-shifting.


Westbridge Capital Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Salomon Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Monro Muffler Brake reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


FT Capital reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


U.S. Accuses Chinese Officials Of Evading Textile-Import Duties
Federal prosecutors in Manhattan yesterday accused Chinese officials of conspiring with two American companies to defraud the United States of more than $100,000 in duties on imported textiles and clothing.
Prosecutors said the criminal indictment was the first to be brought in a broad, continuing investigation of efforts by importers to evade duties and bypass import quotas by shipping textiles made in China through other countries, like Pakistan.
All told, such schemes may have involved $2 billion worth of goods last year, officials said.


Precambrian Shield reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Poland's Parliament Rejects Austerity Budget Cuts
Defying pleas for austerity from the Polish Government and International Monetary Fund, Parliament refused today to cut retirement pensions or trim raises for state employees.
Prime Minister Jan Olszewski said the future of Poland's economic reforms had been imperiled, and declared at a news conference that the Government might ask unions to forgo their raises in the national interest.
The vote deepened a political impasse stemming from last year's Parliamentary elections, which brought to power a legislature with 10 major parties.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Sabatini Gains at Italian Open Gabriela Sabatini began her quest for a second straight Italian Open title yesterday, eliminating a fellow Argentine, Mercedes Paz, 6-3, 6-1, in leading a surge of top-seeded players into the third round of the clay-court tournament in Rome.
Jennifer Capriati of the United States also moved ahead, but only after fighting off a match point in beating Sandra Cecchini of Italy, 6-4, 3-6, 7-6 (7-4).
Capriati committed 56 unforced errors, against Cecchini's 29, and 13 double-faults.
After Cecchini won the second set, the Italian took a 6-5 lead in the third.
But at match point, she hit a forehand long, allowing Capriati back into the match.
The American then won the tie breaker.
Also advancing were No. 4 Mary Joe Fernandez of the United States and No. 5 Anke Huber of Germany.
But Bettina Fulco-Villella of Argentina upset No. 6 Katerina Maleeva of Bulgaria and Rachel McQuillan of Australia topped No. 9 Helena Sukova of Czechoslovakia. (AP) Three Big Names Lose: Andre Agassi, Ivan Lendl and John McEnroe lost to unseeded players at the German Open yesterday in Hamburg, while Stefan Edberg and Michael Stich breezed into the quarterfinals of the $1.27 million ATP event.
Agassi, the tournament's 11th-seeded player, was beaten, 3-6, 6-1, 6-2, by Carlos Costa.
The seventh-seeded Lendl, who has dropped to 10th in the world, was beaten, 7-6 (7-4), 6-2, by Omar Camporese.
The unseeded McEnroe lost to Stefano Pescosolido, 7-6 (7-4), 1-6, 6-4.
The top-seeded Edberg, ranked second in the world to Jim Courier, beat Jordi Arrese, 6-3, 6-4, while the third-seeded Stich defeated Carl-Uwe Steeb, 6-3, 6-2, in 62 minutes. (AP) HOCKEY  Sweden and Finland Advance  The defending champion, Sweden, beat Russia, 2-0, yesterday and unbeaten Finland edged Canada, 4-3, in the quarterfinals at the world hockey championships in Prague.
Sweden got goals from Mats Sundin of the Quebec Nordiques and Roger Hansson, plus a brilliant goaltending effort from Tommy Soderstrom, who made 27 saves.
Finland eliminated Canada and moved into the semifinals against the winner of today's game between the United States and Czechoslovakia.
Germany will take on Switzerland in the other quarterfinal today. (AP)


Vanguard Cellular Systems reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


A Warning on Russian Aid
Members of Congress told the Administration that proposed aid to Russia and other former Soviet republics was in jeopardy.
Page A14.


Collagen Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Government Steps Down in Lebanon
The Lebanese Government resigned today after two days of nationwide riots over the worst economic crisis the country has experienced in 49 years of independence.
Prime Minister Omar Karami announced his resignation here after angry demonstrators tried to storm his residence and the neighboring villa of President Elias Hrawi.
Soldiers and policemen guarding the officials fired over the heads of the protesters to disperse them.


HPSC Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 28


Finnish Poet of the Everyday Object
KAJ FRANCK is known in Finland as the "conscience of Finnish design." The first United States retrospective of the work of the glass and ceramic designer, who died in 1989 at the age of 77, is on view at the Museum of Modern Art through October 12.
Mr.
Franck's durable and practical housewares were postwar objects of "anonymous universality," said Christopher Mount, a curatorial assistant, who organized the show.


SuburbFed Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


The Talk of Seville; In Expo Architecture, Mishmash Means Eclectic
Imre Makovecz's Hungarian pavilion, widely regarded as the most inventive structure at Expo '92 here, soars free from the fair's architectural cacophony like some dizzy fantasy.
Built from wood carved in folk styles and bearing a gray slate roof, it seems inspired by village churches but leaps beyond any one model with an exuberance that recalls the Catalan Antonio Gaudi.
Inside, the building's conceptual basis becomes clearer, with no loss of wit and style.
The interior is divided, one portion symbolizing Hungary facing the West, with a simplified Baroque church front.
Pass through that facade and one finds Hungary facing East, the wall exploding with undulating Slavic-style facades (more gray slate) and carved portals.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
American Standard Inc. announced it would amend a senior-debt offering filed with the Securities and Exchange Commisson to $400 million from $300 million.
Common  *
All American Semiconductor Inc., Miami, has filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission for an undisclosed amount of units, each consisting of common stock and common stock purchase warrants, through JW Charles Securities Inc.
*
Lida Inc., a Charlotte, N.C., fabric manufacturer, is making an initial public offering of 2.5 million common shares at $11.50 a share through Lehman Brothers.
*
Perception Inc., Farmington Hills, Mich., has filed for an initial public offering of 1.8 million common shares through Needham &amp; Co.
Ratings  *
Payless Cashways Inc.'s senior-subordinated-debt rating has been lowered to B from B+ by S.&amp; P.


Household International reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Police May Have Ignored Basic Riot Plan
Emerging evidence from the first crucial hours after the acquittals of four police officers in the beating of Rodney G. King provides a strong indication that top police officials did little to plan for the possibility of violence and did not follow standard procedures to contain rioting once it began.
An examination of television news tapes and police radio transmissions, as well as interviews with city officials, shows that the police never put into effect their standard riot-control strategy: to pull officers back at the start of serious violence, then move back in quickly with a huge show of force.


People
*
John C. Thomas Jr., the chairman of Adweek Properties, New York, and a co-founder of the trade publication, will relinquish his line responsibilities and assume a staff role, serving as senior adviser to John Babcock Jr., president.
Wenda Harris Millard will join the company in the new position of executive vice president of sales and marketing and group publisher.
Ms.
Millard, a former Adweek publisher, was general manager and partner of the Peer Group, Stamford.


Falconbridge Gold reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Accounts
*
Maybelline Inc., Memphis, to Lord, Dentsu &amp; Partners, New York, to advertise its Yardley of London bath and fragrance products in the United States.
The other finalist in the review was Margeotes Fertitta &amp; Weiss, New York.
Billings on the account, previously handled in-house, were estimated at $10 million. *
Long, Haymes &amp; Carr Inc., Winston-Salem, N.C., has resigned the Carolina Beverage Co.'s Cheerwine soft-drink account, with billings estimated at $1 million, effective at the end of July.
The agency's parent company, Lintas Worldwide, handles the Diet Coke account, which was deemed a conflict.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  CHINESE OFFICIALS ACCUSED OF FRAUD
Federal prosecutors in Manhattan charged Chinese Government officials with conspiring with two American companies to defraud the United States of more than $100,000 in duties on imported textiles and clothing.
Prosecutors said the indictment stemmed from an investigation into efforts to bypass import quotas by shipping textiles made in China through other countries.
A1.
MAKING IT EASIER TO CHANGE A LIGHT BULB
It took six years of complaining, but from now on exhibitors at the Jacob K. Javits Convention Center will be able to screw in a light bulb without having to pay an electrician.
Fabian G. Palomino, the head of the center, said that agreements had been reached with four unions that would modify work rules and significantly reduce labor costs.
B3.
HOSPITAL CHIEF'S VISION


XTRA Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Garden Q. &amp; A.
A Tough Perennial
Q.
I have a partially shaded spot and was advised to plant something called goatsbeard.
What is it, and do you recommend it? -- Julie Kornfield, Camden, N.J.
A.
This plant is indeed superb for partial shade, especially areas where the soil tends to remain moist.
Goatsbeard (Aruncus dioicus) is a shrub-like herbaceous perennial and a tough one at that, surviving winter temperatures well below freezing.
A native of North America and a member of the rose family, the plant has seemingly delicate, ferny-looking foliage that may grow from 5 to 7 feet tall.
In June and July this handsome plant comes into its glory with the appearance of 4- to 5-foot-tall frothy, white-plumed flowers that rustle in the wind.
The sexes are on separate plants and male flowers tend to be more ornamental.


CHRONICLE
She's more than 400 years old, but never mind her longevity; she is the toast of Washington, at least for this week.
On Tuesday, J. CARTER BROWN, director of the National Gallery of Art, unveiled a fountain, a bronze sculpture of Venus, in the West Building of the museum.
Attended by Cupid, the Roman goddess of love is depicted eternally wringing out her hair.
Made sometime between 1570 and 1572 by a follower of the Italian Renaissance master Giovanni Bologna, Venus spills water from her tresses into a conch shell held by Cupid.


Abroad at Home; Court Against Congress
Twenty-five years ago Congress passed a statute laying down detailed rules for an important area of law.
The courts have applied those rules ever since.
Congress has considered proposals to change them but has left them as they are.
This week the Supreme Court abruptly rewrote the rules.
In effect it amended legislation that Congress has refused to amend.


Travelers Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


COMPANY NEWS
ALLEN GROUP, Melville, L.I., an electronics company, agreed to a merger with Alliance Telecommunications Corp., a wireless communications concern, in which Allen would acquire Alliance for about $50 million.
CENTURY MEDICORP, Los Angeles, a health maintenance organization concern, completed the acquisition of Mediq Care Inc., Chatsworth, Calif., a hospital company, for $5.45 million in cash and stock.


Olympia Set To Sell Stake In Oil Unit
In a last-minute effort to save its big resources and real estate empire before a crucial meeting in London on Thursday, cash-strapped Olympia &amp; York Developments Ltd. today signaled the sale of another large asset -- its 63.5 percent interest in the Home Oil Company of Calgary.
Olympia said it had retained the First Boston Corporation to "assist in bringing the sale process to a conclusion."


Stephen Oliver, 42, a Composer Of Operas and Theater Music
Stephen Oliver, a prolific English composer of operas, theater music and television sound tracks, died on April 29 in London.
He was 42 years old.
A spokeswoman for his publisher, Novello &amp; Company, said he died of AIDS.


Supermarkets Assail Discount Club Deals
The supermarket industry is declaring war on what it says are special deals given to its fast-encroaching rivals, the warehouse clubs.
Supermarket operators are complaining that food companies, like Ragu, are giving warehouse clubs special price breaks on the bulk packages that the no-frills clubs sell to members at bargain prices.
A study on warehouse clubs released yesterday in Chicago by the Food Marketing Institute, a supermarket trade association, said manufacturers were giving clubs access to prices and large packages that are unavailable to supermarkets.


What's That Unsettling Ring? It's Young Taking a Pounding
For the Mets, the crack of the bat had an ugly ring to it, its echo hanging in the Riverfront Stadium air as if for emphasis.
It was the sound, after all, of strategy backfiring and the night collapsing.
Chris Sabo, turning logic on its head and turning an Anthony Young fastball into a drive to the seats in left, crushed a three-run homer in the sixth inning tonight to spark the Reds to a 5-3 victory over the Mets.


Spring, Unstrung
Imagine the excitement of living somewhere near the Arctic one day and the tropics the next.
Well, New Yorkers don't have to imagine it because that just about describes what happened between Sunday and Monday.
Imagine watching a sky go from gray to sunny, from sunny to gray, from gray to dubious and onward to a curious yellow.
That was Tuesday.
Imagine going to work with an umbrella and going home, feeling foolish, under a sky that would shame Antigua.
Happens all the time.


Euro-Nevada Mining reports earnings for Year to March 31


Burlington Industries reports earnings for Qtr to March 28


2 Star Collegians to Enter N.B.A. Draft
Switch TRACY MURRAY from the leaning to the jumping column.
After family discussions with about half the 27 N.B.A. teams and in fulfillment of a dream, the 6-foot-8-inch U.C.L.A. junior forward, who averaged 21.4 points and 7 rebounds a game last season, has decided to enter next month's National Basketball Association draft.
So has JIM JACKSON of Ohio State, who confirmed at a news conference yesterday that he would pass up his senior year to turn pro.
Jackson, a 6-6 swingman who averaged 22.4 points, 6.8 rebounds and 4 assists last season for the Buckeyes, said concerns about his family were the main reason for his decision.


Dianon Systems reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Sun to Introduce New Chip
Sun Microsystems Inc. will introduce its long-awaited Super Sparc chip Thursday in a move that analysts say should give its work stations much-needed extra power and shore up the company's market-leading position.
The chip, developed with Texas Instruments Inc., is not expected to be as powerful as initially anticipated but still should be good enough to power a new line of high-end work stations.


Budget Aide Named Chief of Probation
Mayor David N. Dinkins reached into the ranks of the budget experts in his administration to appoint a new Probation Commissioner yesterday.
Mr.
Dinkins appointed Michael P. Jacobson, a 38-year-old professional budgeteer with a doctorate in sociology who has worked with criminal justice agencies in the Office of Management and Budget for eight years.
Mr.
Jacobson, who has no practical experience working with criminals, will take over a department with a 1,600-member staff and a $60 million budget that supervises more than 60,000 criminals on probation.


Messier Is Still Recuperating
Mark Messier's lingering back injury concerned the Rangers, who were traveling to Pittsburgh for tonight's Game 3 of the Patrick Division finals of the Stanley Cup playoffs.
Messier, captain of the Rangers and also a first-line center, did not play in Game 2 on Tuesday, idled by what he described as back spasms that have been recurring since he was injured two weeks ago in Game 2 of a first-round series against the Devils.
Messier didn't practice yesterday at Rye, N.Y., staying home and taking medication.
He was scheduled to join the Rangers last night at their Pittsburgh hotel.
Coach Roger Neilson said he wouldn't know until this afternoon whether Messier could play tonight.
Darren Turcotte, another Ranger center who missed Game 2, is listed by the team as possible for the game.
Turcotte is suffering from a sore wrist.


Corrections
The table at the end of the Credit Markets column in Business Day yesterday misstated the maturity date for the Treasury's new three-year note.
It is May 15, 1995.


Automatix Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 28


Cathedral Gold reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Newalta Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


W. J. Lippincott, 73; Headed Lord &amp; Taylor
William J. Lippincott, who started as a clothing buyer at Lord &amp; Taylor and worked his way up to lead the department store chain's national expansion, died on Sunday at his home in Rye, N.Y.
He was 73 years old.
He died of cancer, his family said.


Arden International Kitchens Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 28


Scorpion Technologies Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Huntington Schools Accused of Bias in Special-Ed Programs
In a dispute that underlines the pressure being put on suburban school districts by an increasingly diverse student population, the state has accused the Huntington schools of steering minority and foreign-born children into special-education classes, often without the proper screening to assure that the students are in fact disabled.
The inquiry, conducted by the State Department of Education at the urging of frustrated parents and advocates for minorities, condemns the district's English as a second language program, which it says fails to offer students sufficient help in English and discourages parental involvement.
Generally, the report said, teachers did not expect much of children whose first language was not English, and "instruction itself seemed to be based on limited expectations."


Portrait In Buildings And Words
PART of what I call architecture is having a good balance of emotions," the architect John Lautner has written. "A structure has to have feeling, it has to have freedom."


Burnham Pacific Properties Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Executive Changes
BIOMATRIX INC., Ridgefield, N.J., a developer of biomaterials for use in medical and skin-care products, appointed Brian J. Hayden vice president of finance and chief financial officer.
BROUILLARD COMMUNICATIONS, New York, an advertising and public relations unit of the WPP Group, named Malcolm End senior vice president and executive creative director.


Visual Stimuli Are Implicated in Sex Crimes; Therapy for Offenders
To the Editor:
"Therapies Offer Hope for Sex Offenders" (Science Times, April 14) sheds light on the devastating problem of sex crimes and gives encouraging evidence that treatment programs are preventing recurrences or at least prolonging the periods between offenses.
Our center has been treating hundreds of victims and offenders since 1985, including adult, adolescent and child offenders, and victims of sex abuse.
To date, there have been no known repeat offenses among these sex offenders.
Individual, group and family treatment is provided for both adult and teen-age sex offenders against children.


Golden Corral Realty reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Datron Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Full of Plans, but Wary of Hope
Dr.
Billy E. Jones envisions a New York City hospital system in which every poor person receives thorough, personal health care, every clinic doctor is paid $100,000 a year and the infighting between public hospitals and private medical centers is only a memory.
But Dr.
Jones, who takes over as head of the Health and Hospitals Corporation tomorrow, is the first to warn that he may not be able to achieve his goals.
In this job, he said, success is a relative term.


Rolland Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Applied Innovation Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Capital Re Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Loews Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Thackeray Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


AT HOME WITH: Jon Robin Baitz; The Playwright As Modern-Day Moralist
GRAYDON MASSEY, the antihero of Jon Robin Baitz's play "The End of the Day," makes a strong first impression.
It's not a good one.


Leaseholder Admits Violation In Happy Land Nightclub Fire
The man who holds the primary lease on the Bronx building that housed the Happy Land social club pleaded guilty yesterday to not having an adequate sprinkler system on the premises where 87 people died in an arson fire two years ago.
In a plea bargain that ended his trial after two days of testimony, the leaseholder, Jay Weiss, agreed to perform 50 hours of community service and to pay $60,000 to help build a community center for Hondurans who live in the Bronx.
Many of the victims were Honduran immigrants. 'Finger-Pointing Frenzy'


Nets Ready to Replace Fitch as Coach
The Nets have decided to replace Bill Fitch as their coach, a team official said today, and the list of possible successors is headed by Mike Fratello and Chuck Daly.
At a meeting earlier this week of the Nets' seven owners and other management personnel, but not including Fitch, the need to make a change was determined as the only remedy for the turmoil that consumed the team during the regular season and the first round of the National Basketball Association playoffs.


North Korea Defuses Nuclear Fear
North Korea has lifted the veil from its nuclear programs, thereby lifting hopes that it is renouncing any ambitions to develop nuclear arms.
Long considered a potential nuclear renegade, North Korea has now provided the International Atomic Energy Agency with key details of its nuclear facilities, including a suspected reprocessing plant at Yongbyon.
That will permit early inspections of the sites.
Improved trade and diplomatic ties with the U.S., South Korea and Japan will surely follow, satisfying North Korea's needs.
Under a nuclear safeguards agreement with the I.A.E.A. that went into effect last month, Pyongyang is obliged to open all its nuclear sites to inspectors.
To facilitate those inspections it is supposed to provide design data for all sites that handle uranium or plutonium, including those under construction or planned.
It has now done so.


Tesoro Petroleum reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Why the Fuss About Character in Government
To the Editor:
I read with dismay Mobil's April 23 Op-Ed page ad, "Of perks, politics and public service." Exposes of abuses of the perquisites of office are driving qualified people from public service, it complains.
We should spare our best minds the constant oversight, it suggests, so that they may concentrate their energies on crucial issues like the deficit, health care and education.
That worse horrors than excessive perquisites exist is no reason to ease up on ethics.
Rather, the weightiness of those matters makes it all the more important that people of honesty and integrity work on them; not those who can't remember who actually pays for the perks.
How people deal with the small dilemmas speaks volumes about how they'll deal with the big ones.


Prize Billboards That Stick Their Necks (or Spoons) Out
OUTDOOR advertisers are extending themselves, quite literally, as never before to pique the curiosity of pedestrians and motorists.
Special signs known in the outdoor-advertising industry as "extensions" are becoming more prevalent on the nation's streets and highways.
They feature elements like cutouts, models and dummies that protrude from, or intrude into, the top, bottom or sides of a standard billboard.


Enterra Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Pinnacle Resources reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Children At Play Saving The Earth
DEEP inside the Rube Goldberg-like Urban Tree House, 7-year-old Lillian Tagro was furiously pedaling a stationary bicycle that pumped water through clear plastic tubes, around a series of pipes and eventually onto a table piled high with crushed walnut shells.
"I'm making a river," she said.
The Urban Tree House, or the Sussman Environmental Center, as the new building is officially known, was built behind the Children's Museum of Manhattan, at 212 West 83d Street.


Co-op Effort Worsens a Rift in Williamsburg
It was a moment of detente in the long feud between the Hasidic and Hispanic residents who stake out an impoverished existence in the aging Brooklyn tenements tucked between auto repair shops and industrial buildings in the shadow of the Williamsburg Bridge.
Ending a Federal lawsuit, the city's Housing Authority agreed last June to reserve the next 190 vacant apartments in three fought-over Williamsburg housing projects for black and Hispanic tenants who could prove they had been victims of discrimination.
A leader of the Satmar Hasidim, which had 68 percent of the apartments, conceded that if people had been discriminated against in favor of Jews, it had been wrong.


Riggins and Baxter Arrested
JOHN RIGGINS, the former Jets and Redskins running back who was inducted into the Pro Football Hall of Fame last year, was arrested early Tuesday morning in Arlington, Va., on a charge of driving under the influence of alcohol, the police said yesterday.
A state police spokeswoman, LUCY CALDWELL, said that the 42-year-old Riggins, who lives in Chantilly, Va., was taken to the Arlington County jail, arraigned and released later Tuesday morning.
Caldwell said a blood alcohol test was taken, but she did not have the results.


First Liberty Financial reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Industrial Acoustics Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


John N. Regan, Lawyer, 93
John N. Regan, an attorney and former president of Martindale-Hubbell Inc., the publisher of the Martindale-Hubbell Law Directory, died on April 30 in Dublin.
He was 93 years old.
He died of natural causes, a family spokeswoman said.


Richmond Journal; Ashe Returns to the City He Disowned in Youth
"When I decided to leave Richmond," Arthur Ashe wrote in his autobiography, "Off the Court," in 1981, "I left all that Richmond stood for at the time -- its segregation, its conservatism, its parochial thinking, its slow progress toward equality, its lack of opportunity for talented black people. I had no intention then of coming back."
Today, Arthur Ashe came back.
"It's nice to be home," he said, beginning a round of speeches, press conferences and tennis clinics for young people.


Island Telephone reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Coventry Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


As Los Angeles Smoke Lifts, Bush Can See Kemp Clearly
Suddenly, everyone wants to talk to the Housing Secretary, Jack F. Kemp.
Members of Congress do.
Television networks do.
And what is most important, President Bush does, summoning him to three Cabinet meetings in three days and saving him a seat on today's plane ride to Los Angeles.
"It's nice to be needed," Mr. Kemp said in an interview today.


Chief Consolidated Mining reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Tuesday Morning reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Jewelmasters Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 2


Regis Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Federal Express Cuts Rates
Federal Express has slashed prices for its large-volume customers to compete more aggressively with its rivals, Airborne Express and United Parcel Service.
In the past, Federal Express, which still dominates the overnight letter and small parcel market, was often able to charge more and still keep its market share.
But the giant pioneer in the quick delivery market has been losing business and has decided to take the gloves off.


United Healthcare Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


At Site of 'Iron Curtain' Speech, Gorbachev Buries the Cold War
History came full cycle today as Mikhail S. Gorbachev added a postscript of global reconciliation to the "Iron Curtain" speech by Winston Churchill here 46 years ago, but pointedly contended that the United States was the "initiator" of the nuclear arms race.
Speaking at Westminster College, the scene of Churchill's warning in 1946 about Soviet imperialism, the former Soviet leader conceded that the Kremlin made a "major error" in assuming that the defeat of fascism in World War II would produce an inevitable triumph of Communism.


This Horse Can Do; Beats Dr. Fager Mark
Belmont Park opened its 80th season of racing yesterday with spring in the air and speed underfoot as Dixie Brass hurried wire-to-wire to win the 117th Withers Mile by more than eight lengths in record time and perhaps win a trip to the Preakness.
It was not just any record, either.
Dixie Brass shot the mile in 1:33 3/5 under 126 pounds, slicing one-fifth of a second off the record for the Withers set in 1967 by the renowned warhorse, Dr.
Fager, under the same weight.
He also came within three-fifths of a second of the track record for the mile, set in 1982 by Conquistador Cielo under 111 pounds.


Sports of The Times; 'Hawk' Flew Long Before Jordan Did
NOW that Pat Riley's matadors, the Knicks, have waved their red capes at the Bulls, look for Michael Jordan to soar at a higher altitude than usual tonight.
Up there where Connie Hawkins first dared to dare.
It's so natural now, so expected, for basketball players, especially Michael Jordan, to soar as if they were, well, piloting a jet.
But if Jordan is the Chuck Yeager of basketball, Julius Erving was its Charles Lindbergh and Connie Hawkins was its Wright Brothers.


Condor Services Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Judge in Miami Shifts Trial Of Officer in Blacks' Deaths
Citing the riots that followed the verdict in the Rodney King case, a state judge ordered a change of venue today in the second trial of a Miami police officer who was convicted of killing two black motorists in 1989.
The judge said he wanted to "insure that blacks will be on the jury."
Dade County Circuit Judge W. Thomas Spencer moved the trial of the officer, William Lozano, from Orlando to Tallahassee, where blacks make up a larger proportion of the population.
Judge Spencer made it clear in that he wanted to avoid racial conflict and insure fairness in a case that has riveted Florida.


Study Says Older Women Face Insurance Gap
Women in their mid-40's and older are far more likely than their male contemporaries to lack health insurance, either because they are more often employed in part-time work or because coverage stops under their husbands' policies when they are widowed or divorced, according to a new report.
The report, by the Older Women's League, a Washington-based women's rights group, said that in the age bracket between 45 and 64, before women qualify for Medicare, only 55 percent of working women have health insurance provided by their own employers, as compared with 72 percent of men in the same age group.


Durakon Industries reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


American Online reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Granite Construction Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


CSM Environmental Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


More Jell-O Mold, Hon?
BENJAMIN DARLING collects recipe booklets from the 30's, 40's and 50's.
He calls those decades the "dessert years," because first-class artists were hired by food companies to illustrate the subtleties of icing and "the transparent gleams of gelatin."


Demand Strong for 10-Year Notes
Demand for $11 billion worth of new 10-year Treasury notes was extremely good yesterday, helping to lift prices of outstanding notes and bonds.
The new securities were sold at an average yield of 7.53 percent, up from the average yield of 7.29 percent at the last 10-year auction on Feb. 12.


LeMond Bids for Elusive Title
In Europe, where cycling ranks with soccer and track and field as the major sports, Greg LeMond is a hero.
He is the only American to have won the world's most famous race, the Tour de France, and he has done it three times.
In the United States, Greg LeMond is an aberration -- a star, but in a sport regarded by Americans as minor.
Yet he has never won America's most important bicycle race, the Tour Du Pont, finishing 28th in 1989, 78th in 1990 when he had a blood disorder and 12th last year when he was still weak from the flu.


American Restaurant Partners reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Lomak Petroleum Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


O.I. Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Pepsi, Lipton in Tea Venture
The iced-tea party is getting crowded.
Pepsi and Lipton yesterday became the latest entrant in the $400 million iced-tea market, introducing Lipton Original.
The iced tea will go on sale next week in New York and New England.
The company plans to have the product in national distribution by next year.
At least a dozen companies have recently introduced or plan to begin selling iced-tea drinks soon.
A Coca-Cola Company and Nestle venture began selling canned Nestea in some parts of the country earlier in the year.


3,000 Mourn Youth Killed by Rioters


Savin Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


M.A.C. Funds Prompt Clash Over Spending
Pressure to spend $200 million in Municipal Assistance Corporation money on New York City schools erupted into a major dispute over spending priorities.
The corporation's chairman warned that the city must use the money for schools or risk losing it, while Mayor David N. Dinkins stuck to his contention that it should be used to trim the size of government through incentives like early retirement.
Article, page B1.


USX Registers Stock Offering
The USX Corporation says it has filed a registration statement with the Securities and Exchange Commission covering the offering of five million shares of USX-U.S.
Steel Group common stock through underwriters led by Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company.
The net proceeds from the offering will be used for the general business purposes of the steel business.
Shares will be offered to the public in two concurrent offerings, one in the United States and one outside the United States.


Review/Dance; Dutch Form Generates Content, And It's Sexual Aggressiveness
Rilke demanded that art change a person's life.
The Scapino Ballet Rotterdam stands little chance of doing that, but you'll have a good time.
For its opening on Tuesday night at the Joyce Theater, the Dutch company began with what looked like a voyeuristic scene in a bikers' bordello.
The style of Ed Wubbe's "Rameau" was post-Calvin Klein as bare-legged men in black leather jackets and tank suits paired off with bare-legged, bored women with slicked-back hair who knuckled over on their toe shoes.
It was all great superficial and provocative fun, and the haughty cool or bold dancing of the cast turned the audience on.
As for the second piece (through Sunday at the Joyce, 175 Eighth Avenue, at 19th Street), it was Nils Christe's version of the 1920 Stravinsky ballet, "Pulcinella." Inchoate but charming, this staging was an odd reminder of the company's origins.


A Moment of Bliss in Brooklyn


Schuler Homes Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Reeds Jewelers Inc.  reports earnings for Year to Feb 28


Southwestern Electric Service Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Universal Voltronics reports earnings for Qtr to March 28


Stanford Telecommunications reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Moscow Affirms Sale of Technology to India
India said today that Russia had pledged to honor a commitment made by the former Soviet Union to deliver advanced rocket-engine technology to India despite an American threat to suspend technical cooperation with both Moscow and New Delhi if the deal went through.
Both sides, however, indicated that they would allow a review of the program by a committee of experts in order to satisfy the United States that this is not a weapons project.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
Economic activity gathered steam in April, but with the Northeast and the West Coast trailing the rest of the country, the Fed reported.  [ Page D1. ]
Who should hold the keys to the codes?
In a digital age that finds more and more information protected by elaborate coding techniques, both the Administration and business executives are asking that question.  [ D1. ]


Police Battle Shining Path Rebels in Lima Prison
Fierce clashes broke out today when Peruvian police officers tried to remove some Shining Path guerrillas from a cell block at a maximum-security prison on Lima's outskirts.
At least one person was killed and 13 wounded.
Imprisoned terrorists threw dynamite and acid and opened fire on the officers when they tried to enter the fortified cellblock, which houses at least 150 women belonging to the Shining Path at the Castro Castro prison in the shantytown of Canto Grande, the authorities said.


Events: Crafts and Modern Design
In Wood and Glass
American Craft Museum, 40 West 53d Street; (212) 956-3535.
Works in glass and wood acquired by the museum in 1991 will be on display through July 26.
An artists' panel discussion on wood will be held on May 19 at 6:30 P.M.; a discussion on glass, June 16.
Fee, $10 each session ($5 for members).
From 1890 to 1990
Metropolitan Museum of Art, Fifth Avenue at 82d Street; (212) 879-5500.
"Modern Design: 1890 to 1990" showcases furniture, architectural drawings, crafts, housewares and decorative objects that reflect the major design movements of this century.
Through Oct. 25.
Hours: 9:30 A.M. to 5:15 P.M.
Tuesday through Sunday (and until 8:45 P.M. on Friday and Saturday).
Suggested admission: $6; $3 for students and people 65 and older.
Design for Students
Chess and Checkers House, in Central Park at Fifth Avenue and 64th Street; (212) 360-2766.
The Central Park Conservancy and the National Building Museum are sponsoring study programs on landscape design, urban architecture and industrial design.
The courses, open to high school students, will be in two sessions, July 6 - 31 and Aug. 3 - 28.
No experience is necessary.
Tuition, $995 for either session; scholarships are available.
Registration deadline is June 15.
Urban Architecture
Park East Synagogue, 164 East 68th Street; (212) 996-1100.
Barry Lewis, an architectural historian, will speak on the architect Richard Morris Hunt's influence on American architecture as part of "The City Transformed," a series sponsored by the 92d Street Y. The first lecture, on Wednesday, will cover the period from 1870 to 1880.
On May 20, Mr.
Lewis will discuss the years 1880 to 1890.
Mr.
Lewis will also speak about New York City development from 1865 to 1890 (May 14) and from 1865 to 1875 (May 28) and the planning of Central Park (May 21).
Fee for each talk, $15.
Advance registration required.
Benefit Auction
The Country Club, 209 East 85th Street; (212) 505-7700, ext. 240.
A silent auction offering jewelry, accessories, clothing and a consultation with an interior designer will be held at 6:30 P.M. next Thursday.
Proceeds will benefit the scholarship fund of Citiwomen, a division of Women's American O.R.T., which supports schools and education programs worldwide.
Tickets, $55 in advance; $65 at the door.
Four Blocks of Crafts
Columbus Avenue between 77th and 81st Streets; (212) 866-2239.
The American Arts and Crafts Alliance is sponsoring a festival on Saturday and Sunday and again on May 16 and 17.
Hours: 10 A.M. to 6:30 P.M.
Free.


Driver-Harris reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


SCI Systems reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Modern Library Series to Include Disks
Random House's reissuing of its classic Modern Library series in the fall will include not only books that have been newly typeset and covered in new jackets, but also books available in a format that the founders of the series never imagined when they created it 75 years ago: electronic disks.
Random House and the Voyager Company announced yesterday that they would be jointly publishing the Modern Library on disks that are designed to be read on the Apple Powerbook notebook computers as well as on Macintosh computers.
Voyager executives said they thought it would be some time before the electronic editions could be read on I.B.M. or other computers.


Fairfield Communities reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Cedar Fair L.P.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 29


Geico Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Genesis Health Ventures reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Chromcraft Revington reports earnings for Qtr to March 28


Growing
THE ludicrousness of a weekend garden 250 miles away is beginning to hit me.
Hey, I tell myself, it's only three hours by train.
That's what my daily commute used to be, round trip.
And think of those poor suckers with places in the Hamptons.
Stuck on the Long Island Expressway, sniffing the ocean breeze in Queens.
And those people with the old farmhouses upstate.
Too many rocks.


New Nation Insists on Keeping Name 'Macedonia'
The former Yugoslav republic of Macedonia, denied recognition by the 12-nation European Community and by the United States because of a dispute with Greece over its name, has rejected new pressure to compromise.
Greece says the name Macedonia belongs exclusively to the Greek province of that name, which is adjacent to the mainly Slavic republic of Macedonia that was part of Yugoslavia from the end of World War II until its declaration of independence last year.


'Fantasia' Orchestra Sues Disney
The Philadelphia Orchestra, which recorded the soundtrack for "Fantasia," Walt Disney's classic marriage of symphonic music and animation, filed suit yesterday against the Walt Disney Company and Buena Vista Home Video, asserting that as a co-creator of the work, it was entitled to half the profits from the videotape and laser-disk versions of the film.
In the lawsuit, which was filed yesterday in Federal District Court in Philadelphia, the orchestra charged that it had been neither consulted nor compensated for the recordings it made for the film in April 1939 with the conductor Leopold Stokowski.


2 Sides Clash Over Project for Brighton Beach
One of the most tumultuous and drawn-out land-use disputes in recent memory in Brooklyn was rejoined yesterday, as two sides clashed over a large-scale development to be built on the site of the historic Brighton Beach Baths.
At a morning hearing in Borough Hall, more than 50 people, including residents, construction workers, politicians and a small army of rabbis, debated loudly over whether zoning changes should be made to accommodate the proposed 1,600 housing units and five high-rise towers planned for Brighton-by-the-Sea.


Thomas O. Paine, NASA's Chief During Moon Missions, Dies at 70
Dr.
Thomas O. Paine, who oversaw the nation's space program during the first manned missions to the moon, died on Monday at his home in Brentwood, Calif.
He was 70 years old.
He died of cancer, said David Garrett, a spokesman for the National Aeronautics and Space Administration.


Urban Sound Track
To the Editor:
The New York City Council, while considering the problem of automobile sirens, should also direct its attention to the back-up alarms being installed on all trucks, construction equipment and even some cars.
These irritating high-pitched beeps, audible blocks from the source, have become virtually constant in the city.
Along with automobile sirens, they represent the political leadership's failure to protect the quality of life in this city.
LAWRENCE SHAINBERG New York, April 23, 1992


Turner Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Ziegler Looking to Europe and Asia
It has been more than 30 years since two National Hockey League teams played in Britain, but now JOHN ZIEGLER, the league president, seems to have been bitten by the travel bug.
He announced yesterday that the Chicago Blackhawks and the Montreal Canadiens would play two exhibition games at Wembley Arena in London on Sept. 12-13 as the vanguard of a full-scale N.H.L. expeditionary force.
As early as the 1993-94 season, he said, there is a strong possibility that the N.H.L. will begin scheduling regular-season games in Europe and Asia.
Ziegler, pointing out that the new player contract called for 24 games to be played outside N.H.L. cities, dismissed suggestions that playing abroad could hinder efforts to start a European league, saying, "Our belief is that, by exposing the N.H.L. on a limited basis, we are enhancing the development of hockey." (AP)


Presidio Oil reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League
CLEVELAND INDIANS -- Optioned Jeff Shaw, pitcher, to Colorado Springs of the Pacific Coast League.
Purchased the contract of Eric Plunk, pitcher, from Canton-Akron of the Eastern League.
National League
CHICAGO CUBS -- Purchased the contract of Dwight Smith, outfielder, from Iowa of the American Association.
Placed Rey Sanchez, infielder, on the 15-day disabled list.
Activated Jose Vizcaino, infielder, from the 15-day disabled list.
Pioneer League
LETHBRIDGE MOUNTIES -- Named Larry Milbourne manager.
Basketball  United States Basketball League
NEW JERSEY JAMMERS -- Released Josh Lowry, Charlie Roberts and Greg Woodard, guards; Tony Walker, forward; and Mark Peterson, center.
Football  National Football League
LOS ANGELES RAMS -- Announced the resignation of John Math, director of player personnel.
PHILADELPHIA EAGLES -- Waived Preston Anderson, defensive tackle. Arena Football League
AFL -- Announced that the Sacramento Attack will play in the league this season.
SACRAMENTO ATTACK -- Named Joe Kapp coach. Canadian Football League
EDMONTON ESKIMOS -- Named Mark Nelson special teams coordinator and linebacker coach.
WINNIPEG BLUE BOMBERS -- Signed Matt Dunigan, quarterback.
Hockey  National Hockey League
PITTSBURGH PENGUINS -- Recalled Jock Callander, center, and Mike Needham, right wing, from Muskegon of the International Hockey League.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Behind the Scenes; Republican Sleuths on Clinton's Trail
In a Presidential year that political veterans predict may be the nastiest in modern times, a corps of would-be private eyes is squirreled away at the Bush campaign headquarters, pursuing tips, poring over documents and cataloguing secrets yet to be revealed.
For those who thought all the derogatory tales about Gov.
Bill Clinton had already been dredged up, these sober-minded young Republicans who make their home on the 10th floor of a drab office building four blocks from the White House are digging deeper for more.


M/A-Com Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 28


Some in Congress Balk at Soviet Aid
Members of Congress delivered a blunt warning to the Administration today that President Bush's proposed legislation authorizing American participation in a $24 billion international assistance program for the former Soviet republics was in jeopardy in the House and Senate.
"This legislation is in trouble," Robert L. Kasten, Republican of Wisconsin, told Richard L. Armitage, who is directing American assistance to the Commonwealth of Independent States, when he appeared before a joint hearing of two Senate committees.


Leon's Furniture reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Home Video
This month, video dealers face a situation they don't like much: putting up with the very long movie.
Yesterday MCA/Universal released Hector Babenco's "At Play in the Fields of the Lord," which runs 3 hours 6 minutes, and on May 20 will come Warner's "J. F. K.," which lasts 3 hours 8 minutes.
Each movie is on two cassettes, and that makes store owners nervous.
Double-cassette films can turn off customers, retailers say.


National Insurance Group reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


LSB Industries reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Actors Face Eviction. Anyone's Dad Have a Barn?
THE playwrights finally get to the heart of the matter a few minutes after the curtain rises on Act II of "The Royal Family," the sentimental Kaufman-Ferber warhorse that transparently substitutes the fictitious Cavendish clan for the reigning Barrymores of Broadway.
Going into her windup, Julie Cavendish, daughter of the matriarch and mother to the next generation of Cavendishes, introduces a series of gooey paeans to the metaphysical pull of the theater:


Bloc Development reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Dekalb Energy (o) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Israel Asserts Armed Palestinians Will Be Killed Without Warning
The commander of Israeli forces in the West Bank said today that under recently amended gunfire regulations, troops have been authorized to shoot without warning at Palestinians holding firearms.
It was the first time a senior army commander had given details of the changed orders, which were first announced in general terms by the army in February after several Jewish settlers in the occupied territories had been shot to death.
Charge of 'Summary Execution'
The new rules have become a subject of dispute in recent weeks after a series of incidents in which soldiers, mostly from undercover units, shot and killed Palestinian fugitives.


Weston (George) Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Cambior Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Budd Canada reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Corrections
A caption yesterday with a picture from The Associated Press, showing two people who were honored for helping victims of the Los Angeles rioting, misidentified them in some copies.
They were Lei Yuille and Gregory Alan Williams.


Orange-Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31





Woolworth Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to April 25


Environmental Services of America reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Parkland Industries reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


InterProvincial Pipe Line reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Continental Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Cliffs Drilling Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Mark Resources reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Poco Petroleums reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Walshire Assurance Co. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Cuomo Proposes to Enlarge Thruway Agency's Powers
In 1950, the New York State Thruway Authority was created to build and maintain the state Thruway system, which stretches 570 miles and is the largest continuous toll-road system in the world.
But under a proposal by Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo, the authority's power would be expanded, giving it control over the operation and development of the state's 524-mile-long canal system, as well as over construction and economic development projects along the Thruway's borders.


INSIDE
The Nuclear View From North Korea
In a detailed 100-page report to the International Atomic Energy Agency, North Korea has described a web of previously unknown sites.
One is a laboratory that appears to be the same building that the United States asserts is the centerpiece of a nuclear weapons project.
Page A8.
A Quarrel Over Secret Codes
Like diplomats or spies, business executives can encode their documents, thanks to cheap computer chips, but Washington is balking.
Page D1.
Drivers Reject Times Pact
In what could lead to a major labor battle, truck drivers rejected contracts with The New York Times and a wholesale deliverer.
Page B1.
Cataloguing Clinton
In Washington, a corps of young Republican researchers are doing their best to come up with derogatory information on Bill Clinton.
Page A24.
Hockey Star Out of Playoffs
Mario Lemieux, the N.H.L. scoring leader, has a broken hand and Adam Graves of the Rangers may be suspended for injuring him.
Page B19.


Forum Retirement Partners reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


CAE Industries reports earnings for Year to March 31


Tax-Exempt Yields in Gain But Taxables Show Drop
Yields offered by money market funds monitored by IBC/Donoghue's Money Fund Report were mixed in the latest week.
Analysts said the Treasury's quarterly refunding, whose final leg is today's auction of 29 1/2-year bonds, had changed the tone of the market.
A week ago, few believed the Fed would soon move again to lower rates.
But because inflation seems to be contained and the recovery is still slow, there is now some perception that rates could dip lower, taking money market yields with them.


Del Laboratories Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Affiliated Food Stores Inc. reports earnings for Year to Dec 27


Southern Union Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Drivers Union Votes Down Contract With Times
In a decision that could lead to a major labor battle, a newspaper truck drivers union voted yesterday to reject contracts with The New York Times and a wholesale newspaper delivery company.
In a bitterly contested election, the union, the Newspaper and Mail Deliverers' Union of New York and Vicinity, voted not to make sweeping concessions on staffing levels, work rules and overtime in exchange for severance bonuses, job security and higher base pay.


The Three Main Proposals For a Budget Amendment
For members of Congress who want to balance the Federal budget, there are currently three main proposals to amend the Constitution.
The amendment sponsored by Senator Paul Simon, Democrat of Illinois, and a similar proposal by Representative Charles W. Stenholm, Democrat of Texas, have wide backing in Congress and are given a good chance of passing this year.
A competing version, whose chief sponsor is Senator Bob Kasten, Republican of Wisconsin, has less support in Congress and would erect greater obstacles to increasing taxes than the other proposals.


Electrocon International reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


COMPANY NEWS: Points of Light; 4 Billion Printed a Year, And Each Is Hotly Read
One hundred years ago, Joshua Pusey, a lawyer in Lima, Pa., created the first paper matchbook.
Mr.
Pusey, who is also given credit for inventing the roller coaster, called his creation the flexible match and patented the design.
The Beans of Jaffrey, N.H., are glad he did.
In 1938, Delcie David Bean founded D. D. Bean &amp; Sons, the first company to make paper matches exclusively.


Nature Food Centres Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Jerusalem Journal; To a Novelist of Nazareth, Laurels and Loud Boos
When Israel marks its independence day on Thursday, it will award its highest literary honor for the first time to an Israeli Arab writer, an act of cultural recognition that has set off fierce debate in Arab intellectual circles.
The dispute centers on whether the writer, Emile Habibi, a 70-year-old novelist from Nazareth and chronicler of the quandaries and conflicts of Arabs in Israel, should have agreed to accept the annual Israel Prize, given for scholarly or cultural achievement.


Hall Financial Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Despite Sales, Glum Spirit At Art Auction at Sotheby's
The atmosphere at Sotheby's sale of contemporary art last night was surprisingly gloomy, compared with the buoyant feeling at the auction at Christie's on Tuesday night.
The sale at Sotheby's totaled $12.3 million, which was below the auction house's estimate of $17.6 million to $23.3 million.
It was, in fact, a higher total than at Christie's, which came to $11,261,032.
Of the 61 works offered for sale at Sotheby's, 40 sold.
At Christie's on Tuesday night, 51 of 70 works sold.
At both auctions, private collectors dominated the buying, eagerly snapping up works that went at relatively bargain prices.


Clinton Delegate Tally Reaches 77%
Gov.
Bill Clinton moved closer to wrapping up the Democratic Presidential nomination with decisive victories on Tuesday in primaries in Indiana, North Carolina and Washington, D.C.
By picking up 141 delegates in the three contests, Mr.
Clinton's total climbed to 1,665, or 77 percent of the number needed for nomination.
Former Gov.
Edmund G. Brown Jr., who trailed Mr.
Clinton badly in all three races, picked up 20 delegates.
He finished a distant second in Indiana and fourth in North Carolina and Washington, behind former Sen.
Paul E. Tsongas, who suspended his campaign more than six weeks ago, and "uncommitted."


Andres Bossard, 47, a Founder of a Mime Trio
Andres Bossard, a founding member of Mummenschanz, the Swiss mime trio that achieved international popularity with its sophisticated commentary on the human condition, died on March 25 in Brunnen, Switzerland.
He was 47 years old and lived in Zurich.
Bernie Schurch, who formed Mummenschanz in 1971 with Mr.
Bossard and Floriana Frassetto, said by telephone from Switzerland that Mr.
Bossard had died of AIDS.


Essay; Old Pro Perot
H.
Ross Perot used to make himself useful around the Nixon White House, in hopes of settling disputes his company was having with the Social Security Administration.
When we were battling the sinister forces of Vietnam protest in 1970, the short Texan with the Haldeman crewcut came up with an idea to dramatize the vastness of our support.


Strategy for Child Bill: Piggyback It Into Law
House Democrats are trying to add a major child welfare program to a popular bill that would extend long-term unemployment benefits, hoping to show that they can get something done legislatively in a generally dismal session.
The move, led by Representative Thomas Downey of Long Island, would also mark the beginning of efforts by House Democrats to relate their legislative activity to the campaign of Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas, the likely Democratic Presidential nominee.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Concrete Blonde The Academy
Johnette Napolitano looks like a vampire.
At the Academy on Monday night, fronting her band Concrete Blonde, Ms.
Napolitano wore her bass over a white lace dress, black stockings and black ankle boots.
Her long black hair hung so thick over her face that at times her head might as well have been facing backward; when the hair parted, all that was visible was the whites of her eyes.
Many of Ms.
Napolitano's songs are about hauntings.
In "Walking in London," the title track from Concrete Blonde's most recent album (I.R.S.), the singer goes around the world but can't escape the memory of a lover: "I'm walking in London and you are watching me walk/Talking Italian and you are hearing me talk."


Botulism Reported In Fort Lee Family
Four members of a Fort Lee family have been stricken with botulism after eating fish bought in Jersey City, officials at the Hackensack Medical Center said today.
Steven Solomon, a spokesman for the hospital, said Farid Sariwis, 32 years old, is in critical condition with the disease.
His wife, Hanada Sariwis, 26, and two other female relatives Sihan Hanna, 53, and Zak Hanna, 58, also show symptoms of the disease and have been admitted to the hospital, Mr.
Solomon said.


With Few Tools, Ueberroth Begins Mission in Riot Area
Peter V. Ueberroth, who was appointed last week by Mayor Tom Bradley to lead the rebuilding of the South-Central area, is full of ambitious ideas about luring industry back to the community, creating thousands of permanent jobs and giving new hope to residents who feel economically disenfranchised.
But for now, Mr.
Ueberroth does not even have a telephone number.
In fact, he said this week that he had only a skeletal staff, no specific commitments for government or private financing, few lines of communication to the city's minority leaders and only a vague notion of how to carry out his ideas.
He was finally able to start moving into some donated office space in downtown Los Angeles late today, although it could be another day or two before the office is up and running.


Katy Industries reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Ajay Sports Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


World League vs. N.F.L., In a Board Room, That Is
The board of the World League, which includes seven owners of National Football League teams, will meet in New York tomorrow to assess the spring league's second season and its future.
The board will present its assessment at a meeting of N.F.L. owners on May 19 in Pasadena, Calif., in an effort to keep the league alive.


Ministering to Men in 'One of God's Alcatrazes'; Channeling Activism, Fed by Anger, Into Churches in Neighborhoods That Others Have Fled
Tuesday night, men's night at St.
Paul Community Baptist Church in East New York, where Bible studies are preceded by morality tales from the streets: A teen-ager in a purple sweatshirt stands abashed at the side of the Rev.
Johnny Ray Youngblood, facing about 100 men.
"What happened, man?" the minister asks.
"I cut somebody in the face," replies the youth.


Talk Aids Architect's Museum
Sir John Soane (1753-1837), the architect who designed the Bank of England, was also famous for his vast collections of architectural drawings (30,000), books (10,000) and sculpture.
But he was an educator, not a hoarder.
In 1833 he gave his house, which he built in London, to Britain for a museum open to the public, and especially to architects and architectural students.
Last night Peter Thornton, curator of the museum, opened the Sir John Soane's Museum Foundation in the United States with a lecture at the Cooper-Hewitt Museum in Manhattan.
The foundation, patterned after one in London, was established to raise funds for restoration of the museum and to sponsor lectures, tours, exhibitions and publications.
Mr.
Thornton is also to speak this month at the Art Institute of Chicago, the Portland (Me.) Museum of Art and the Museum of Fine Arts in Boston.


Wajax Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


New Brunswick Scientific Co. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Review/Dance; Sketches With an Underlying Order
Susan Rethorst's "Sometimes to Grace," presented at Performance Space 122 on Friday night, appears to spill out of nowhere and move through its own rarefied time and place in ways that call to mind the very different dances of Merce Cunningham.
Ms.
Rethorst has her own quiet but insistent choreographic voice.
And the new quintet for women, danced in rather tatty practice clothes and without music, offers a clear view into Ms.
Rethorst's fascinating work.
At first, particularly with the occasional sounds of Friday's last demonstrators and the police outside in the East Village streets, "Sometimes to Grace" looked like a series of inconsequential little movement sketches.
A woman entered, sank to a crouch and cupped the air and floor with her hands as if in a dream, in a still, poetic image that also ended the dance.
Another woman entered with a plain wooden chair, one of six that eventually made their way onto the stage to form, with alertly resting and moving bodies, a mysterious landscape.
The women came and went in no very ordered-looking sequence.
There were moments when they overtly acknowledged one another's presence.
Ms.
Rethorst broke up small gatherings with peremptory murmurs, like a schoolteacher or a mother.
Beneath her determined, intense concentration and the air of inapproachability it gives her, Ms.
Rethorst is quite a comic.
Sometimes the women seemed to be dancing together simply because they shared the stage space.


A Friend in Debt Is a Friend Indeed
David Geffen, a record industry executive and an investor, has disclosed that he has helped his close friend Calvin Klein by buying the outstanding bond debt of the fashion designer's company, which has had anemic sales for several years.
Barry Schwartz, chairman of Calvin Klein Inc., said in an interview yesterday that Mr.
Geffen had made the investment because "he is a friend of this company." Mr.
Schwartz said the company would now concentrate on building the business and pursuing growth opportunities.
For a few years the clothing company's sales have been declining.


14 Killed as Standoff Turns Violent in Tajikistan
A long-gathering confrontation between supporters and foes of the Tajikistan Government turned violent overnight, adding yet another hot spot to the tattered map of the former Soviet Union.
Gunfire echoed through the capital of this Central Asian country today, and hospitals reported at least 14 dead and many wounded.
Among those killed was the editor of the Tajikistan Parliament's newspaper, whose name was given as M. Sheraliyev.


When Five Barns Make One House
IT would definitely not be everybody's dream.
But on a clear day, Ed and Jane Dadey, two artists in Marquette, Neb., can scale the tower of their home, which they call a "mutant Little House on the Prairie," and get quite a view.
The Dadeys' house (above) consists of five salvaged barns joined together.
"Our intention was to get a lot of space cheap," said Mr.
Dadey, 44 years old, who grew up in the area.


Stage II Apparel Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


FRP Properties reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Cowboys: Their Art And Life
ATTENTION, buckaroos: "Trappings of the American West," a celebration of the art and life of the American cowboy, opens Saturday at the Coconino Center for the Arts in Flagstaff, Ariz.
The weekend's events, which open the show, include demonstrations of bit and spur engraving, by Jerry Cates of Amarillo, Tex., right, rawhide braiding, bootmaking, a performance of cowboy poetry, a camp cooking workshop and the finals of the Flagstaff Pine Country Rodeo Queen Contest.


Placer Dome Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


HDR Power Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 28


North Korea Reveals More About Its Nuclear Sites
Possibly resolving one of the biggest mysteries surrounding its secretive nuclear program, North Korea has described a web of previously unknown sites to the International Atomic Energy Agency, including a laboratory that appears to be the same building the United States asserts is the centerpiece of a nuclear-weapons project.
The agency said that in the detailed, 100-page document submitted on Monday, North Korea described a "radiochemical laboratory" designed for research on separating very small amounts of uranium and plutonium as a way to control nuclear wastes.


Young Black Men
The fires of Los Angeles cast harsh new light on the way America writes off places, urban wastelands that are more patrolled than policed.
Even worse, America writes off people -- another generation of young black men.
Studies show shockingly large percentages of young black men behind bars or under correctional supervision, feeding popular fears and stereotypes.
Quickly, glibly, they are all classified as criminals.


MC Shipping reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Regal Communications reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Accused Looters Are Varied As Greatly as Things Stolen
In hectic round-the-clock proceedings, thousands of men and women who were in the mobs that ravaged Los Angeles have crowded courthouses here, facing arraignments on charges of looting, arson, assault and curfew violations.
Some have long criminal records; some, in the parlance of their lawyers, are "virgins," never having broken the law before.
All of them -- a fisherman, a sales clerk, a graphic designer, a homeless man -- are accused of discovering within themselves an impulse to anarchy when the city came apart.
Beginning With Anger
That impulse took many forms, from angry gang members intent on settling scores to poor immigrant families unable to resist the lure of what one police officer called "the basic luxuries that we all take for granted."


Biospherics Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Evidence Is Found That Fetal Tissue Transplants Can Ease a Brain Disease
Two new reports on small groups of patients provide what experts say is intriguing evidence that fetal tissue transplants can alleviate symptoms of Parkinson's disease.
Neurologists say the scientific data add weight to anecdotal evidence that the operation can be helpful.
And Congressional experts say the results could provide the nudge that is needed to overturn a ban on using Federal funds to pay for research on fetal tissue transplants.


Teledata Communications Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Housewares, Lots of Them, At a Discount
Bernard (Ben) Cammarata, founder of the successful T. J. Maxx chain, is setting out to do for housewares and home furnishings what he did for family apparel.
On Thursday, in this middle-class suburb 30 miles southwest of Boston, Mr.
Cammarata, president and chief executive of the $3 billion TJX Companies, will open Home Goods, a 50,000-square-foot discount store for housewares and home furnishings.
Home Goods will offer more than 200,000 brand-name items, from place mats to Waterford crystal, at 30 to 70 percent off the usual retail prices.


Day Runner reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Reuter Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Laurentian Capital Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Lemieux Is Sidelined Amid Slash Controversy
Mario Lemieux of the Pittsburgh Penguins, considered by many to be hockey's best player, will miss tonight's game and possibly the rest of the National Hockey League playoffs because a bone in his left hand was fractured on Tuesday night when Adam Graves of the Rangers slashed him with his stick early into a 4-2 Ranger victory at Madison Square Garden.
The injury to Lemieux seriously damages Pittsburgh's hopes of repeating as Stanley Cup champions and can only help the Rangers in the quest for their first championship since 1940.
The Patrick Division final, which resumes in Pittsburgh, is tied at 1-1.


Fed Finds More Signs Of Upturn
Furnishing additional evidence that the nation is slowly recovering from recession, the Federal Reserve reported today that economic activity gathered steam in April but with the Northeast and the West Coast trailing the rest of the country.
Manufacturing appeared to be powering the recovery, but the report said retail sales and housing starts had also picked up.


Tyco Toys Planning to Acquire Matchbox
In a move that highlights the rough-and-tumble competition of the toy industry, Tyco Toys Inc. said yesterday that it planned to acquire the Universal Matchbox Group, which makes Matchbox miniature cars.
If the acquisition, valued at $135 million, is completed, Tyco will leapfrog over Fisher-Price to become the country's third-largest toy company, behind Hasbro and Mattel.
The company has bought several companies in recent years, including the View Master Ideal line, Playtime products and the Illco Toy Company.
The string of buyouts has pushed Tyco's annual revenues to $548.7 million in sales in 1991 from just $87.7 million in 1986.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Klaus Suonsaari Quintet The Blue Note
New York has heard plenty of jazz groups devoted to the hard-bop style of the early 1960's.
The Klaus Suonsaari Quintet may be the only one led by a drummer from Finland.


Precision Optics reports earnings for Qtr to March 29


Chronimed reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Far East National Bank reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Death Penalty; Clinton Weighs Clemency For Killer Scheduled to Die
Lawyers for the youngest inmate on Arkansas's death row, Steven Douglas Hill, yesterday pressed a Federal court appeal as well as a clemency request to Gov.
Bill Clinton in an effort to stop Mr.
Hill's execution, scheduled for today.
For the Arkansas Governor, who supports the death penalty, it is the second request for clemency by a condemned man that he has had to consider in the middle of his campaign for the Democratic nomination for President.
Mr.
Clinton planned to spend today in Little Rock to consider the request.


Florida Rock Industries reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Support for Striking Ushers
Concerned about the number of fans who have been ignoring picket lines set up by striking ushers at Yankee Stadium, New York's Central Labor Council is planning a mass demonstration and boycott of the Yankees-Angels game on May 20, the head of the striking union said yesterday.
Tom Garrett, president of Local 366 of the Utility Workers Union of America, said the council, which represents more than 500 unions and union locals, had agreed to what he called "a major demonstration of union solidarity" at the stadium beginning at 5 P.M., two and a half hours before game time.


Eldec Corp. reports earnings for Year to March 29


Vanguard Real Estate Fund II reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Xscribe Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Put Soiled Gloves in Careful Hands
THE heavy-duty glove season may be over, but for those who survived winter with two matching gloves, glove-rehabilitation time is here.
Tired-looking gloves can usually be revived with a professional cleaning and pressing if stains have not been left for too long.
Seams can be sewn closed, and loosened ornaments like bows, buttons and sequins can often be reattached.
Even white kid gloves of the Queen Mum variety can usually be revived, provided the leather is still in good condition.


Sales Rise At Top Black Companies
The nation's 100 largest black-owned companies posted a 10.4 percent increase in sales last year, despite the recession, bringing their revenue to $7.2 billion, according to a survey by Black Enterprise magazine.
The figures for 1991 represent a sharp gain from the growth level of the previous year, in which Black Enterprise reported a 5.2 percent sales increase for the top 100 black-owned businesses.
Earl G. Graves, publisher of Black Enterprise, said the increase indicated "that we're coming out of the recession and that black-owned businesses have reached a point of sophistication that we can overcome a number of economic obstacles."


Tokyo Envoy's Views on Trade
Japan's new Ambassador to the United States said today that Congressional legislation was not the way to resolve America's trade problems.
The Ambassador, Takakazu Kuriyama, also said Japan's market was not closed to foreign goods, as generally perceived.


Maclean Hunter reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Consumers Water Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Israel to Boycott 2 Parts of Peace Talks
Israel has given formal notice that it will boycott two phases of regional peace talks scheduled to begin next week because Palestinians from outside the occupied territories will be taking part, officials said today.
The Israeli decision to stay away from separate discussions on Middle East refugee problems and economic development was relayed over the last two days to the hosts for those talks, Canada and the European Community.


Quotation of the Day
"It would be a supreme tragedy if the world, having overcome the 1946 model, were to find itself once again in a 1914 model. A major international effort will be needed to render irreversible the shift in favor of a democratic world, one which is democratic for the whole of humanity, not just for half of it." -- MIKHAIL S. GORBACHEV.  [ A14:2. ]


Review/Dance; A Fast-Paced 'Medea' From Michael Smuin
Michael Smuin's "Medea," which Dance Theater of Harlem presented in its New York premiere on Tuesday night at the Brooklyn Academy of Music, is a sensational ballet in several senses of that word.
Mr.
Smuin's new interpretation of an ancient Greek myth is no stately ceremonial but a fast-paced melodrama of marital infidelity and revenge that provides its interpreters with roles demanding great forcefulness of stage presence.
Like most melodramas, it is virtually devoid of philosophical depth or moral insight.
Yet there is plenty of action.
If Mr.
Smuin had told this story of lust, sex, violence and murder in words instead of movements, it might appear with screaming headlines on the front page of a newspaper.


SNC Group reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Adage Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Closing the Store, Opening the House
JOLIE KELTER and Michael Malce, Manhattan antique dealers, are a walking, talking encyclopedia of 19th- and 20th-century decorative arts.
For almost two decades the pair sold quilts, folk art, garden furniture, and other antiques from their Greenwich Village shop, Kelter-Malce.
But last week they shut the store on Bleecker Street and moved the goods to their nearby home.
They will conduct their antique business from their 1850 Italianate town house, which has been freshly renovated for the purpose.
In other words, everything in their house is for sale.


Meadowbrook Rehabilitation Group Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Holco Mortgage Acceptance reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Jilly Rizzo, Close Aide To Sinatra, Killed at 75
Jilly Rizzo, the onetime restaurateur who became Frank Sinatra's closest associate and was later convicted in a Federal fraud case, was killed in an automobile crash here in his hometown early today, his 75th birthday.
The police said Mr.
Rizzo was driving alone along Gerald Ford Drive when his car was hit by a second vehicle and exploded in flames.
Because his body was badly burned, the authorities said positive identification would take at least 24 hours.
But Susan Reynolds, a spokesman for Mr.
Sinatra, confirmed that Mr.
Rizzo had been killed and said the entertainer was in seclusion as a result.


Aceto Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Dime's New Securities Unit
The Dime Savings Bank said yesterday that it would offer investment advice and securities services to its customers through a new subsidiary called Dime Securities of New York rather than the independent contractor, the Invest Financial Corporation, it has used for nearly a decade.
J.
Edward Diamond, president of the securities unit, said the change was an effort "to get our name before the customer again and again and to establish our own identity in the business." He added that Dime, which had revenues of $11 million last year from sales of securities and insurance, would keep more of the revenues from the securities business under the new arrangement.
The 55 workers who specialize in securities at Dime branches will not change as a result of the change.


National Sea Products reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


PRESSURE BUILDING FOR AN AMENDMENT TO BALANCE BUDGET
Momentum is building in Congress for a constitutional amendment that would require a balanced Federal budget and that could take effect as early as 1995.
Even those who say the idea is just a cynical effort concede that Congressional approval is almost inevitable this year, as lawmakers who have failed to control Federal spending rush to give the appearance of fiscal responsibility in an election year.


Bestar Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Courthouse Shooting Heats Up Debate on Gun Bill
A shooting in a suburban St.
Louis courthouse that left one person dead and five wounded has intensified the debate in the Missouri Legislature about whether to allow private citizens to carry concealed weapons.
The more intense debate stems from a shooting on Tuesday in Clayton, Mo., in which Kenneth Baumruk, a laid-off 53-year-old aerospace worker, entered the St.
Louis County Courthouse and shot and killed his 46-year-old wife because he was upset about their divorce.
Two lawyers, a bailiff, and a security officer were also wounded before Mr.
Baumruk was shot and wounded by police officers.


Prairie Oil Royalties reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Lannet Data Communications Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


CHRONICLE
There is something about the Bronx that fuels the creative spirit, or so say a group of authors who will gather on May 17 at the New York Botanical Garden to read passages from writings about their borough.
Originally the plan for the "Bloomsbury in the Bronx" brunch called for the Bronx-born writers to read about floral topics, but that was considered too narrow a focus.
Instead, LAURA CUNNINGHAM, AVERY CORMAN, FRANK GILROY and JOHN PATRICK SHANLEY will read passages from their novels, plays and movie scripts that describe the Bronx.


Review/Dance; Bodies That Fly Like Angels
Sin Cha Hong's new "Pluto," performed by her Laughing Stones Dance Company on Sunday night at La Mama Annex, is filled with beautiful images of bodies in flight.
Bathed in white light, the bodies seem to fall through space as they are held high, odd-angled, in lifts or perch on top of other bodies reclining on the floor.
The stage is as deep and dark as the black, empty sky on a screen behind the dancers, a sky filled, as is the stage, with odd shapes that look like pieces of planets or extraterrestrial artifacts.
There are several warmer, more human occurrences: a near-kiss or two and a funny sequence in which two men kept falling out of a neat row and against an increasingly exasperated third male dancer.
This mysterious ritual of a dance, provocatively lighted by Jeff Nash, was set to some haunting Celtic music in a collage that featured scores by Philip Corner, Fast Forward and Arvo Part.
And the performers looked and moved like compellingly human angels in a fine cast made up of Gary Onsum, Annie-B Parson, Nadine Helstroffer, Eun-Gyu Lee, Song Won Kang, Gennevieve Lam, Bill McCully and Richard Siegal.


Laser Photonics reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Silver Lining For a Victim Of a Burglary
It was hardly the worst of crimes -- just a run-of-the-mill burglary.
But it was a bit ignominious, considering that it took place in the State Capitol and that one of the victims was the state's top law-enforcement official, Richard H. Girgenti.
Mr.
Girgenti, who arrived at work on Tuesday to find his office ransacked and a tape recorder missing, was well aware of the potential for embarrassment.
"I think the irony of the situation probably struck me as much as it strikes you and others as well," he said.


Zygo Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Students Who Learn to Write Learn the Key to All Learning
To the Editor:
As educational consultants specializing in teaching writing, we were not surprised to read that, according to a Department of Education survey, "American children do not write much in school and when they do, they do it poorly" (news article, April 17).
Having had the opportunity to put institute writing programs in hundreds of schools around the country, we have observed ways that curriculum and teaching contribute to poor writing skills in students.
Schools that spend three or four months of their school year coaching children on how to take short-answer, standardized reading tests will, obviously, have no time to teach writing, nor even to teach reading.


IRT Property Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Coaching Union Needed, Says Ex-Coach
He is not knocking coaching salaries in the N.H.L., but his dismissal as the coach of the Los Angeles Kings on Monday seems to have set TOM WEBSTER to thinking about such contractual niceties as job security, retirement benefits and golden parachutes.
What is needed, Webster has decided, is an N.H.L. coaches union.
"We, as coaches, have to do something to protect ourselves," said the 43-year-old Webster.
"We need standardized contracts and more information on our pension plans."(AP)


Alias Research Inc. reports earnings for Year to Jan 31


Visual Stimuli Are Implicated in Sex Crimes
To the Editor:
In "A Damaging Remedy for Sex Crimes" (editorial, April 13), you argue against the pornography victims' compensation bill.
Several of your arguments are sound, including arguments against censorship and shifting of responsibility.
Your primary argument, however, is questionable and is directly contradicted right below in "Adolescents at Risk" (Editorial Notebook) by Diane Camper.
You cannot have it both ways.
Ms.
Camper asserts that "the glamorizing of violence on television and in movies . . . contributes to increasing violence" among teen-agers.
She praises Fred M. Hechinger's request in a new book called "Fateful Choices" that the entertainment industry moderate its portrayals of violence and sex.
The assumption is that depictions of violence have a causal role in enactments of violence, and reducing such depictions would reduce violence.
The editorial maintains that the association between pornography and sex crimes "has no solid basis in science or psychology," is "unproven and highly speculative," and to posit a causal relationship "is a fatal flaw."


Kemper Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Carver Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.25-6.5
6.25-6.5
8.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.62
3.77
5.75
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.59
3.60
5.49
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.72
3.74
5.64
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.09
7.13
7.89
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.96
7.99
8.22
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.90
8.95
9.28
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.70
6.71
7.21
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Washington at Work; Grim Reaper for Military Budgets
Sean O'Keefe says his job is sometimes as interesting as "watching paint dry." Perhaps, but there is a huge crowd watching Mr.
O'Keefe's every move.
As the Defense Department's comptroller and chief financial officer, Mr.
O'Keefe calls himself "the accountant, keeping the beans lined up and the books straight."


CNA Financial reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Candidate's Record; White House Aides' Memos Paint Perot as Nixon Insider
Ross Perot, whose incipient Presidential campaign is based largely on his image as an outsider, was closely allied with the Nixon White House, often asked for special favors and promised contributions to Nixon public-relations efforts, according to documents in the National Archives.
The documents, mainly notes from White House aides in the Nixon Administration, suggest that Mr.
Perot told Nixon aides that he would give up to $50 million to a public relations campaign to burnish Mr.
Nixon's image.
Nixon aides say the money was never delivered.
Aides' View of Perot
Mr.
Perot declined to be interviewed directly about the Nixon papers.
Instead his campaign released a six-page statement generally denying any impropriety.
The statement acknowledged that Mr.
Perot discussed starting an "electronic town hall" with Mr.
Nixon, but added: "At no time did Mr. Perot indicate any interest at all in spending $50 million on a special project for the President."


Big Government Study Links Vitamin C to Heart Benefits
A large new study has suggested that eating more vitamin-rich fruits and vegetables may help prevent premature death from heart disease and other ailments.
The study, conducted among more than 11,000 Americans, indicated that consuming ample amounts of vitamin C in foods and supplements may lower death rates, especially the coronary death rate among men.


King Case Speaks of Our Grave Condition
To the Editor:
The 20th century should have taught us that to be silent in the face of egregious injustice is to be complicit in it.
In the 1980's, in the wake of the bombing of a synagogue in Paris and desecration of a Jewish cemetery in Carpentras, French citizens of all ethnic and racial backgrounds demonstrated under the slogan "We Are All Jews."
In this same spirit, following the verdict in the trial of four Los Angeles police officers for beating Rodney King and the understandable if unjustified avenging riots in several black ghettos, concerned Americans should rally around the battle cry "We Are All African-Americans."


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Capriati Loses 3-Setter  Top-ranked Monica Seles raced to an easy victory yesterday in reaching the quarterfinals of the Italian Open in Rome, but Jennifer Capriati was beaten after another display of ragged, listless tennis.
Capriati, seeded third, lost to the 16th-seeded Amanda Coetzer of South Africa, 6-1, 3-6, 6-4.
The turning point came in the eighth game of the third set when Capriati, with a chance to move ahead by 5-3 and serve for the match, failed to convert two break points.
Seles needed only 52 minutes to drub unseeded Carrie Cunningham, 6-0, 6-1. (AP) Edberg Advances: Top-seeded Stefan Edberg defeated Francisco Clavet, 6-3, 6-1, to advance to the quarterfinals of the German Open in Hamburg. (AP) GOLF Standly Leads by 1  Mike Standly, who hasn't won in two years on the PGA Tour, shot a five-under-par 67 yesterday in the cold and rain to lead by one shot after the first round of the Atlanta Classic in Marietta, Ga.
Five players are at 68. (AP) A Rally in Westchester: Mike Diffley of Pelham, N.Y., after losing the opening hole, rallied for a 3-and-2 victory over Larry Rentz of Winged Foot, the defending champion, and won the Westchester P.G.A. championship at the Tuxedo Club.
HOCKEY  Routed U.S.
Is Out  Ray LeBlanc gave up four goals within 7 minutes 41 seconds of the opening period as Czechoslovakia routed Team USA, 8-1, in yesterday's quarterfinals of the world championships in Prague.
In the semifinals on Saturday, Czechoslovakia will face Finland, and Switzerland will play Sweden. (AP) DIVING  Moses Wins 1-Meter  Melisa Moses and Julie Ovenhouse finished 1-2 in the Alamo International's women's 1-meter springboard diving final yesterday in Fort Lauderdale, Fla.
Moses, 21 years old, won the event on her last dive, a reverse twist, to finish with 254.88 points.
Ovenhouse, 23, had 253.80.


Bush Finds 'Horror' on Los Angeles Tour
Expressing "horror and dismay" at what he saw from his armored limousine, President Bush toured the broken and blackened districts of Los Angeles today and confronted the resentment of minority groups who feel cheated of justice and prosperity by the established power that he represents.
Black residents of the city's South-Central section told Mr.
Bush of the fear of elderly women to walk the streets at night, of young men's inability to find jobs, and of rioters and looters who ran wild because "they had no stake" in the community.


Mr. Rohatyn's Proper Role
Once again, City Hall and Felix Rohatyn disagree over the use of $200 million in surplus money at New York's Municipal Assistance Corporation.
Gov.
Mario Cuomo and Mr.
Rohatyn, chairman of the M.A.C., want the money for public schools.
Mayor David Dinkins would use it for productivity agreements with labor -- perhaps to grant raises in exchange for long-term savings.
Schools Chancellor Joseph Fernandez has put together a very attractive proposal for the money.
The Dinkins administration has no specific plan yet, and the idea of using the surplus for wage increases in the 1993 mayoral election year is troubling.


'Hamlet' to Close
"Hamlet," Shakespeare's drama, co-starring Stephen Lang and Elizabeth McGovern, is to close after the matinee on Sunday at the Criterion Center, 1530 Broadway, at 45th Street.
The production, directed by Paul Weidner, will have run for 45 regular performances and 26 previews.


New Jobless Claims Up a Bit
The Government said today that the number of Americans filing new claims for unemployment benefits rose a moderate 11,000, to 415,000, in late April, signaling persistent weakness in the jobs market.
Massachusetts and New Jersey, long mired in a downturn, bore the brunt of layoffs in the week ended April 25 because of cutbacks in the service sector, the Labor Department said.


Rangers Are Tainted Into Corner
After the Pittsburgh Penguins beat the Rangers in the first game of the Patrick Division final last Sunday night, Mike Gartner of the Rangers was asked what his team could do to stop Mario Lemieux, the Penguin superstar who led his team to the Stanley Cup last spring.
"Throw a net over him," Gartner was quoted as saying.
"Better yet, maybe we should shoot him."


Paying Budget Piper; A Constitutional Amendment to Avert Deficits Would Involve Painful Steps
An embattled Congress and angry voters are rushing to embrace a balanced-budget amendment, but hardly anyone is talking about the long-term economic complications it would probably produce.
Because the Federal Government spends $4 for every $3 it takes in, any serious effort to balance the budget would necessarily involve a disconcerting array of bitter measures that are likely to include raising taxes and putting tough ceilings on Medicaid and Medicare spending.
In straining to balance the Federal budget, Washington might also slash aid to the states, forcing them to cut services or raise taxes in turn.


From Riots of 60's to Riots of the 90's, a Frustrating Search to Heal a Nation
The battles in the streets of Los Angeles have ended, and the political battles have begun.
At their core is the nation's most famous report on urban violence, which looked at burning cities a quarter century ago and called for a major Government effort to heal them.
"Only a greatly enlarged commitment to national action -- compassionate, massive and sustained, backed by the will and resources of the most powerful nation on this earth -- can shape a future that is compatible with the historic ideals of American society," concluded the Kerner Commission, convened by President Lyndon B. Johnson to examine the causes of riots that shook more than 150 American cities in 1967.


Why Single Out Artists to Subsidize the Arts?; Tainted Money
To the Editor:
While Susan Jane Gilman's idea of self-funding the art community (Op-Ed, April 18) is good, I object to her assumption that all art is of value.
For instance, Andy Warhol, while not exactly insulting (except to the intelligence), was so trivial he should have been dismissed with alacrity.
However, since artists of his type can attract vast amounts of money, let them donate their excess to artists of a more serious, traditional bent.
I find it offensive that Ms.
Gilman labels symphonies crowd pleasers, when they are traditional mediums of culture proved by their longevity.
I support the National Endowment for the Arts only when it finances artists who create art that is pleasing to the eye and restorative to the soul.


The Art Market
New Phillips Director
The Phillips Collection in Washington finally made it official yesterday: Charles Moffett, the senior curator of paintings at the National Gallery of Art in Washington, has been appointed the collection's next director.
The appointment was the latest step in the game of musical chairs among museum directors.
In September Mr.
Moffett, 46 years old, is to replace Laughlin Phillips, who announced his retirement in November.
He will be the first person from outside the Phillips family to head the modern-art gallery.


A New Bill on 'Baby Bells'
The chairman of the House Judiciary Committee, Representative Jack Brooks of Texas, introduced legislation today that would bar the seven regional Bell telephone companies from owning information services and manufacturing equipment for years to come.
Though prospects are virtually nil that an election-year Congress will pass such a divisive measure, the bill marks a starting point for political bargaining in the session that begins in January.


A Malady to Beware: Llama Fever Spreads
ON the surface, Carolyn Blalock looks like a perfectly normal businesswoman -- efficient, informed, well-dressed, punctual.
The fact is, however, that she suffers from a serious case of the little-known llama fever.
This highly contagious malady is marked by the distinct desire to be in the composed company of these regal creatures with the very soft fur and the very oversized ears.
In severe cases, llama-fever sufferers find themselves talking to the animals, grooming and -- get this -- generally caring for them as if they were intelligent.


Cuomo Proposes Measure To Improve Safety of Buses
In response to a bus accident that left two Long Island students dead last month, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo proposed legislation today that would require new charter buses to have seat belts and would require bus drivers with bad driving records to be retested for licenses.
Officials with national highway safety organizations said they believed the new legislation would be the toughest in the nation.
And legislative leaders received the bill warmly, although they said they would have to study it more thoroughly.


Ludwig, Ill, Withdraws
Because of illness, the mezzosoprano Christa Ludwig has withdrawn from her concert with the Metropolitan Opera Orchestra scheduled for tomorrow at 8 P.M. at Carnegie Hall.
The mezzo-soprano Waltraud Meier will take her place to sing the Mahler cycle "Das Lied von der Erde," with the tenor Michael Sylvester.
The other half of the program will be the Mozart Piano Concerto No. 12 in A, with James Levine as soloist and conductor.
Remaining tickets are $12 to $45.
Information: (212) 247-7800.


Ransom Note Revealed for Exxon Official
Investigators have received a ransom demand for the safe return of Sidney J. Reso, a high-ranking Exxon official who disappeared from his home in Morris Township eight days ago, according to a law enforcement official.
The official, who spoke on the condition that he not be identified, said investigators had not been able to confirm whether the demand was genuine or a prank and had not revealed its existence for fear of jeopardizing Mr.
Reso's return.


Renault and Volvo Discuss Possibility of Merger
Renault and Volvo, already tied by a 1990 alliance, are discussing the possibility of a full merger, officials of the two companies said today.
Such international mergers have often been considered by car makers in Europe to cut costs and streamline production in the Continent's intensely competitive auto market.
But past attempts -- like those by Fiat S.p.A. with Peugeot S.A. in the 1960's and again by Fiat with Ford of Europe in the 1980's -- have stumbled on corporate or nationalist pride.


Aide Termed Easy on Police And Unbudging on Rioters
The Bush Administration's top civil rights official was criticized at a Congressional hearing today for his reluctance to support steps to crack down on police officers who beat civilians at a time when the Government seems eager to prosecute looters and riot-related offenses in Los Angeles.
Even as the Administration is trying to show that it is sensitive to civil rights abuses and forceful on law and order issues, John R. Dunne, the head of the Justice Department's civil rights division, left the impression among some lawmakers that the department is dragging its feet on police brutality.


YELTSIN DECREES NEW RUSSIAN ARMY
President Boris N. Yeltsin issued decrees today forming a separate Russian Army with himself as commander in chief and acting Minister of Defense.
The announcement had been expected since March, when Mr.
Yeltsin first bowed to prevailing sentiments in the new Commonwealth of Independent States and announced the creation of a Russian Ministry of Defense.


American's New Fares Attract Business Fliers
The big air-fare restructuring that was announced last month by American Airlines has caused a large increase in the bookings of business fliers for full-coach fares.
While that shows signs of fulfilling one of American's top goals -- to lure travelers by simplifying the fare structure -- the carrier apparently will not be able to raise fares on some routes later this month as it had planned.


Corrections
An article yesterday about the Philadelphia Orchestra's lawsuit against the Walt Disney Company and Buena Vista Home Video misstated the estimated profits earned by videocassette and laser-disk sales of the film "Fantasia." The profits, of which the orchestra is seeking half, are estimated at $120 million, not $120,000.


Corrections
A report in the Chronicle column last Friday about Sheena Easton, who collapsed on stage during a matinee of "Man of La Mancha," referred incorrectly to her understudy.
She is Joan Susswein Barber.


Hitless-Wonder Yanks Lose Again, 6-0
Does it matter anymore who the pitcher is?
Apparently not.
The Yankees, caught in a hitting slump that seems to keep growing worse, lost another game tonight because their struggling offense never materialized.
The previous two nights, they were thwarted by left-handers.
Tonight, it was Julio Valera, a right-hander, one-time Met and current rookie, whose five-hit shutout carried the California Angels to a 6-0 victory at Anaheim Stadium.


Top Executives Say Recovery Has Begun
Top executives from a dozen of the nation's largest corporations said this evening that with the exception of riot-torn Los Angeles, the United States appeared to have begun a slow recovery from last year's recession.
All the executives who spoke this evening thought that an economic recovery had begun, but they differed on whether its progress was assured.
The most optimistic was Robert E. Allen, the chairman and chief executive of the American Telephone and Telegraph Company.
"I don't think we're going to have a booming recovery, but I think it may exceed most economists' expectations," he said.


MANAGEMENT BUYOUT AT WHEREHOUSE ENTERTAINMENT
A group of Wherehouse Entertainment Inc. managers has led a $250 million buyout of the music, video and computer equipment retailer, the company said.
The management group and Merrill Lynch Partners Inc. bought the company from Adler &amp; Shaykin, a leveraged-buyout firm.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Reporter's Notebook; Bill Clinton, Crusading Cub Reporter
Sometimes, as Bill Clinton's political caravan jumps from state to state in a frenetic quest for votes and publicity, it seems that television news correspondents are as important as the candidate himself, or more so.
Since inspecting the damage from the riots in Los Angeles on Monday, Mr.
Clinton has been trying to engage President Bush in a debate over social welfare policy.
The debate is conducted not through speeches or manifestoes, but through an exchange of "sound bites." Journalists ask Mr.
Clinton, the likely Presidential nominee of the Democratic Party, for his reaction to some statement by the Bush Administration, and within hours Mr.
Clinton's comments are broadcast across the country, often provoking, in turn, a reply from the White House.


Camden Yards Magic Saves Orioles Again
Orioles 5, Twins 4
BALTIMORE, May 7 (AP) -- Joe Orsulak scored the winning run on a wild pitch by Rick Aguilera, capping a four-run ninth-inning rally that lifted Baltimore past Minnesota tonight, 5-4.
Aguilera's wild pitch, the Twins' fourth of the game, gave the Orioles their eighth victory in nine games and improved their home record to 12-2.
With the Orioles trailing, 4-1, Glenn Davis opened the ninth with a single and Randy Milligan doubled.
David Segui followed with a run-scoring single and was replaced by pinch-runner Mark McLemore.
Pinch-hitter Sam Horn then singled, scoring Milligan, and took second on the throw.


Perot Hires Businessman To Be Issues Coordinator
Ross Perot, who said this week he would step back from public forums to study policy positions for a likely Presidential campaign, has hired a business executive with broad connections in the Federal Government to head his effort.
John P. White, general manager since 1989 of the computer-based products division at the Eastman Kodak Company, took an indefinite leave from the company in Rochester earlier this week to join the slowly-widening circle of Perot advisers in North Dallas, said a Kodak spokesman, Ron Roberts.


COLGATE TO EXPAND INTO DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
The Colgate-Palmolive Company has embarked on a new business plan to accelerate profits through 1995 by expanding into developing countries, the company's chairman, Reuben Mark, told shareholders at the annual meeting.
"More and more people are demanding everyday luxuries like toothpaste and soap," Mr.
Mark said, referring to emerging markets in Eastern Europe and elsewhere.
"Colgate has always been a pioneer, and our vision is to make sure we are among the first to enter these new locations."


Cordero Says His Reluctant Goodbye to Riding
Angel Cordero Jr., the combative king of New York jockeys for the last generation, closed his career as a rider at the age of 49 yesterday and began a new one as a trainer after 38,684 races, 7,076 victories and more spills and injuries than he could finally handle.
"Riding has been my life," he said, at times weeping gently during an emotional farewell.
"But after long pain, after consulting my doctors, I have decided to quit riding but to stick with racing as a trainer. I only hope that I accomplish as much as a trainer."


COMPANY NEWS
BANTA CORP., Menasha, Wis., a printing and graphics services concern, completed the sale of some of its Editel operations to Unitel Video Inc., New York, a videotape services concern, for $17.5 million.


Shuttle Crew: Six Veterans And a Rookie
Capt. Daniel C. Brandenstein Mission Commander
Captain Brandenstein, 49 years old, of the Navy has flown three shuttle missions since 1983 and served as commander on the last two.
Before joining NASA in 1978, Captain Brandenstein was a naval aviator and flew 192 combat missions in Southeast Asia from 1968 to 1970.
He is chief of NASA's Astronaut Office.


As Troops March Out, Courts Narrow Backlog
The Federal Government was withdrawing its troops from the streets today, and the courts cleared up most of the backlog of arraignments of the thousands of people arrested in last week's riots as the city continued its tentative steps back toward normalcy.
But the fallout continued from the acquittals last week of four white police officers in the beating of a black motorist, Rodney G. King, as a Federal grand jury stepped up its criminal civil rights investigation into the beating, captured on an 81-second amateur videotape and broadcast around the world.


Jordan Huffs and He Puffs, But There's Still No Blowout
The message the Chicago Bulls had planned for the Knicks tonight wasn't quite getting through.
After a while, Michael Jordan decided to clear his throat and deliver it personally to John Starks.
There isn't a basketball player alive who would relish the position Starks found himself in in the middle of the first quarter.
Jordan, Starks's man and the best player known to man, felt the Knicks, in general, getting under his skin and he wanted Starks, in particular, out of his face.


Trade Talks Gain in Mexico
Negotiations for a North American Free Trade Agreement among the United States, Mexico and Canada have accelerated in the last two weeks, with a complete deal now likely this summer, possibly as early as June, Administration and Congressional officials said today.
Also today, American and European Community negotiators appeared to have settled a dispute over Government subsidies to their commercial aircraft industries.
The two sides reached a tentative deal patching up differences that emerged after they reached a draft pact on March 31, but no details were available.
On the free-trade agreement, United States, Canadian and Mexican officials met throughout last week in Mexico City and produced considerable and unexpected progress on issues in many industries, notably textiles and automobiles, they said.
But differences remain on such questions as the access of United States banks and oil drilling companies to the Mexican financial services and energy markets.
The faster pace of negotiations leaves Congressional approval of a deal this year still unlikely but not impossible.
Less time remains on the Congressional calendar this year than called for by the "fast track" legislation for consideration of trade agreements.
The Administration would thus have to persuade Congress not only to approve an agreement but to do so speedily.
The proposed North American trade pact would broaden an existing free-trade agreement struck in 1988 between the United States and Canada.


CHRONICLE
"You are cordially invited NOT to attend another hotel chicken dinner," said the invitation sent this week by two organizations that work with homeless people, HELP and Partnership for the Homeless.
"Instead of having to sit through another black-tie hotel ballroom dinner," it said, "plan to relax, stay at home or enjoy a night out on the town."
ANDREW CUOMO, the president of HELP, considered it a relief to have something not to go to.
"It is nonsensical to attend a fancy ballroom dinner where the organization pays $100 for your meal," he said, "when you have homeless people outside eating from garbage pails."


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows, performances and art exhibitions in the New York metropolitan region that will be closing soon: Closing This Weekend
"THE SLEEPING BEAUTY," New York City Ballet, New York State Theater.
Through Sunday.
Performance times: Tonight at 8; tomorrow, 2 and 8 P.M.; Sunday, 1 and 7 P.M.
Tickets: $12 to $58.
Information: (212) 870-5570.
DANCE THEATER OF HARLEM, Brooklyn Academy of Music, 30 Lafayette Avenue, at Ashland Place, Fort Greene.
Through Sunday.
Performance times: Tonight at 8; tomorrow, 2 and 8 P.M.; Sunday, 3 P.M.
Tickets: $20 to $50.
Information: (718) 636-4100.


Amdahl Shifts Some Duties Among Its Top Executives
The Amdahl Corporation today promoted E. Joseph Zemke, its president and chief operating officer, to chief executive.
Mr.
Zemke, who is 51 years old, succeeds John C. Lewis, 56, who will continue as chairman.
Amdahl, based in Sunnyvale, Calif., is a leading maker of I.B.M.-compatible mainframe computers.


Review/Film; Documentary Evidence Supporting Indian's Rage
John Trudell, the American Indian spokesman and organizer, appears as an actor in Michael Apted's "Thunderheart," playing a firebrand suspected of murdering a Federal Bureau of Investigation agent.
Mr.
Trudell also appears in "Incident at Oglala," Mr.
Apted's documentary on the same subject, and the difference is instructive.
Mr.
Trudell's fervent, angry manner is similar in both films.
But it is "Incident at Oglala" that displays a photograph of this man's wife and children.
They were killed (along with his mother-in-law) in a fire of suspicious origin, a fire that Mr.
Trudell regards as directly linked to his political outspokenness.
"Thunderheart" made highly dramatic use of Mr.
Trudell's furious, adamant demeanor; the quieter "Incident at Oglala" is the film that explains it.
This straightforward, meticulous documentary offers a detailed account of the violent events that led to the murders of two F.B.I. agents in Oglala, S.D., in 1975, and the subsequent investigation that found Leonard Peltier guilty of the killings.


Corporations Ask Bush to Lift Vietnam Ban
Eight large United States corporations, among them four oil companies, asked President Bush today to lift restrictions on business with Vietnam and allow Americans to compete in its growing market.
"The United States economic sanctions with respect to Vietnam have become unilateral, with our allies and trade partners investing heavily and trading vigorously," said the letter from executives of Caterpillar, Boeing, Hunt Oil, Chevron, Amoco, Phillips Petroleum, Windmere, American International Group and the Coudert Brothers law firm.


Heaton and Belle Receive Suspensions
Kansas City pitcher NEAL HEATON was suspended yesterday for five games and Cleveland outfielder ALBERT BELLE was suspended for three games for their participation in a brawl on Monday.
Both players appealed the penalties imposed by the American League president, BOBBY BROWN,delaying the suspensions from taking effect.


'Shimada,' Rather Than Bashing Japan, Examines Prejudice
To the Editor:
"Merciful End on Broadway" (Topics of The Times, April 26) states that the closing of "Shimada," a drama about a Japanese company that buys an Australian bicycle factory, "can only delight those who detest prejudice." We the cast of "Shimada" singly and collectively detest prejudice; and we are not delighted.
We cannot speak for the radio ads, but we assume the critics review a play and not its advertising.
"Shimada" is about prejudice, about one man's inability to let go of the past and release the bitterness of his war experiences.
It is also about survival; about relationships between generations, between labor and management, and between friends.
But most of all it is about the need for healing between East and West, a healing that can only take place when xenophobia, which you erroneously associate with the play, is faced, acknowledged and finally released.
The play's structure blends Western theater and Kabuki theater in a cross-fertilization of the two cultures that resonates on many levels.
If the reviewers were not attuned to those other levels, the audience was, as evidenced by the cheering standing ovations on opening night and at both performances on Saturday.
Audience members lined the streets outside after the shows and told us tearfully how sorry they were we were closing.
They said: "This is what Broadway has needed, a real play about real issues." "Where do we write? How can we help? It's not fair that the critics should have the power to close a play as good as this and not give the audience time to see it."
The cast's exultation at the overwhelming opening-night reception was shattered by the critics, who saw only the surface, literal aspects of the play.
We were shocked and stunned that they had missed what the play was about, that it was designed to stimulate questions, not give easy answers, to encourage people to look at their own prejudice, the old wounds on both sides.
That is why a reference to Hiroshima is introduced.
Japan is not the largest foreign investor in the United States.
Britain is, but there is no Britain-bashing.
Why not?
Is it perhaps the white skin?
If so, we are xenophobic, and that is what the play explores.
We respect the right of critics to a different opinion from the creative artists who have worked months on a play.
We are all willing to take our licks in this business, but please do not impugn our honor by calling us prejudiced when we employ our God-given gifts to tell our deepest truths about the moral failure of prejudice.
ELLEN BURSTYN, JILL SHEARER, ESTELLE PARSONS, MAKO Upper Nyack, N.Y., May 1, 1992 The letter was signed also by the entire cast of "Shimada."


Sports of The Times; One Jockey To Another: Pack It In
SOME couples display photographs from their last vacation, standing in front of the pyramids, riding a cable car in San Francisco.
The Cordero family does not take vacations because there are always horses to ride, horses to feed.
"He doesn't play golf, he doesn't garden, he doesn't take vacations," Marjorie Clayton Cordero said proudly of her husband, Angel Cordero Jr.
"All he knows are horses."


On My Mind; History for Fools
Mikhail Sergeyevich Gorbachev is taking the opportunity of his tour of the United States as the honored guest of politicians, capitalists and academics to show what he thinks of them and Americans in general.
He thinks they are fools, with the historical memory of fruit flies.
The man may be exactly right.
He certainly will have proved we are fools if we let him get away with what he is saying on his triumphal tour -- and craven fools at that.


Czyz and Lalonde Brace For a Friendly Exchange
Bobby Czyz, the World Boxing Association cruiserweight champion, had just finished saying that he liked Donny Lalonde and that what he had to do to him in the ring would be "strictly business."
That was when Lalonde got to his feet and told reporters: "I like Bobby, too, and respect him. And I'll be very respectful and will knock him out with respect. And not have any hard feelings at all."


Former Detroit Police Chief Convicted of Embezzlement
A Federal jury today convicted Detroit's former police Chief of stealing $2.6 million in taxpayer money over seven years.
The money had been intended for undercover drug operations.
After deliberating for eight days, the 12-member jury concluded that the former Chief, William L. Hart, embezzled the money to buy luxury cars and gifts for three former girlfriends as well as to renovate his home and a cottage in Canada.
He was also convicted of filing false Federal income tax returns in 1986 and 1987.


Finland in $3 Billion Deal for 64 McDonnell Douglas Combat Jets
Finland, no longer constrained by Soviet pressure to tailor its military strength to an international image of neutrality, is about to rebuild its air force with a fleet of American fighter aircraft.
The Finnish Defense Ministry said Wednesday that it was placing a $3 billion order with McDonnell Douglas Corporation for 64 FA-18 Hornet fighter-bombers, Finland's first purchase of American combat planes.


The Slash. Bonehead or Fine Line?
The talk entering last night's overtime 6-5 overtime victory by the Rangers was Adam Graves's vicious slash of Penguins superstar Mario Lemieux Tuesday night.
So it was a delicious irony for John Davidson and Sam Rosen of the MSG Network team to witness the beleaguered Graves scoring the game's first goal last night.
That wasn't the only irony: For the second time this week, cable viewers were treated to the rarity of the Rangers and the Knicks in second-round playoff games on the same day, playing compelling games at virtually the same time.


Consumers Reduce Debt
Consumers cut their debts in March and avoided taking on new loans that require monthly payments, figures published by the Federal Reserve Board showed today.
Federal policy makers say the steady whittling down of obligations taken on during the free-spending 1980's has been a brake on economic expansion but the trend means that Americans are getting their financial houses in order.


Sounds Around Town
Chicago Gold
Lefty Dizz, Chicago Blues, 73 Eighth Avenue, between 13th and 14th Streets, Manhattan, (212) 255-7373.
Many blues guitarists spend notes like pennies, shelling them out in a rapid-fire flurry that adds up to a whole little.
Lefty Dizz, from Chicago, treats every note like gold.
With the guitar turned upside down to accommodate his left-handed style, his fingers bop up and down the neck as if they're on parade; his leads sizzle, giggle and tell tales that are informed by fun as much as passion and technique.
Sets tonight and tomorrow begin at 9:30 P.M.
Admission is $12.


TV Weekend; Stephanie Zimbalist as a Victim of Harassment
A sure sign that the subject of sexual harassment is not about to disappear soon: It has become the stuff of television movies.
This weekend's pat but pointed example is "Sexual Advances," the "ABC Sunday Night Movie" at 9.
Stephanie Zimbalist dispenses with much of her normal icy poise to portray a happily married woman who finds herself transformed rather rapidly from rising corporate star to shaken victim.
Paula Pratt (Ms. Zimbalist) works for Hyper Velocity, a Tacoma, Wash., company specializing in athletic shoes.
As promotion manager, she focuses on athlete endorsements.
When one athlete threatens to break his contract because of patronizing treatment from the company attorney Jack French (William Russ), the account is given exclusively to Paula.
Although Jack seems unruffled, he soon starts bombarding Paula with sexual propositions, not in the least put off by her continued insistence that she is not interested.


Hughes Talks With Dynamics
The Hughes Aircraft Company is negotiating to buy the General Dynamics Corporation's missile business, Hughes' parent company said Thursday.
The General Motors Corporation, confirmed the talks withGeneral Dynamics, but did not give details of the negotiations or mention any price.


The Peaceful Way Is Not Lost; End of Police Brutality Case Turns Toward Hope for Change
Privately, Judge Gerard Goettel feared chaos in his Federal District Court when he called for a meeting this morning between local government and law-enforcement officials, civil rights advocates and the family of a black man killed by an off-duty police officer in 1986.
He wanted the meeting to focus upon healing and social reform.
He worried that instead it might be used by opportunists to manipulate the passions of the day.
He called for four Federal marshals to keep the peace.


Corrections
A brief article in Business Day yesterday about the imminent departure of J. Michael Farren as Under Secretary of Commerce for International Trade to join President Bush's campaign team misstated his position with the Republican National Committee in the early 1980's.
He was the director of White House liaison at the committee, not the deputy director.


Trenton Sees Budget Gap Of Millions
State Treasurer Samuel F. Crane said today that lower-than-expected revenue from the state income tax has left a $342 million gap in the state budget just seven weeks before the end of the current fiscal year.
Mr.
Crane projected an additional $310 million revenue loss from a $15.7 billion budget proposed by Gov.
Jim Florio for the next fiscal year.


On Stage, and Off
A Break With a Tony Custom
The annual screams of outrage, indignation and glee have begun on Broadway with the announcement on Monday of the 1992 Tony Award nominations.
This year's nominating committee has made some daring and unpopular choices, like nominating two plays for best play that have already closed ("Four Baboons Adoring the Sun," "Two Shakespearean Actors"), while ignoring four that are still running ("Death and the Maiden," "Jake's Women," "Conversations With My Father," "A Small Family Business").
This decision flies in the face of the conventional Tony wisdom (mostly unspoken) that says the awards have two purposes -- to honor excellence and sell tickets.
In recent years the nominators have gotten a bad rap within the industry, since the committee consisted of many who voted the Broadway party line (sell whatever's still running) as opposed to actually seeing every entry and appraising it on its merits, even if it had closed.
This season -- for the first time in years -- no matter how displeased Broadway hardliners are with the decisions, no one is questioning the committee's integrity.


Dinkins Thanks New Yorkers For Remaining Cool Last Week
Riding a wave of praise for his handling of tensions following the Rodney G. King verdict, Mayor David N. Dinkins broadcast a message yesterday thanking New Yorkers for the restraint that they showed last week amid rioting in Los Angeles and other major cities.
Appearing on evening television and radio news programs, Mr.
Dinkins asked the city's residents to continue to keep the peace.
And he urged them to participate in a May 16 demonstration in Washington seeking more Federal aid for cities.
As he has in the past, the Mayor also thanked news organizations for what he called responsible coverage of the week's volatile events.


April Sales Up Slightly For Large Chain Stores
The nation's chain stores reported slightly better sales in April yesterday, despite a spate of unexpectedly cold, wet weather in many regions.
Discount retailers like Wal-Mart Stores Inc., where sales in stores open at least a year climbed by 13 percent, continued to make the strongest showing, while apparel chains recovered from a weak March.


Irish Bishop Resigns Amid Talk Of an Affair With a U.S. Woman
In a development that has dominated news coverage and discourse across Ireland, one of the country's most prominent and popular bishops has resigned, reportedly because of his relationship with a woman living in the United States.
The 65-year-old Bishop of Galway, Eamonn Casey, who has been known as a champion of the poor in Ireland and the third world, announced his resignation unexpectedly in a statement on Wednesday night.
He said that after a trip he made to the Vatican his resignation for "personal reasons" had been accepted by Pope John Paul II and that he would now do missionary work.


Legislature Winds Up Its Session in Hartford
The Connecticut General Assembly ended its work, sort of, at midnight on Wednesday, finishing the regular legislative session with most budget-related bills completed and with a handful of major proposals, including the legalization of video slot machines and an overhaul of the income-tax code, languishing as the clock ran out.
Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr. signed the budget act late Wednesday evening, putting to rest speculation that he might veto the budget, as he did three times last year.
And most lawmakers filed out of the House and Senate chambers after the midnight adjournment for the traditional end-of-session party that for one night a year turns the Capitol's Hall of Flags into an after-hours club.


Sounds Around Town
Mother's Day Threesome
Bob Dorough, Meredith D'Ambrosio and Eddie Higgins, Merkin Concert Hall, 129 West 67th Street, Manhattan, (212) 362-8719.
Bob Dorough, whose flip and hip songs have brightened the repertories of singers from Tony Bennett and Barbara Lea to the Fifth Dimension, will be doing them in his own peculiar way for a Mother's Day concert on Sunday.
And he will share the stage with the singer Meredith D'Ambrosio.
Her warm, throaty voice and subtle phrasing have made her a favorite among musicians, including the pianist Eddie Higgins, a veteran of the Chicago jazz scene, who is both her musical and marital accompanist.
Between them, the two have eight grandchildren by earlier marriages, which gives the concert a very real Mother's Day flavor.
Tickets for the concert, which is on Sunday at 8:30 P.M., are $20.
A Designer Song, Literally
Blossom Dearie, the Ballroom, 253 West 28th Street, Manhattan, (212) 244-3005.
Blossom Dearie, back on her home ground at the Ballroom after three years in foreign climes, is bursting with new songs and basking in the joys of old, delightfully familiar ones.
With Bill Takas adding his string bass to her own piano accompaniment, Miss Dearie sings a song about designers, which she commissioned from John Wallowitch because, she says, "maybe I can get some dresses wholesale." It's called "Liz, Ralph and Calvin," and it will be part of a Christmas album she is recording.
She is also introducing a new song she wrote with an old collaborator, Jack Segal, and what she describes as several "good things" by a British songwriter, Duncan Lamont.
Not to mention, as the mood may strike her, "Peel Me a Grape," "The Ballad of the Shape of Things," "Sweet Georgie Fame" and other Dearie classics.
She still likes to get home early, so she does her shows tonight and tomorrow at 6:30 P.M., with a Sunday brunch performance at 3 P.M.
Tickets are $15, plus a two-drink minimum.


Why Single Out Artists to Subsidize the Arts?; Worth Emulating
To the Editor:
Susan Jane Gilman (Op-Ed, April 18) is on to a good idea: it makes great sense for artists who have prospered to make significant gifts to pay for one or more foundations to help other artists.
The idea is not new: in the late 1960's, a number of Abstract Expressionist painters made wills under which much of their estates were left to create foundations to assist individual visual artists.
Two of those foundations -- the Pollock-Krasner Foundation and the Adolph and Esther Gottlieb Foundation -- are the only major private sources of grants to visual artists.


Review/Film; Everyone's French and Tres Fervent
"The Favor, the Watch and the Very Big Fish" is an exhausting, aggressively eccentric comedy about a photographer of devotional pictures, an innocent actress who provides the moaning and groaning for porn-film soundtracks and a pianist who comes to believe he is Jesus.
The setting is a fairy-tale Paris that is more easily reproduced on a Hollywood sound stage than in the real city where this film was made.
The multi-national cast of actors, all of whom are supposed to be French, is headed by Bob Hoskins as the photographer, Natasha Richardson as the actress and Jeff Goldblum as the mad savior.
Michel Blanc, who really is French, appears in a supporting role.


Money Fund Assets Off
The assets of the nation's 593 money market mutual funds decreased by $1.36 billion, to $496.21 billion, for the week that ended on Wednesday, the Investment Company Institute said yesterday.
Those of the 216 institutional funds increased by $1.80 billion, to $177.91 billion.
The assets of the 286 general-purpose funds were down by $1.96 billion, to $176.41 billion.
The 91 broker-dealer funds decreased by $1.19 billion, to $141.88 billion, the institute said.


At (or on) a TV Show: Free Fun For a Few
THE hottest ticket in New York this weekend is actually free.
But there's no point in asking what line you can stand in to try to get one.
You had to get in line last August.
And you had to have the luck of Sky Masterson.
About 200 people have free tickets to see Bruce Springsteen perform three songs tomorrow night.
They'll also see Tom Hanks doing comedy for no extra charge.


I.B.M. Forms Company to Sell Employee-Benefit Services
I.B.M. said yesterday that it was forming a new company to help other companies improve their human-resources programs.
I.B.M. is the latest of a number of large companies to sell a service originally developed for its own employees.
The new company, called Workforce Solutions, will assist other employers in developing programs to recruit and train new employees and to survey workers' needs and attitudes in areas like child care and retirement benefits.


INSIDE
New Shuttle Launched
The nation's newest space shuttle, Endeavour, roared aloft with seven astronauts to save a stranded communication satellite.
Page A16.
Ex-Police Chief Convicted
William Hart was found guilty of helping to embezzle $2.6 million from a fund set up to finance Detroit police undercover investigations.
Page A12.
Senator's Award Under Fire
John Cardinal O'Connor says Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan's abortion views make him a poor choice for an award from Notre Dame.
Page B1.
New Jersey Budget Gap
Lower-than-expected tax revenue has left New Jersey facing a $342 million deficit seven weeks before the end of the fiscal year.
Page B6.
Olympia &amp; York Offer
Canada's troubled Olympia &amp; York, seeking cash and relief from its $12 billion debt, offered stock to its creditors at talks in London.
Page D1.


Questions for Ross Perot
Ross Perot, the energetic non-candidate, made a startling admission this week: He's been spending too much time on the talk shows and not enough on the issues.
Now, he told the nation's publishers, he's going to devote the weeks ahead to developing detailed strategies so he can answer "all your good reporters who want to know my positions on everything from mosquitoes to ants."
High time.
Mr.
Perot's enigmatic candidacy thrives for two reasons.
He's a successful businessman who presents himself as the anti-candidate in an era of anti-politics.
He's also the candidate in whom voters can see whatever they wish.
In the most recent New York Times/CBS News Poll, half the registered voters queried were unable to say whether he's a liberal, conservative or moderate.
They just like the idea of Perot -- striking evidence of discontent with politics.


Official on Leave From Bayer Bess
Bayer Bess Vanderwarker in Chicago said yesterday that Tony Vanderwarker, vice chairman and chief creative officer, would leave the agency, effective today.
In a telephone interview, Mr.
Vanderwarker, 49 years old, said he would take a year off from advertising to write three books, including one about the industry.
Whether he returns to advertising depends on how the projects turn out, he said.


Strike Over, Germans Pay; Beyond Wage Accord, Fissures Haunt Unity
The 10-day strike by public employees in Germany ended today, having made one thing clear: Germans may be united in fact, but they are far from it in spirit.
Western Germany's 2.3 million public employees settled for a 5.4 percent pay increase and a lump sum payment of up to $650, down from the 9.5 percent raise they had originally sought.  [ Page A6. ]


Dietrich
There is a point during their ascent to fame when stars -- whether they be politicians or performers or whatever it is that makes them public property -- slough off a name.
Dietrich lost Marlene in 1930, when she played Lola-Lola in "The Blue Angel."
Lola-Lola had frizzy hair, a few too many pounds and a voice that sounded steeped in cognac.
When she sang "Falling in Love Again," the black garters snaking out from under her ruffled panties were shocking against her white thighs.
No wonder she made a fool out of the elderly schoolteacher who adored her; that woman could have made a fool out of anyone.


New York City Officers Charged With Running L.I. Cocaine Ring
Five New York City police officers and a retired colleague were charged yesterday with running a cocaine ring in which drugs from Brooklyn bodegas were ultimately sold in bars and restaurants on Long Island.
At least one of the officers and perhaps others in the group also used cocaine, Deputy Chief Robert J. Beatty said.
Two of the officers' wives were accused of helping in the cocaine business and a sixth active-duty officer was charged with conspiring to sell anabolic steroids, which are used by athletes to increase power and speed.
Bought Drugs in Bodegas
The arrests, made by Suffolk County police officers, represent the most flagrant charge of drug corruption in the city's police force in six years.
For at least a year, the officers, sometimes in uniform and sometimes also working out of their patrol cars, bought drugs in bodegas in the 73d Precinct in the Ocean Hill-Brownsville section and the 94th Precinct in the Greenpoint section and took them back to Long Island, where they lived, selling out of their homes or meeting dealers and distributors throughout Suffolk County, law-enforcement officials in New York City and Long Island said.
The authorities said the accused officers referred Long Island drug dealers to their sources in Brooklyn and financed a mid-level dealer in the city who shared profits with them.


Art in Review
Dmitri Baltermants  International Center of Photography 1130 Fifth Avenue (at 94th Street) Manhattan Through June 21
Dmitri Baltermants (1912 to 1990) was one of only a very few Soviet photojournalists whose work became known in the West.
A few of his photographs from World War II achieved wide renown and offer eloquent testimony to the terrible nature of that conflict.
"Grief" (1942), his most famous picture, shows the aftermath of a massacre of civilians carried out by the Germans in the Crimea as peasant women search through bodies strewn across a muddy field.


Why Single Out Artists to Subsidize the Arts?; Rock Capitalism
To the Editor:
Rather than wrestle with Camille Paglia's muddled sense of rock history, economics and esthetics in "Endangered Rock" (Op-Ed, April 16), I will take issue with the ludicrous notion that rich rock musicians are "ethically obligated" to support other, struggling performers.
This concept ignores the democratic nature of culture under capitalism: by voting with their disposable dollars, fans underwrite the music they like best.
When artists like David Byrne, Peter Gabriel or others help to put out records by unsung musicians, they may set a good example, but if the next rock star prefers to save the rain forests or to spend the lucre on a pair of matching Ferraris, so what?


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.25-6.5
6.25-6.5
8.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.75
3.71
5.65
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.58
3.59
5.48
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.70
3.72
5.62
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.10
7.09
7.88
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.96
7.96
8.21
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.88
8.90
9.27
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.69
6.70
7.21
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


After Long Wait, New Boston Garden Planned
It's playoff time, and Red Auerbach fired up his cigar this morning, a gesture that generations of basketball fans have come to associate with the moment the Boston Celtics clinch another victory.
But Mr.
Auerbach was standing outside the Boston Garden, not inside on its ancient parquet floor.
He was there to celebrate an even bigger triumph -- the announcement that after 25 years of blundering, bickering and Yankee parsimony, Boston will finally have a modern sports arena, a new Boston Garden.


ACCORD ON LIMITS ON GAS EMISSIONS IS SAID TO BE NEAR
Hoping to break a longstanding deadlock between the United States and Europe, negotiators were closing in today on a compromise that would limit industrialized countries' emissions of gases tied to global warming, according to officials involved in the talks.
The proposal, circulating among delegates in draft form, would be a centerpiece of the Earth Summit meeting next month in Rio de Janeiro.
Failure to come to an agreement in the preliminary talks here would seriously undermine the success of the conference.


Books of The Times; Shocking Confessions To Send a Grandchild
Blue Calhoun  By Reynolds Price 373 pages. Atheneum. $23.
Reynolds Price's ninth novel is in the form of a letter, surely one of the longest letters in literary history, 373 pages in all.
The letter is from a 65-year-old man named Blue Calhoun to his 15-year-old granddaughter, Lyn, but it's hardly the sort of letter the average person would leave for a grandchild.
In fact, we quickly learn that the letter is a recapitulation of Blue's entire life, a long and often shocking chronicle of death, betrayal, incest and lust.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  Massachusetts Bay Transportation Authority is offering $140 million of tax-exempt bond anticipation notes due on Dec. 15, 1992, at a price to yield 3.45 percent through underwriters led by Bear, Stearns &amp; Co.
The issue was rated MIG-1 by Moody's Investors Service Inc. and SP-2 by Standard &amp; Poor's Corp.
Common


Bosnia's Besieged Government Near Disintegration
With exploding Serbian mortar shells and automatic gunfire rattling their office windows and sometimes shattering them, the dozen or so officials running this rapidly disappearing country are more like a panic-seized crisis committee than a government.
"The Prime Minister is pacing the halls and doesn't know what to do," said a Muslim Slav woman standing in a bustling hallway in the republic's nerve center, the Presidency Building.


Undefeated and Undaunted, Fordham Women Hit Road
Susan Veteri, the Fordham captain, proved yesterday that you can fit an entire crew into a compact car and make a trip from the Bronx to Philadelphia.
Beginning today, this crew will be out to prove it is one of the best, if not the best, in its category at the Dad Vail regatta on the Schuylkill in Philadelphia.


Review/Film; Daddy's Little Girl Is Anybody's
It is 1958 somewhere in California, and the cry of a muted trumpet curls through a sepia haze.
In this grungy, twilight world, Ham (Tom Skerritt), an itinerant jazz musician, and his teen-age daughter, Blue (Nina Siemaszko), travel from town to town as Ham weaves his moody trumpet magic in nearly pitch-black clubs.
Like Chet Baker, on whom he is obviously modeled, Ham is also a heroin addict.
And one night when he is too sick from withdrawal to perform, Blue, who is as practical as she is attractive, sells her body to the club owner (Joe Dallesandro) in order to pay for her father's drugs.
These atmospheric opening scenes of the West Coast jazz life are the most captivating moments in "Wild Orchid 2: Two Shades of Blue," Zalman King's latest fusion of soft-core and art-film esthetics.
The movie follows the tradition of such earlier King movies as "9 1/2 Weeks" and the original "Wild Orchid," which were modestly successful in the United States while doing blockbuster business overseas.
There is every reason to expect that "Wild Orchid 2," which tells of Blue's descent into prostitution after her father's violent death, will follow the same pattern.


John N. Regan; Lawyer, 93
John N. Regan, an attorney and former president of Martindale-Hubbell Inc., the publisher of the Martindale-Hubbell Law Directory, died on April 30 in Dublin.
He was 93 years old.
He died of natural causes, a family spokeswoman said.


King Case Speaks of Our Grave Condition; New York's Difference
To the Editor:
"New York Holds Together" (editorial, May 6) puzzles over why New Yorkers escaped rioting Friday, May 1, and credits the leadership of Mayor David N. Dinkins.
I have lived in both Los Angeles and New York, and I believe I have a sense of why the events of Los Angeles weren't duplicated here.
Even as I heard rumors of two people killed in Manhattan and rioting in downtown Brooklyn, even as I traveled by subway Friday afternoon with my daughter to Pennsylvania Station on a long-term plan to get away for the weekend, I did not believe New Yorkers would riot.
Despite our problems of crime, poverty, racism and other urban ills, New York is an interactive community.
We ride the subways, we walk the avenues.
Every day we are up against one another, face to face.
I have spent a year driving the freeways of Los Angeles and know that it is a city shaped by alienation.
Isolation is part of its geography.
You can live in Santa Monica or Beverly Hills your whole life and never see a black person unless he or she works for you.
While "planning, restraint and a little luck" helped last weekend, I think the main thing was that there is a sense of community here that we all need to see and acknowledge more.


Market Place; Relief in Tokyo, At Least for Now
SUDDENLY, the Japanese stock market seems to have pulled out of its nose dive.
After two months of steep price declines and a frightening erosion of confidence in the market, the deeply depressed Nikkei index has rebounded smartly this week.
The pessimism that engulfed the market is a thing of the past.
Or is it?


Times Trucks Are Blocked At Wholesaler
Newspaper truck drivers clashed yesterday with the new owner of two wholesale delivery operations in a labor dispute that could have a profound impact on the newspaper landscape of New York.
The immediate cause of the confrontations was the decision by Arthur E. Imperatore, the New Jersey trucking executive and head of Imperial Delivery Service, owner of the wholesalers, to hire new drivers at distributing centers in New Rochelle, N.Y., and East Farmingdale, L.I.
They are filling about 200 jobs that until yesterday were held by members of the Newspaper and Mail Deliverers' Union of New York and Vicinity, known as the N.M.D.U.
The drivers distribute newspapers to vendors in the metropolitan region and are a vital link in getting papers to the readers.


Big Government Study Links Vitamin C to Heart Benefits
A large new study has suggested that eating more vitamin-rich fruits and vegetables may help prevent premature death from heart disease and other ailments.
The study, conducted among more than 11,000 Americans, indicated that consuming ample amounts of vitamin C in foods and supplements may lower death rates, especially the coronary death rate among men.


Pop/Jazz; Who Is Squeezing When
Tonight's "Big Squeeze" concert at Symphony Space features the Lawtell Playboys, Jose Quesada y los Cinco Diablos (Dominican music), Tom and Maureen Doherty (Irish) and Guy Klucevsek's "Polka From the Fringe."
The lineup tomorrow is the Savoy-Doucet Band, I. K. Dairo and the Blue Spots, Los Macondos (Colombian), Art Moilanen (Finnish) and the new-music composer and performer Pauline Oliveros.


Coke and Pepsi Skirmishing In Restaurant Trade Press
COKE and Pepsi are at it again.
In the latest skirmish, Pepsi is firing back at claims by Coke that it is self-destructive for restaurants to serve Pepsi.
The Coca-Cola Company has effectively persuaded many restaurant chains that buying Pepsi's soft drinks is a way of subsidizing a fearsome competitor, since Pepsico is one of the world's biggest restaurant companies, with more than 21,000 Taco Bells, Pizza Huts and Kentucky Fried Chicken outlets.


Gunman Kills 2, Burns Bodies and Is Suicide
A man in his late 60's crashed his car through the garage door of a house on a peaceful block of town houses in Staten Island and then repeatedly fired a handgun at his estranged companion and her 30-year old daughter, the police said.
As they fled into the street and then a side yard, he shot them to death, set their bodies on fire and then shot and killed himself, the police said.
The younger woman's 18-month-old son, who was in the house at 258 Hett Avenue in New Dorp, was uninjured.
The woman's husband was at work in Manhattan and was told of the deaths later in the day.


Critic's Notebook; At Cannes, a Sense of Deja Vu As Hollywood Elbows In
ACROSS the street from the Palais des Festivals, the vast convention center at which the 45th Cannes International Film Festival began yesterday, it is possible to buy an oil painting of Scarlett O'Hara and Rhett Butler embracing against the backdrop of a burning Tara (not Atlanta), with Rhett sporting an unfamiliar-looking gun holster at his waist.
The same art gallery also displays oils of Harrison Ford (looking rakish with an Indiana Jones-style bullwhip coiled around his neck) and Humphrey Bogart (parting grimly from Ingrid Bergman).
For those who prefer their movie imagery on a more symbolic level, another painting depicts a chrome banana halfway unzipped to reveal a nasty-looking chrome dagger inside.
Whatever this may say about the tastes of art lovers basking too long in the Mediterranean sunshine, it's a clear indication of Hollywood's overpowering influence on the international film world.
Even stronger evidence can be found inside the Palais itself, where this year's festival will feature an even more highly visible American presence than usual.
And American films have won the Palme d'Or, this festival's highest honor, the last three years.


Rolm Sale By I.B.M. To Siemens
I.B.M. announced yesterday that it would sell its remaining 50 percent stake in the Rolm Company, a telecommunications marketing concern, to Siemens A.G. of Germany.
For the International Business Machines Corporation, the move represents a further tightening of its focus on the computer business in its effort to improve profitability, analysts say.


Penguins Don't Set Sights On Graves
Although Adam Graves of the Rangers added some insult to injury tonight by scoring the game's first goal, the fear of retaliation by the Penguins against the man who hurt Mario Lemieux's left hand two nights ago never materialized during the Rangers' 6-5 overtime victory.
The Penguins had expected Graves to be suspended by the National Hockey League earlier in the day as a result of fracturing a metacarpal bone in Lemieux's left hand Tuesday night in New York, but the league, which often moves as if skating on warm ice, delayed the decision on his fate for a day.


National Effort Is Urged to Fight Worsening Fraud in Medical Bills
Congressional investigators said today that fraud and billing abuse eats up 10 percent of the more than $700 billion spent on health care each year in the United States, and some lawmakers called for establishing a national commission to find ways to combat the problem.
The General Accounting Office, an investigative arm of Congress, released a study that said fraud and abuse in paying for health care were out of control and getting worse.
It estimated that fraud would cost $100 billion a year by 1995.


A Battle at the Heart of the Newspaper Business
Though a labor dispute centered on two relatively unknown wholesale delivery operations may seem an unlikely reason for major battle, the issues go to the heart of the newspaper business in New York City.
The looming struggle promises to have a profound impact on The New York Times's ability to operate its new printing plant at Edison, N.J., and on the future of The Daily News and The New York Post, which have the same unions as The Times.


CHRONICLE
Associate Justice CLARENCE THOMAS of the United States Supreme Court canceled an appearance at the Seton Hall University School of Law in Newark on Monday after learning that a women's group was planning a protest.
"Before he was ever nominated by President Bush, Judge JOHN GIBBONS invited him to judge our moot-court finals," RONALD RICCIO, dean of the law school, said in a telephone interview yesterday.
Judge Gibbons, a former chief of the United States Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit, is the Richard J. Hughes Professor of Constitutional Law at the school and a longtime friend of Justice Thomas.


COMPANY NEWS;
Northern Telecom Ltd. said its new digital-technology joint venture with Motorola Inc. won a $70 million contract from Bell Cellular, a unit of BCE Mobile Communications Inc. of Canada.
The venture, Motorola Nortel Communications, will provide Bell Cellular with technology that could triple the capacity of its network, Northern Telecom said.
The technology will convert Bell Cellular's system from analog voice, which is based on sound waves, to digital transmissions that convert sound into computer code.


MALLARD COACH SHUTS ITS MANUFACTURING PLANTS
The Mallard Coach Company has ceased its manufacturing operations, saying the company will be run by a management consulting company as it prepares to file for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection.
The maker of motorized and towable recreational vehicles also accepted the resignation of its chief executive, Edward T. Vieth, effective immediately, and laid off its labor force.


Rise Seen In Lending By Banks
The chairman of the Federal Reserve, Alan Greenspan, said today that the ill effects on the economy from bankers' reduced willingness to extend new loans was abating.
While standing by his comments earlier this year that weakness in the financial system, including banks, was hurting the economy, Mr.
Greenspan said the regulators were not to blame.
He said the tougher financial standards for banks did not cause banks to reduce business lending and instead to increase their holdings of government securities sharply.
Rather, he said, that trend "reflects mainly weak loan demand."


Diner's Journal
Steak Frites
The vast, high-ceilinged room has all the charm of an auto-parts warehouse: somber gray walls (somewhat enlivened by quirky Parisian murals), a scuffed wooden floor, exposed heating ducts overhead, murky lighting and a long, maculated bar where a gregarious, casually clad crowd clusters nightly.
Plangent rock music adds to the room's raw edge, but no one seems to mind.
Steak Frites, on East 16th Street near Fifth Avenue in Manhattan, is a cleverly conceived 90's phenomenon.
Give the customers he-man portions of solid home cooking for a fair price in a sleeves-up, forget-good-posture ambiance.
What makes Steak Frites such a winner after only six weeks is the engaging food of Terrance Brennan -- he also has Prix Fixe at 18 West 18th Street -- and the good-humored, well-trained service staff.


Review/Art; How American Indians Are Seen by the Nation
Elaine Reichek's purpose in "Native Intelligence," her provocative exhibition at the Grey Art Gallery at New York University, is not to sort out the facts of the long and violent clash between white settlers and American Indians.
Ms.
Reichek makes no attempt to offer an up-to-date and balanced view of that conflict or of Indian life before or after the arrival of European invaders or even to depict American Indian life today.
Instead she's after subtler, more elusive game: the ways in which depictions of Indians and ideas about Indian culture have been incorporated into the national consciousness.
As her work here demonstrates, images of Indians have long been a central element in white Americans' sense of the country's history and identity.
In the popular imagination, Indians have been regarded as everything from bloodthirsty savages to representatives of a supposedly simpler, more natural way of life.
The conflicting ideas many whites have about the subject are further complicated by the simple fact that the Indians were here first.


Ukraine Chief Admits Arms-Transfer Error
President Leonid M. Kravchuk of Ukraine acknowledged today that he did not know Wednesday that all tactical nuclear weapons had been transferred from his country to Russia, where they are to be dismantled.
Speaking to reporters at a news conference, he said that he had received a cable overnight from the Ukranian Minister of Defense telling him that all of the short-range weapons had been taken from Ukranian territory.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League
AMERICAN LEAGUE -- Suspended Neal Heaton, Kansas City pitcher, for five games, and Albert Belle, Cleveland outfielder, for three games and announced that both suspensions would be delayed pending appeals.
CLEVELAND INDIANS -- Sent Eric Bell, pitcher, to Colorado Springs of the Pacific Coast League.
Called up Mike Christopher, pitcher, from Colorado Springs.
TEXAS RANGERS -- Purchased the contract of Mike Campbell, pitcher, from Oklahoma City of the American Association.
National League
MONTREAL EXPOS -- Assigned Gilberto Reyes, catcher, outright to Indianapolis of the American Association.
Announced that Reyes refused assignment and elected to become a free agent.
NEW YORK METS -- Claimed Chico Walker, outfielder, on waivers from the Chicago Cubs.
Sent Chris Donnels, infielder, to Tidewater of the International League.
PHILADELPHIA PHILLIES -- Activated Dale Murphy, outfielder, from the 15-day disabled list.
Optioned Darrin Chapin, pitcher, to Scranton-Wilkes Barre of the International League.
ST.
LOUIS CARDINALS -- Placed Tim Jones, infielder, on the 15-day disabled list.
Recalled Luis Alicea, infielder, from Louisville of the American Association.
Southern League
CHATTANOOGA LOOKOUTS -- Placed Tim Costo, first baseman, on the 15-day disabled list, retroactive to May 5.


Get It Right. Privatize Executions.
The time has come to consider the privatization of executions.
There can no longer be any doubt that government -- society itself -- is incapable of doing anything right, and this certainly applies to the executions of convicted criminals.


A Famous Big Wheel Wins in U.S. Again
Leave it to Greg LeMond to make an adoring audience happy.
The 11-day, 1,000-mile Tour Du Pont bicycle race started tonight with a three-mile prologue, and the winner was the 30-year-old LeMond, America's most celebrated and successful cyclist.
For a crowd estimated by police at 15,000 to 18,000, his victory was like a hokey Hollywood script.
LeMond, from Wayzata, Minn., started next to last among 105 riders from 15 teams and 18 nations.
He was followed by the world champion, Gianni Bugno of Italy.
On Wednesday, LeMond insisted he would need three or four days to ease into the race.
Instead, he won a race or a stage of a race for the first time since 1990, when he captured the Tour de France for the third time.


Farr Undergoes Cancer Treatment Again
Doctors have again have detected cancer in HEATHER FARR, a member of the Ladies Professional Golf Association tour, but the latest amount is believed to be small and treatable with hormone therapy.
"She feels fine and is working on wedding plans and her golf game," an L.P.G.A. spokeswoman, BETH McCOMBS, said.


Crisper Chips, Fresh Slogans
Two of the best-known slogans in advertising are changing to herald changes in the products they promote.
"Betcha can't eat just one," the theme for Lay's potato chips since 1963, becomes "Too good to eat just one" in a campaign co-starring the basketball players Larry Bird and Kareem Abdul-Jabbar and scheduled to be introduced Monday.


Miner of U.S.C. Joins the N.B.A. Draft
HAROLD MINER, an all-American and one of college basketball's top guards for the last three years, said yesterday that he was passing up his senior year at Southern Cal to enter the National Basketball Association draft next month.
Miner also announced at a campus news conference in Los Angeles that he was donating $60,000 to the university athletic department to repay the cost of his athletic scholarship.


William Collins 2d, Lawyer, Is Dead at 75
William T. Collins 2d, a lawyer specializing in trusts and estates, died on Monday in Carleton House, a nursing home in Fairfield, Conn.
He was 75 and lived in New Rochelle, N.Y.
He died of cancer, his son Patrick said.


Review/Film; She Joins a Family and Leaves It Well and Truly Wrecked
Home-wrecking remains mostly the province of female movie characters, perhaps because it involves such subtle skills.
"Poison Ivy" is the latest thriller about a sexy, scheming blond interloper who singles out an ostensibly happy nuclear family and, just for fun, sets her sights on destroying the whole household.
Ivy (Drew Barrymore), an older and much worldlier Lolita, can accomplish this using nothing more than clever, intuitive seductiveness and a keen grasp of each family member's private weakness.
That makes "Poison Ivy" a B movie with a vengeance, one that offers a wickedly feminine (though hardly feminist) view of nominally happy family life and its failings.


FIFA Is Set to Ban Temporary Seating
The president of the world governing body for soccer confirmed yesterday that the organization would outlaw the kind of temporary seating that collapsed in Corsica earlier this week, contributing to the death of 11 spectators at a French Cup semifinal match.
Speaking to reporters in East Rutherford, N.J., after a tour of Giants Stadium, one of the nine sites for the 1994 World Cup, Dr.
JOAO HAVELANGE, the president of the governing body, the Federation Internationale de Football Association, said the new provision would go into effect after a meeting by telephone today by members of FIFA's committee for urgent matters.


Robert Gladstein, 49, West Coast Choreographer
Robert Gladstein, a West Coast choreographer, ballet master and choreography reconstructor, died on Tuesday night at his home in San Francisco.
He was 49 years old.
He died of cancer, said a friend, Martin Devin.


2 Admit E.P.A. Violated Hazardous Waste Law in Issuing Permit
The Environmental Protection Agency admitted today that it violated the nation's hazardous waste law when it issued an operating permit in 1983 for an Ohio toxic waste incinerator owned by a financier who has been an important campaign contributor to both major political parties.
The admission came at a public hearing by a House Judiciary subcommittee examining the agency's role in permitting a consortium of American and European investors to build the incinerator, one of the nation's largest, on a flood plain along the Ohio River in East Liverpool, 400 feet from houses and 1,100 feet from an elementary school.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Voters; Effort Under Way in Oregon to Remove Governor
Just 16 months into her first term in office, Gov.
Barbara Roberts is facing a possible recall election from an angry electorate that seems to be using her as a target for a shotgun blast of voter rage.
Never before has an Oregon governor's tenure been put before the electorate in midterm.
Under the recall laws of this state, voters will be asked to keep the Governor in office or to oust her immediately.


Newest Shuttle, Endeavour, Begins First Mission
The space shuttle Endeavour roared aloft tonight on its inaugural flight, carrying six men and a woman on a rescue mission to save a $150 million communications satellite stranded in space for more than two years.
The 100-ton Endeavour blasted off at 7:40 P.M., spewing white vapor and orange flame as it thundered through a partly cloudy sky to begin a seven-day flight.


Big Government Study Links Vitamin C to Heart Benefits
A large new study has suggested that eating more vitamin-rich fruits and vegetables may help prevent premature death from heart disease and other ailments.
The study, conducted among more than 11,000 Americans, indicated that consuming ample amounts of vitamin C in foods and supplements may lower death rates, especially the coronary death rate among men.


Review/Ballet; Not the Usual Treatment For Those Cursed Lovers
Another Romeo, another Juliet.
Well, not quite.
American Ballet Theater offered a full day of curiosities on Wednesday.
In the evening, Sylvie Guillem and Laurent Hilaire, both French guest artists, performed jointly for the only time this season in Kenneth MacMillan's version of Shakespeare's play.
Their conductor, also in a single-night appearance, was Rudolf Nureyev.
At the matinee in the Metropolitan Opera House, Julie Kent and Jeremy Collins made their debuts in the title roles of the same "Romeo and Juliet," choreographed to the familiar Prokofiev ballet score.


Art in Review
'Play Between Fear and Desire'  Germans Van Eck Gallery 420 West Broadway (near Spring Street) SoHo Through May 23
This delightful show brings together the work of seven artists who practice what might be called playful abstraction.
Saint Clair Cemin's small bronze sculpture "Talc Container" (1987), looking like a somewhat amorphous dachshund with a handle, sets the tone of the exhibition.
All these artists incorporate abstract forms, usually bulbous biomorphic shapes of the sort found in the Surrealist paintings and sculptures of Joan Miro, into work that combines large helpings of whimsy with a flavoring of threat.


Note Offerings From 3 Banks
Banks were active in the debt market yesterday, as the Republic New York Corporation, the Bankers Trust New York Corporation and the Bank of New York Company priced a total of $350 million in notes.
The Bank of New York came in with $100 million of short-term notes due on May 14, 1993, through underwriters led by Kidder, Peabody &amp; Company.
The interest rate on the one-year note was set at 4.4 percent and offered to the public at par.


House Votes Overwhelmingly to Restore Seawolf Submarine Funds
Hoping to save thousands of jobs, the House voted overwhelmingly today to restore one of two Seawolf nuclear submarines that President Bush wants to eliminate from the budget.
The unusual spectacle of House Democrats defending an expensive military program that the White House opposes reflects an emerging realization that military cuts are accompanied by pink slips and angry constituents.
And more specifically, the 412-to-2 vote represented a victory for the New England delegations, which carefully lined up allies over more than three months to preserve the submarine scheduled for manufacture by the Electric Boat Division of the General Dynamics Corporation in Groton, Conn.


Malcolm MacIntyre, 84, Is Dead; Airline Official Began the Shuttle
Malcolm Ames MacIntyre, who created a new format for air travel with Eastern Air Lines' popular shuttle service between New York, Boston and Washington, died on Wednesday at Fairfax Hospital in McLean, Va.
He was 84 years old and lived in McLean.
He died of complications from emphysema, his family said.


How a Union Won an Appalachian Struggle
In early April, Caterpillar's mere threat to put 12,600 strikers out of their jobs for good drove the workers back to the assembly lines in Peoria, Ill.
They returned on the company's terms while a new contract is negotiated, and they had nothing but wrath and unpaid bills to show for five months of picketing.
At Caterpillar, as at more and more unionized companies, management has found that to stop labor disputes it can simply replace workers.
But in this dowdy, one-stoplight hamlet of 4,200 in the Ohio River Valley, the United Steelworkers of America has shown that a union can still break an employer.


GENERAL TIRE TO CUT U.S. WORK FORCE BY 3.3 PERCENT
General Tire Inc. said it would cut its United States salaried work force by 100, or about 3.3 percent, and transfer about 60 employees as part of a previously announced restructuring.
The layoffs will take place between now and the end of the year, and most will occur at the company's operations in Akron, Ohio.
Sixty technical-staff employees will be transferred to manufacturing operations at Charlotte, N.C.; Mayfield, Ky.; Mount Vernon, Ill., and Bryan, Ohio.


Last Body Identified in Series of Homicides
The last body discovered in a series of homicides in East Orange has been identified as that of a 14-year-old girl, Shakia Hedgespeth, the Essex County Prosecutor's office said today.
The authorities are still trying to determine how and when she died, said Ray Weiss, a spokesman for the prosecutor's office.


3 Held in Shooting Death Of Sergeant Are Freed
Manhattan prosecutors charged three men and a woman yesterday in the murder of an off-duty New York City police sergeant who interrupted a robbery attempt at an automated teller machine in midtown last December.
Two other women and a man, in jail awaiting trial since January on charges of killing the officer, were released on Wednesday, and prosecutors said they would request that the charges against them be dropped, said Nancy Ryan, chief of the Trial Division in the Manhattan District Attorney's office.


Corrections
A capsule report in the Business Digest yesterday about contentiousness over a proposed summary of American corporate law was published in error.
It referred to an article not in yesterday's issue but in today's, on page D6.


Veteran Players Battle In News Drivers Fight
A New Jersey trucking magnate who once planned to build a grandiose new riverfront city on the Hudson across from Manhattan, and two iron-willed drivers' unions that have been linked by investigators to rackets and underworld mobs are the principal players in the high-stakes confrontation that has brought New York City's major newspapers to the brink of a labor war.
There are other players -- 1,000 members of a union that has delivered New York's newspapers since the turn of the century, whose jobs are jeopardized; and hundreds of newly hired members of a teamsters' local with no newspaper-delivery experience, who find themselves in a potentially bruising inter-union fight for jobs .


BIG U.S. RETAILER TO ENTER CZECHOSLOVAKIA
The discount retailer Kmart said yesterday that it had bought the second-largest department store in Prague and had options on 11 others in Czechoslovakia.
The company's chairman, Joseph Antonini, said the Czechoslovak venture might act as a beachhead for future expansion in Europe, if the investment succeeded.
Kmart, which is based in Troy, Mich., has purchased from the Czechoslovak Government a majority interest in Maj, an eight-story merchandise mart in downtown Prague.


Two Rivals Form Pool For HDTV
Signaling that the race to develop a standard for American high-definition television is in its homestretch, two of the four rival groups agreed in principle today to hedge their bets by splitting royalties if either of them wins the Government-supervised competition.
The new alliance will unite two groups, one consisting of the General Instrument Corporation and the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and the other consisting of the Zenith Electronics Corporation and the American Telephone and Telegraph Company.


ROLLS-ROYCE RECEIVES ENGINE-REPAIR CONTRACT
The aircraft engine manufacturer Rolls-Royce P.L.C. said its Canadian unit had received a $100 million engine-overhaul order from USAir Group Inc.
USAir, based in Arlington, Va., currently operates 82 aircraft powered by Rolls-Royce: 38 Fokker F-28's fitted with Spey engines; 36 Fokker 100's with Tay engines, and 8 RB211-powered Boeing 757's.


Teheran Journal; With New Pride, Iran Dusts Off the Crown Jewels
The egret-plumed crown of 3,755 jewels that Mohammed Riza Pahlevi placed on his head when he crowned himself Shah in 1967 is there.
So is the Peacock Throne that he ascended afterward, an elevated, gem-encrusted, enameled bed that sat in the Golestan Palace but was damaged during the 1979 revolution, many of its most important gems looted.
And the flawless 180-carat pink Sea of Light diamond, drapery tassels made of thousands of miniature seed pearls, watch fobs of diamonds the size of lima beans, trays piled high with emeralds and rubies.
And jeweled fruit knives, fly swatters, opera glasses, opium pipes, horse bridles and kebab warmers.


A Skeptical View of the Police Made More So
When the noise of gunfire starts outside his Brownsville apartment, 3-year-old Jarrett Rice drops to the floor.
"I teach him that," said his mother, Dina, who was walking yesterday past the beige brick fortress of the 73d Precinct station house to her apartment in the Howard Houses, a few blocks away.
The shooting outside the projects starts almost every night, and when it does the police are rarely to be seen, she said.


Swift Remains Spotless As Giants Beat Cardinals
Giants 2, Cardinals 0
ST.
LOUIS, May 7 (AP) -- San Francisco pitcher Bill Swift became the National League's first six-game winner today, maintaining his perfect record with a four-hit 2-0 victory over the St.
Louis Cardinals.
Matt Williams's two-run homer in the fourth off rookie Donovan Osborne (3-1) accounted for the only runs.
It was the seventh homer of the season for Williams, who entered the game hitting .189 and was the first given up by Osborne in five starts, spanning 36 1/3 innings.
Williams picked on a pitcher who attended the same high school (Carson City, Nev.) and college (Nevada-Las Vegas) as he did.


Traffic Alert
TOMORROW Because of the Five Borough Bike Race, these streets and bridges will be closed: Madison Avenue Bridge, 9 A.M. to 10:30 A.M.; Third Avenue Bridge, 9:00 A.M. to 10:45 A.M.; F.D.R.
Drive, 9:00 A.M. to 11:15 A.M.; Queensboro Bridge, 9:15 A.M. to 11:40 A.M.; Pulaski Bridge, 10:40 A.M. to 1:15 P.M.; Brooklyn-Queens Expressway, 10:45 A.M. to 2:40 P.M.; Belt Parkway, from 11:20 A.M. to 3:15 P.M.; Verrazano-Narrows Bridge, 11:40 A.M. to 3:40 P.M.
Because of the Lower Amsterdam Street Fair, Amsterdam Avenue will be closed between 65th Street and 71st Street, from 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.
SUNDAY Because of the Cuban Independence Day Parade, Madison Avenue will be closed between 37th Street and 56th Street, from noon to 3 P.M.


Theme Is Human Rights
The Human Rights Watch Film Festival will run through May 17 at two Manhattan locations: the uptown Loews Columbus Circle Theater, Broadway and 61st Street, and the downtown Loews Village VII, Third Avenue and 11th Street.
Admission to each screening is $6.50.
Foreign films have English subtitles.
Some of the screenings feature discussions with the directors.
Festival information: (212) 978-8883.
A schedule of screenings of feature films follows.
Today
"NOVEMBER DAYS" (1990), directed by Marcel Ophuls.
A documentary on German reunification, featuring a discussion with the director, today, 6:30 P.M.
Also: Sunday at 6 P.M.; Tuesday at 8:30 P.M. and May 17 at 8 P.M.
All screenings downtown.
"SIGNED: LINO BROCKA" (1987), directed by Christian Blackwood.
A presentation of the works of the Filipino film director Lino Brocka, with a discussion with Mr.
Blackwood, 7 P.M., downtown.
Also: Wednesday at 2 P.M., uptown.
"FIVE GIRLS AND A ROPE" (1991), directed by Ye Hung-wei.
A drama centering on five young Chinese girls who commit suicide to avoid the slavery of marriage, 6:30 P.M., uptown.
Also: May 17 at 8:30 P.M., downtown.
"LIFE ON HOLD" (1991), directed by Maroun Baqdadi.
The story of a photojournalist taken hostage in Beirut, 10 P.M.
Also: Thursday at 5 P.M. and May 16 at 8:10 P.M.
All screenings downtown.
"PERFUMED NIGHTMARE" (1978), directed by Kidlat Tahimik.
A look at cultural imperialism in the Philippines, 9:30 P.M.
Also: May 16 at 6 P.M.
Both screenings downtown.
"XALA" (1974), directed by Ousmane Sembene.
A satire of modern Africa, 9 P.M.
Also: May 17 at 4 P.M.
Both screenings uptown.
Tomorrow
"THE SORROW AND THE PITY" (1970), directed by Marcel Ophuls.
A documentary focusing on the Holocaust and Vichy France, with a discussion with the director, noon, uptown.
Also: Tuesday at 2 P.M, uptown; May 16 at noon, downtown.
"THE MEMORY OF JUSTICE" (1976), directed by Marcel Ophuls.
A documentary on war in the 20th-century, with a discussion with the director, 6 P.M., uptown.
Also: Monday at 1 P.M., uptown; May 17 at 1 P.M., downtown.
"HALF LIFE: A PARABLE FOR THE NUCLEAR AGE" (1986), directed by Dennis O'Rourke.
A documentary on the effects of United States nuclear testing on Marshall Islanders, 7:20 P.M., downtown.
Also: Wednesday at 4 P.M., uptown.
"ICE" (1969), directed by Robert Kramer.
A futuristic fight for civil rights against an oppressive state, with a discussion with the director, 9 P.M.
Also: Tuesday at 9 P.M.
Both screenings downtown.
"IN THE ALLEYS OF LOVE" (1991), directed by Khosros Sinaie.
The return of a young Iranian to his hometown after the Iran-Iraq war, 12:15 P.M.
Also: Thursday at 2 and 7 P.M.
All screenings downtown.
"RAIN WITHOUT THUNDER" (1992), directed by Gary Bennet.
A New York woman commits fetal murder in 2042, 7:10 P.M., downtown.
Also: Wednesday at 10 P.M., uptown; May 16 at 9 P.M., with discussion with the director, uptown.
"TECHQUA IKACHI: LAND, MY LIFE" (1991), directed by James Danaqyumtewa, Agnes Barmettler and Anka Schmid.
A documentary using home movies to illustrate Hopi survival, 4 P.M.
Also: Monday at 6:30 P.M., with a discussion with the director; Tuesday at 2:20 P.M.
All screenings downtown.
"WADI (Parts 1 and II)" (1981 and 1991), directed by Amos Gitai.
A look at Arabs and Jews living together in a valley in Israel, 7 P.M.
Also: Tuesday at 7 P.M.; May 15 at 6:30 P.M.
All screenings downtown.
"ZONE" (1992), directed by Revaz Gvarliani.
Winning a beauty contest at a women's prison in the Republic of Georgia means winning freedom, with discussions with the director, 2:10 P.M.
Also Monday at 2 and 6 P.M. (the 6 P.M. showing includes discussion with the director).
All screenings downtown.
Sunday
"BEHIND THE MASK" (1989), directed by Frank Martin and the Activision Irish Project.
A documentary on the life and attitudes of Irish Republican Army members, with a discussion with the directors on Sunday. 4:30 P.M.
Also: Sunday at 4 P.M., both downtown.
"HOTEL TERMINUS: THE LIFE AND TIMES OF KLAUS BARBIE" (1988), directed by Marcel Ophuls.
A documentary on the Gestapo chief, with a discussion with the director, noon.
Also: May 16 at 1 P.M.
Both screenings uptown.
"JOE POLOWSKY: AN AMERICAN DREAMER" (1986), directed by Wolfgang Pfeiffer.
The story of a World War II veteran who dedicated his life to developing understanding between Soviets and Americans, 9 P.M., downtown.
Also: May 15 at 3 P.M., uptown.
"AFRIQUE, JE TE PLUMERAI" (1992), directed by Jean Marie Teno.
A comparative look at Cameroon under European colonial rule and its own Government, with a discussion with the director, 9 P.M.
Also: Monday at 9:20 P.M.; Thursday at 2:20 P.M.
All screenings downtown.
"BERDEL" (1990), directed by Atif Yilmaz.
A look at patriarchal society in rural Turkey, 7 P.M., uptown.
Also: Tuesday at 9:50 P.M., uptown; May 15 at 10 P.M., downtown.
"BEYOND J. F. K.: THE QUESTION OF CONSPIRACY" (1992), directed by Barbara Kopple and Danny Schechter.
An examination of the conspiracy debate, 3:30 P.M.
Also: May 17 at 6 P.M., which includes a discussion with the directors.
Both screenings downtown.
"LAST IMAGES OF WAR" (1992), directed by Stephen Olsson and Scott Andrews.
Profiles of four photojournalists killed while covering the war in Afghanistan, 9:20 P.M., uptown.
Also: Thursday at 8 P.M., downtown.
Monday
"A SENSE OF LOSS" (1972), directed by Marcel Ophuls.
A documentary on the roots of hatred in Northern Ireland, 9 P.M., uptown.
Also: Thursday at 9 P.M, downtown.
"NAJI EL-ALI" (1991), directed by Atef El-Tayyeb.
An Egyptian film based on the life of the Palestinian cartoonist, 6:30 P.M., uptown.
Also: Thursday at 10 P.M., downtown; May 15 at 8:30 P.M., downtown.
Tuesday
"RODINA MEANS HOME" (1991), directed by Helga Reidemeister.
Soviet soldiers stationed in East Germany return after the fall of Communism, with a discussion with the director 7 P.M., uptown.
Also: Thursday at 4 P.M., uptown; May 16 at 4 P.M., downtown.
"CUP FINAL" (1991), directed by Eran Riklis.
The story of the relationship between an Israeli soldier and his Palestinian captors, with a panel discussion, 11 A.M.
Also: Thursday at 9:20 P.M.
Both screenings uptown.
Wednesday
"MEIN KRIEG" (1990), directed by Harriet Eder and Thomas Kufus.
Six German veterans of World War II narrate their own amateur film of the fighting, with a discussion with the directors, 7 P.M.
Also: May 15 at 5:30 P.M.
Both screenings downtown.
"8A" (1992), directed by Orlando Leal.
The story of four men convicted of drug trafficking in Cuba, 9:30 P.M.
Also: May 15 at 7:30 P.M. with a discussion with the director.
Both screenings downtown.
"DAMNED IN THE U.S.A." (1991), directed by Paul Yule.
A documentary on censorship, featuring the Rev.
Bill Wildmon of the Moral Majority, with a discussion with the producers, 7 P.M., uptown.
Also: May 17 at 6:30 P.M., downtown.
"LAIBACH" (1988), directed by Goran Gajic.
A documentary on a Yugoslav rock band, with a discussion with the director, 9:20 P.M.
Also: May 15 at 11 P.M., both downtown.
May 15
"GO AWAY" (1991), directed by Dmitry Astrakhan.
The story of a Jewish family living in Russia, 5 P.M.; May 17 at 1:30 P.M.
Both screenings uptown.
"THE LAST BUTTERFLY" (1992), directed by Karel Kachyna.
A French mime during World War II is forced by the Germans to perform in a Czechoslovak village, 7 P.M., uptown.
Also: May 16 at 9 P.M., downtown.
"WITHOUT ANESTHESIA" (1978), directed by Andrzej Wajda.
A Polish journalist searches for the reason his wife left him, 9:30 P.M., uptown.
Also: May 16 at 10 P.M., downtown.
May 16
"GODS WALK BACKWARD" (1991), directed by Miklos Jancso.
A political satire centering on two Hungarian film producers, 6:30 P.M.
Also: May 17 at 9 P.M.
Both screenings uptown.
May 17
"COUSIN BOBBY" (1991), directed by Jonathan Demme.
A documentary on Mr.
Demme's cousin, the Rev.
Robert Castle, with a discussion with the director, 6:30 P.M., uptown.


Chancellor Joins in Attack to Win Back $67 Million in Aid to Schools
New York City Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez joined state legislators and the education unions yesterday in a blistering attack on the Dinkins administration aimed at winning back $67 million in state aid that they say is being diverted to other city agencies.
The sharp statements yesterday added to the tensions between Mr.
Fernandez and aides to Mayor David N. Dinkins earlier this week over how to spend a $200 million surplus expected by the state's Municipal Assistance Corporation.


COMPANY NEWS: The Environment; And See to It That Ken Composts
Add another name to the environmental movement's list of villains: Barbie.
The button-nosed, 11 1/2-inch doll has come under scrutiny by a class of sixth graders at the Holy Name School in San Antonio.
And Barbie's corporate parent, Mattel Inc., is listening.


The Spoken Word
ARCHEOLOGY SYMPOSIUM, Museum of the City of New York, Fifth Avenue at 103d Street, Manhattan.
A symposium that will focus on archeological projects in New York City, including digs in Brooklyn and lower Manhattan, with archeologists from around the city.
Sponsored by the Professional Archeologists of New York City and the Museum of the City of New York.
Tomorrow, 1 to 3 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 534-1672.
POETRY READING, Nicholas Roerich Museum, 319 West 107th Street, Manhattan.
Eavan Boland, a poet, will read from her new work.
Today at 7 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 864-7752.


Wage Contract Ends Strikes In Germany's Public Sector
One of the most serious labor conflicts in Germany since World War II ended today when a union representing 2.3 million public employees accepted a new Government offer.
Under the contract, public employees will be given a 5.4 percent pay increase.
Additional benefits, including one-time payments of up to $650, will be computed to favor lower-income workers.


Why Single Out Artists to Subsidize the Arts?
To the Editor:
"New Patrons of the Arts" by Susan Jane Gilman (Op-Ed, April 18) has the ring of sincerity in arguing that artists ought to set up arts foundations to counter political pressure and Government censorship.
Indeed, such artists as Robert Rauschenberg, Mark di Suvero, Andy Warhol, Lee Krasner and Jackson Pollock created foundations, while alive or through their wills, to benefit other, less fortunate artists.
Others (some artists included) have suggested that if a national resale royalty law were enacted, providing visual artists with a royalty of 5 percent when their work is resold at a profit, those artists should donate that sum toward a foundation to aid lesser-known artists.


Economic Scene; Riots Put Focus On Economic Ills
WHAT effect will the Los Angeles riots have on the nation's economic and social agenda?
It is too early to say whether the outbreak of violence, looting and burning that followed the acquittal of four members of the Los Angeles Police Department in the beating of Rodney King will have any lasting effect.


Review/Art; Richard Prince, Questioning the Definition of Originality
The large mid-career survey of Richard Prince's work at the Whitney Museum of American Art starts out thinly and gains in substance.
Elegantly installed, well paced and, by the end, unexpectedly affecting, it traces the gradual maturation of one of the 1980's most influential yet enigmatic art-world sensibilities.
A maker of photographs, drawings, paintings and sculptures, as well as a writer, the 43-year-old Mr.
Prince has had a varied and, in some sense, an uneven 15-year career.
In fact, the smooth coherence of this exhibition, and the way his ideas build and expand, gallery by gallery, and from one medium to another, is something of a surprise.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-11  COOLER PLANET MAY PREVAIL
Hoping to break the longstanding deadlock between the United States and Europe, negotiators closed in on a compromise that would limit industrialized countries' emissions of gases tied to global warning.
A1  THE DARK SIDE OF UNIFICATION
The 10-day strike of public employees in Germany ended, and one thing was made clear: Germans may be united in fact, but they are far from it in spirit.
The strikers were protesting in part against the higher taxes they have had to pay for unification, and the inflation it has caused.
A1
German workers settled for a pay increase of 5.4 percent.  A6  CRISIS IN THAILAND
Thailand's most serious political unrest in more than 15 years deepened.
More than 100,000 people defied military orders to end protests calling for the resignation of Prime Minister Suchinda, the former army chief who took office last month.
A3  WHO'S IN CHARGE THERE?
At least four groups are asserting their authority to govern Kabul and, by virtue of their presence in the capital, all of Afghanistan.
The emergence of so many governing entities has made it difficult to determine who is exercising power.
A3  CALL HIM MARSHAL YELTSIN
The Russian President issued decrees forming a Russian Army with himself as commander in chief and acting Minister of Defense.
The decrees, while expected, left unresolved the question of the army's relation to the Commonwealth of Independent States.
A11  REVOLUTION IN TAJIKISTAN
After weeks of protest, President Nabiyev fled the Parliament building and opposition forces said they were taking control of the former Soviet republic.
The Tajik radio reported the formation of a "revolutionary council." A11  FINNS FLEX THEIR MUSCLES
No longer constrained by Soviet pressure to tailor its military strength to an international image of neutrality, Finland is about to rebuild its air force with a fleet of American fighter aircraft.
A10  BOSNIANS STRUGGLE FOR CONTROL
With exploding Serbian mortar shells and automatic gunfire rattlings their office windows and sometimes shattering them, the dozen or so officials who are running Bosnia and Herzegovina are more like a panic-seized crisis committee than a government.
A10  Gunfire and explosions at a prison holding guerrillas in Peru.
A6  The Koreas agreed on further steps toward reconciliation.
A5  An Irish bishop resigns amid reports of a relationship with a woman.
A8  Teheran Journal: With new pride, Iran dusts off the crown jewels.
A4  National A12-21  BUSH TOURS LOS ANGELES
The President saw firsthand the damage wrought by last week's rioting, and he confronted resentment expressed by residents of the South-Central section.
A1
For the most part, residents viewed Bush's visit cynically.  A1
Democrats assailed the Justice Department over the riots.  A18
A grand jury stepped up its inquiry into the King beating.  A19
The Kerner Commission report, 25 years later.  A19  PEROT AND NIXON
Ross Perot, whose would-be Presidential campaign is based largely on his image as an outsider, was closely allied with the Nixon White House and often asked it for favors, according to documents at the National Archives.
A1  Reporter's Notebook: On the road with Clinton.
A20  HISTORY COMES KNOCKING
In a development that stunned Washington and stumped scholars, Michigan gave a 203-year-old proposed constitutional amendment on Congressional pay raises the last bit of support needed to become the law of the land.
Or did it?
A1
News analysis: The effects of a balanced-budget amendment.  A21
The House voted to restore one Seawolf submarine.A21  VOTER RAGE IN OREGON
Just 16 months into her first term in office, Gov.
Barbara Roberts is facing the growing possibility of a recall election.
A20  EX-POLICE CHIEF CONVICTED
A Federal jury found William Hart guilty of helping to embezzle $2.6 million from a fund set up to finance the Detroit police force's undercover drug investigations.
A12  A UNION BUCKS THE TIDE
In a West Virginia hamlet, the United Steelworkers of America has shown that a union can still force an employer to capitulate.
A12  NEW SHUTTLE ROARS ALOFT
The shuttle Endeavour was launched on its maiden flight, a rescue mission to save a $150 million communications satellite stranded in space for more than two years.
A16
Profiles of the seven astronauts aboard Endeavour.  A16  BILLIONS IN HEALTH-CARE FRAUD
Congressional investigators said fraud and billing abuse accounted for 10 percent of the more than $700 billion that the nation spends annually on health care.
A13  Boston announced final plans for a big new arena.
A12  The E.P.A. admitted a violation of hazardous-waste law.
A15  Law Page B9  A condemned man's supporters say new data could clear him.
A disputed nomination for the 11th Circuit Court of Appeals advances.
An AIDS test is ordered for a man suing for lost potential earnings.
Metropolitan Digest, B1 OFFICERS HELD IN DRUG RING  Five New York City police officers and a retired colleague were charged yesterday with running a cocaine ring in which drugs from bodegas in Brooklyn were ultimately sold in bars and restaurants on Long Island.
At least one of the officers is accused of using cocaine.
Two of the officers' wives are accused of helping in the drug business.
A1  Business Digest, D1  Weekend C1-32  Free fun behind the screens.
C1  Cannes Film Festival opens.
C1  Theater: On Stage, and Off C2  Art: Andrea Montegna.
C1  Obituaries B10  Malcolm A. MacIntyre; airline official who began the shuttle.
Sports B11-17  Basketball: Bulls beat Knicks, 86-78.
B11  Column: Vecsey on Cordero.
B11  Hockey: Rangers defeat Penguins, 6-5, in overtime.
B11  Editorials/Op-Ed A30-31  Editorials A30  Questions for Ross Perot.
Mr.
Rohatyn's proper role.
Dietrich.
New guard against brutality.
Letters A30  A. M. Rosenthal: History for fools.
A31  Leslie H. Gelb: More arms, less aid.
A31  Arthur Miller: Get it right.
Privatize executions.
A31  Earl Strom: The end of basketball.
A31  John B. Oakes: An environmentalist?
Bush?
Forget it.
A31


Art in Review
Emily Cheng  David Beitzel Gallery 102 Prince Street SoHo Through May 30
The compositions in Emily Cheng's paintings have become more complex with every gallery show over the last seven years, but she has yet to find a set of ideas interesting enough to animate them.
Each of her recent works is based on a montage of images from art history that she has photographically enlarged, transferred to canvas and then painted.
Often, large passages of white undercoat, oddly shaped to suggest the missing pieces of a puzzle, are left exposed.
Similar shapes are sometimes painted in black, beneath which shadowy activity seems to be taking place.


Restaurants
Trionfo
Rosario Carvelli is from the old school of "the customer is always right no matter how demanding or bumptious." There seems to be little he will not do to please a client: prepare a special request dish on a frenetic day, serve a wine from his personal cellar, change a party's table even if it has one of the prime spots in the house, probably even give his necktie to an admiring diner.
Of course hospitality alone does not make a restaurant, but in this case Trionfo's beguiling front line is supported by an able kitchen.
Mr.
Carvelli's chef in this beguiling venture in the Broadway theater district is Meliano Plasencia, a former chef at Bice on East 54th Street in Manhattan.


Quotation of the Day
"Most things take a year around here, and others take 203." -- BILL MARTIN, a Michigan legislator, after ratification of what may become the 27th Amendment.  [ A21:1. ]


A New Weapon Against Brutality
If the Justice Department decides to prosecute the four Los Angeles policemen who were acquitted in the Rodney King beating, Federal prosecutors will face some of the same obstacles that defeated state prosecutors last week.
As Assistant Attorney General John Dunne testified yesterday:
"The average American respects a law enforcement man or woman as really one of the most important individuals in our society. The juror sitting in that box doesn't want to believe that's a bad cop. And even if they begrudgingly come to that conclusion, they don't want to see that man or woman going to jail."


Blacks' Woes In Borrowing
Blacks have a much harder time than whites getting a home mortgage, a symptom of the deep-seated racism that is splitting the nation, members of Congress said today.
"People are being discriminated against by mortgage lenders based on the color of their skin," said Representative Kweisi Mfume, Democrat of Maryland.
"Banks have a long way to go for meeting the legitimate needs of neighborhoods."


Senate Panel Approves Prosecutor for Judgeship
The Senate Judiciary Committee today approved the nomination of an Alabama lawyer, widely regarded as one of the nation's leading prosecutors in death penalty cases, to an important Federal appeals court post.
Over the opposition of some of its liberal Democratic members, the committee voted 10 to 4 to send to the full Senate the nomination of Edward E. Carnes to fill a vacancy on the Court of Appeals for the 11th Circuit, which is based in Atlanta.


2 Koreas Chip Away At the Political Wall Separating Families
North and South Korea agreed today on further steps toward reconciliation, including reunions of families divided by the Korean War.
But there was no apparent progress towards overcoming the main barrier: continuing suspicion that the North is developing a nuclear weapon.
After two days of talks here, Prime Ministers Chung Won Shik of South Korea and Yon Hyong Muk of North Korea, issued a communique outlining one practical step toward healing the division of the Korean peninsula: an agreement to reunite some relatives who have not seen each other since their families were divided at the end of the Korean War.


Child World Files for Bankruptcy
Child World Inc., the nation's second-largest toy retailer, filed for bankruptcy protection yesterday and said it would close 54 stores, mostly in the Midwest and South, leaving 71 profitable stores in the Northeast.
The moves ended a long struggle by Child World to stabilize its finances, shaken most recently in March when bankers withdrew a $100 million line of credit for the chain, based in Avon, Mass.
"It was a handicap even a strong company would find difficult to overcome," said Sean McGowan, an analyst with Gerard, Klauer, Mattison &amp; Company in New York.
Negotiations With Lenders


Art in Review
Stephen Mueller  Annina Nosei Gallery 100 Prince Street SoHo Through May 31
At the age of 44, Stephen Mueller has spent more than 20 years cultivating the often infertile soil of Color Field painting without running out of things to do.
Part of his success stems from his ability to see the borders of this terrain as permeable, an attitude that leaves his art healthily open to outside influence.


O'Connor Joins in Protesting a Notre Dame Award for Moynihan
A decision by the University of Notre Dame to give Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan a prestigious award honoring outstanding Catholics has touched off a protest by some bishops, including John Cardinal O'Connor, who object to the Senator's stand in favor of abortion rights.
A spokesman for Cardinal O'Connor, Joseph Zwilling, confirmed that the Cardinal had written to the president of Notre Dame, the Rev.
Edward A. Malloy, to express his disapproval of the university's decision to award Senator Moynihan the Laetare Medal at its commencement exercises on May 17.
University officials, however, defended the choice of Senator Moynihan for the honor.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
In the race to develop a high-definition TV standard for the U.S., two of four rival groups agreed in principle to split royalties if either wins the Government-supervised competition.
The alliance will unite two groups, one with General Instrument and M.I.T., the other with Zenith Electronics and A.T.&amp; T.  [ Page D1. ]


Art in Review
'Joan Mitchell: Pastel'  Whitney Museum of American Art 945 Madison Avenue (at 75th Street) Manhattan Through June 21
This exhibition of more than three dozen of Joan Mitchell's recent pastels provides a distillation of her abstract painterly style.
Essential to all of her work is the attention she gives to the physical weight of pigment.
The pastel is applied in thick, emphatic strokes here, tangles of loose calligraphic thread there, with a judicious use of rubbing, smudging and overdrawing throughout.
The interwoven colors are many and rich, with a bias toward vegetable hues -- succulent greens, dark reds -- that make a few of these drawings look like informal but exotic bouquets.


Knicks Stage a Late Rally, but Armstrong Steals Show
With the Chicago Bulls in trouble in the waning moments tonight, Michael Jordan did not save them.
B.
J.
Armstrong did.
With Armstrong scoring 6 of Chicago's final 7 points in the closing two minutes of the game, the Bulls held off a passionate Knicks rally to capture Game 2 of their playoff series, 86-78, at Chicago Stadium.
The series is tied at 1-1, with Game 3 to be played Saturday afternoon at Madison Square Garden.


Rangers Put Aside Sins and Win in Overtime
Adam Graves, slasher of Mario Lemieux, scored the first goal.
Kris King, basher of Joe Mullen, scored the last one.
From the start of Game 3 tonight at the Civic Arena, it seemed as if every Ranger move was designed as an affront to the city of Pittsburgh.
When King's odd goal gave the Rangers a 6-5 victory at 1 minute 29 seconds of overtime, the defending Stanley Cup champions trailed 2-1 in the Patrick Division and faced a must-win game on Saturday with their ravaged roster.


Long-Term Bond Sale Goes Well
An auction of $10 billion worth of 29 1/2-year bonds, the final part of the Treasury's quarterly refunding auctions, went well yesterday.
Despite the successful auction, traders began to sell securities after the auction results were announced as a defense against the chance that April employment data, to be released today, would show unexpected strength.


Ecological Plea From Executives
Hoping to influence the outcome of next month's Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro, a group of powerful international business leaders, including top American executives, called today for greater environmental awareness from governments and private businesses.
The group said business executives had to start addressing environmental issues to survive.


Husband Is Charged In Death of His Wife
A man who failed to help his fatally injured wife after a jacked-up station wagon they were working on fell on her has been charged with manslaughter in her death, the police said.
Four minutes elapsed from the time the car fell on Mary E. Smith Williams to when the first rescue personnel arrived and found Bruce C. Williams starting to jack up the car, said Mark D. DeVito, a senior detective with the Jefferson County Sheriff's Department.


At the Movies
Redressing Wrongs
"I have different projects in my mind," Sibylle Schonemann said recently.
"I think the next will be a documentary about the informers."
Ms.
Schonemann, who was arrested in East Germany in 1984, imprisoned for a year and expelled to the West for the "crime" of having asked for an exit visa, has already created an international stir with her documentary "Locked-Up Time." In the film, opening today at the Walter Reade Theater at Lincoln Center, the 38-year-old Ms.
Schonemann, who now lives in Hamburg, confronts the people responsible for her imprisonment: fellow workers, wardens and members of the Stasi, the East German secret police.


Piquet Is Injured in Indy Practice Run
NELSON PIQUET, a three-time Formula One champion but an Indianapolis rookie, was injured when his car slammed head-on into a wall yesterday during practice for the Indianapolis 500 on May 24.
The 29-year-old Brazilian driver was taken to Methodist Hospital in Indianapolis with what doctors described as multiple fractures to the lower legs and feet and a concussion.
He was reported conscious and alert. (AP)


St. John's Signs a Top Canadian Prospect
Faced with the loss of five seniors from its basketball team, including four starters, St.
John's took a major rebuilding step yesterday by signing one of Canada's top high school prospects.
He is ROWAN (DUCK) BARRETT, a 6-5, 205-pound swing man who averaged 29.2 points a game for West Hill Collegiate Institute in Toronto and was a starter on the Canadian national junior team.


Bank Takes MGM-Pathe
Credit Lyonnais today formally took possession of the crippled movie studio MGM and its parent company, the Pathe Communications Corporation.
The French state-owned bank, which is the company's largest creditor and has controlled its board since last year, took possession of the company's shares in an auction in which there were no other bidders.


Review/Film; Tracing Germany's Reunification
Toward the end of "November Days," Marcel Ophuls's fine, wide-ranging documentary about the reunification of Germany, there is an uncharacteristic moment when the person being interviewed turns on his interviewer, Mr.
Ophuls, and seems to stop him cold.
Until that moment, the film maker has received almost fawning respect from his subjects, especially from those former Communist Party officials who governed the German Democratic Republic and presided over its collapse.
Not from Kurt Masur, though.


An Environmentalist? Bush? Forget It.
With the environmental security of America and the world at risk, President Bush is playing a cynical political game.
To support his claim that he is an environmentalist, he has apparently decided to attend the U.N.
Conference on Environment and Development -- the so-called Earth summit -- in Rio de Janeiro next month.
But Mr.
Bush is no environmentalist.
If he were, he would long ago have discarded his fears of the right wings of both parties.
He would have had the vision to grasp the leadership of this international effort to control forces that present a greater threat to civilization than the cold war ever did.


Pop/Jazz; Accordion-Music Festival For Breaking New Ground
Tonight at 8, the curtain at Symphony Space in Manhattan goes up on an event that is being touted as "the most extensive accordion festival to ever be held in New York."
Stop laughing.
The notion of an accordion festival may make you think of a numbing procession of men in lederhosen pumping out endless choruses of "The Beer Barrel Polka," or performers in ill-fitting tuxedos pumping out endless choruses of "Lady of Spain." If that's the case, though, you have not been keeping up with developments on the cutting edge of the accordion scene.


For Children
Indian Entertainment  Asia Society 725 Park Avenue (at 70th Street) Manhattan (212) 288-6400 Recommended ages: 4 and up Sunday
Classical Indian dance, at least when performed by Leela Raja, a disciple of the renowned Indian dancer Indrani, can be very expressive, almost mimelike.
In Sunday's performance, which lasts only about 20 minutes, children can see five styles, starting with the most cerebral -- an invocation to Shiva, with a complex narration -- and ending with an emotional story of Shiva's warrior-goddess who battles a demon.
In this dance, Ms.
Raja, who is Indian but grew up in the United States, uses an imaginary bow and arrow and fierce facial movements, which children find riveting.
In all the dances, she is illuminating in her shiny aqua-and-pink sari as she jangles her wrist bangles and the ankle bells called ghunghroo.
Her feet and hands are hennaed, she wears bewitching black eye makeup and drops petals from her hands, all to the accompaniment of whining, eerie music.
After Ms.


Foreign Affairs; More Arms, Less Aid
Poor countries now spend about $175 billion yearly on arms and soldiers.
That is more than double the development aid they receive from all sources.
With growth slowing in rich nations and with new demands for aid by states of the ex-Soviet empire, poor countries have only one place to turn for big government bucks -- themselves.
To avoid deeper poverty they will have to shift their own funds from military accounts to economic development.


Bonilla Hears the 2 Lonely Words: Strike 3!
The game was on the line, the pitch was on the corner, the bat was on Bobby Bonilla's shoulder.
The umpire punched the air, and the latest, disquieting deflation for the Mets was complete.
Bonilla's strikeout against Rob Dibble with the bases loaded and two out in the seventh inning rendered almost certain the 4-2 loss the Mets suffered to the Reds, and left Bonilla standing and staring at the plate.
Having lacked the resources to do anything with Dibble's 3-2 fastball, Bonilla was without the conviction to argue Mark Hirschbeck's called third strike.


Critic's Choice/Dance; Flamenco, Butoh and Genet's 'Balcony'
La Mama's complex is known for odd and interesting excursions into world theater.
But "Le Balcon," to be performed in La Mama's first-floor theater this weekend and next, promises to be among its most unusual productions.
Shigeko, a member of the theater's Great Jones Repertory Company, has put together a version of the Jean Genet play "The Balcony" that uses the dance and theater techniques of flamenco and Japanese Butoh and is set to flamenco guitar music.
Even more interestingly, the production will star Maria Alba, the noted flamenco dancer and teacher, in a rare stage appearance.
Miss Alba came late to flamenco, but she has carved a reputation for herself as a leading interpreter of the Spanish dance form in New York City and a consummate theater artist.
Of Irish ancestry, she began her professional career as a Broadway gypsy before discovering the flamenco.
In Spain, she became a star performer with the Ximenez Vargas Dance Company and later founded her own troupe, which has toured the United States, Europe and Asia.


A Show of Attention Brings A Show of Wearied Shrugs
To the residents of South-Central Los Angeles, the visit of the President of the United States to their devastated neighborhood was at best welcomed as a needed show of attention, at worst rejected as irrelevant.
Mr.
Bush came with the quiet of dawn and left with a whoosh of his motorcade at 9:59 A.M., almost before anybody knew he was in the " 'hood."


Art in Review
Bruce Cratsley  Judith Goldberg Gallery 52 East 76th Street Manhattan Through tomorrow
Bruce Cratsley specializes in moody black-and-white photographs of little moments painted in shadows.
Statues and mannequins feature prominently among his subjects, usually framed and lighted to accentuate their strangeness.
In one picture here, a torso in a museum glows solidly in a pool of light while the people around it are reduced to blurry ciphers.
Elsewhere, Mr.
Cratsley himself becomes a dark reflection in a store window, facing a particularly stylized female mannequin.


1789 Amendment Is Ratified But Now the Debate Begins
What could be the 27th Amendment to the Constitution was ratified by the necessary 38th state today.
But it is unclear whether the measure, which won its first state ratification in 1789, will ever take effect.
The vote by the Michigan Legislature, on an Amendment to prevent Congress from voting itself an immediate pay raise, stunned members of Congress and stumped scholars, who debated whether a proposal written 203 years ago by James Madison could still become part of the Constitution.


Art in Review
'Flair: Fashion Collected by Tina Chow'  Shirley Goodman Resource Center Fashion Institute of Technology Seventh Avenue at 27th Street Manhattan Through tomorrow
The word flair is only a crude approximation of the stringent and sophisticated taste with which Tina Chow selected her wardrobe, which she also viewed as a collection.
Chow, who died of AIDS in January, seems to have approached her purchases with a connoisseur's unstinting eye, a sculptor's sense of volume and silhouette, and a curator's understanding of historical coherence.


Who Rules in Kabul? Take Your Pick
At least four separate groups are claiming the authority to govern this devastated city and, by virtue of their presence in the capital, all of Afghanistan.
The emergence of so many governing entities has made it difficult to determine who is exercising power in Kabul, whose orders are in fact being carried out, indeed, which of the competing authorities retains credibility among the heavily armed guerrilla armies which will ultimately decide the fate of this country.


A Brawl Breaks Out Over Corporate Law
When corporate executives enrich themselves at the expense of their company in a business deal, the board can sue on behalf of the company to recover lost profits.
But what if the board lets the matter drop to avoid the expense and disruption of litigation?
Should courts be able to second-guess the board's judgment if requested to do so by shareholders?
That seemingly obscure issue has touched off the equivalent of a brawl in legal circles, as the American Law Institute prepares to vote Tuesday at its annual meeting in Washington on a new proposed summary of the nation's corporate law.


Art in Review
'Metamorphose: British Surrealists and Neo-Romantics, 1935-55'  Guillaume Gallozzi Gallery 203 West Houston Street Manhattan Through June 20
Displayed throughout three floors of a town house, this show of more than 60 small works by British Surrealists and Neo-Romantics has the intimate feel of being a careful personal selection.
In a sense it is.
In an impassioned catalogue text, the dealer Guillaume Gallozzi writes that he conceived the exhibition during a life-threatening illness that gave these nature-saturated paintings and drawings special meaning for him.


Executive Changes
AMERICAN RECREATION PRODUCTS INC., St.
Louis, an international manufacturer and marketer of hiking and camping equipment, appointed George J. Grabner president.





Accounts
*
Sprint Communications Co., Kansas City, Mo., to the Stenrich Group, Glen Allen, Va., to develop direct-response campaigns for Sprint's consumer services group, previously handled by Devon Direct, Berwyn, Pa.
The other participants in the review and the billings were not disclosed.


The Sphinx of 110 Livingston
If the New York City Board of Education is a riddle, then Joseph J. Saccente is probably its sphinx, the only person who understands how the whole labyrinthine organization works and who can make it budge.
Over 22 years, eight chancellors have given him titles ranging from chief of staff to his current mouthful of chief of monitoring and school improvement, but essentially they have trusted him to handle their most delicate controversies.
A list of the troubles he has soothed constitutes a brief history of the board in the tumultuous years since schools were decentralized.


Despite Sales, a Glum Spirit At Sotheby's Art Auction
The atmosphere at Sotheby's sale of contemporary art on Wednesday night was surprisingly gloomy, compared with the buoyant feeling at the auction at Christie's on Tuesday night.
The sale at Sotheby's totaled $12.3 million, which was below the auction house's estimate of $17.6 million to $23.3 million.
It was, in fact, a higher total than at Christie's, which came to $11.2 million.
Of the 61 works offered for sale at Sotheby's, 40 sold.
At Christie's on Tuesday night, 51 of 70 works sold.
At both auctions, private collectors dominated the buying, eagerly snapping up works that went at relatively bargain prices.


More Workers Sickened
For the second day, workers in a downtown Brooklyn office building were overcome by noxious fumes yesterday, and while an initial investigation had traced the fumes to welding in the basement, the source remained a mystery to city officials.
In three separate incidents since Wednesday morning, more than 125 people have been treated for dizziness, nausea and respiratory irritation in the building, at 233 and 253 Schermerhorn Street, including 50 people yesterday morning, fire and rescue officials said.


AMTRAK CONTRACT FOR MORRISON-KNUDSEN TEAM
The Morrison-Knudsen Corporation said a joint venture of which it controls 60 percent received a $295.5 million contract from Amtrak.
The deal calls for the electrification of the rail line between New Haven and Boston.
Morrison-Knudsen said the contract was part of Amtrak's project to cut travel time between Boston and New York by one hour.
The New Haven-Boston route is the only segment of the Northeast Corridor between Washington and Boston where Amstrak still uses diesel-powered locomotives.
Morrison-Knudsen said Amtrak would also upgrade its tracks to accommodate faster trains.
The venture also involves L. K. Comstock &amp; Company and Spie Group Inc.


New Clues Fuel a Race With Executioner's Clock
Wanda F. McCoy was raped and killed 11 years ago at her home in this small Appalachian coal mining town.
And 10 years ago, her brother-in-law, Roger Keith Coleman, was convicted of the crime and sentenced to death.
Mr.
Coleman, who has always maintained his innocence, is scheduled to be electrocuted on May 20.


At the Bar; New York's transit agency says lawyers are taking it for a very expensive ride.
Of all the feelings one can muster for the New York City Transit Authority, solidarity must be pretty low on the list.
But that is precisely what the organization is seeking to foster these days, by choosing a target even less popular than the Broadway Local at rush hour: lawyers.
"LAWSUIT ABUSE!" shriek the more than 20,000 posters that began popping up on the city's buses and subways in March.
"Guess who picks up the tab? You do!" This month the notices, now found alongside advertisements for acne specialists and beauty academies, will spread to Metro-North and the Long Island Rail Road.


Review/Art; A Fiery Renaissance Painter With a Sculptor's Cool Touch
"ANDREA MANTEGNA," at the Metropolitan Museum of Art, is a dense exhibition about this early Italian Renaissance master that includes some truly staggering works of art.
Mantegna may be unfamiliar to many people.
He spent most of his career not in a cultural center like Florence or Venice but in small-town 15th-century Mantua.
His works are deeply cerebral and tough as nails in their hard-edged exactitude, and these qualities diminished him in the eyes of influential modern critics like John Ruskin and Bernard Berenson, who accused him of painting people "as if they were made of colored marble rather than flesh and blood."
Berenson wasn't entirely wrong, but the show demonstrates that Mantegna could also be a profoundly affecting artist, as in his "Ecce Homo," where the gnarled features of the accusers serve to make more intense Christ's ethereal beauty.
His "Virgin and Child," from the Gemalde galerie in Berlin, with its swaddled, sleeping baby tucked under the chin of His pensive mother, is no less touching an image of intimate emotion.
And in "The Man of Sorrows With Two Angels," Mantegna's depiction of land and sky can even bring to mind the Romantic vistas of Caspar David Friedrich.


BOOKKEEPING CHANGE SHOULD IMPROVE 1993 INCOME
The American Telephone and Telegraph Company said it expected to adopt a new accounting rule for income taxes that would increase its income in 1993 by $500 million.
But the increase will only partly offset an estimated cut of up to $7.5 billion in its 1993 earnings, a decline that A.T.&amp; T. has been expecting from an earlier accounting change involving health-benefit costs.


METRO DIGEST
OFFICERS HELD ON DRUG CHARGES
Five New York City police officers and a retired colleague were charged with running a cocaine ring in which drugs from Brooklyn were sold in bars and restaurants on Long Island.
At least one of the officers also used cocaine, officials said, and two of the officers' wives were accused of helping in the cocaine business.
A1.
Residents of the 73d Precinct react.
B5.
NEW YORK CITY FERNANDEZ PRESSES FOR STATE AID
Schools Chancellor Fernandez joined state legislators and the education unions in an attack on the Dinkins administration aimed at winning back $67 million in state aid that they say is being diverted to other city agencies.
The statements added to the tensions between Mr.
Fernandez and aides to Mayor Dinkins earlier this week over how to spend a $200 million surplus expected by the state's Municipal Assistance Corporation.
B3.
THANKS FROM THE MAYOR
Riding a wave of praise for his handling of tensions after the Rodney G. King verdict, Mayor Dinkins broadcast a message thanking New Yorkers for the restraint that they showed last week amid rioting in Los Angeles and other major cities.
B3. 3 DIE ON STATEN ISLAND
A man crashed his car through the garage door of a house on Staten Island, killed his estranged companion and her 30-year-old daughter and set their bodies on fire before killing himself.
B3.
NEW SUSPECTS IN SLAYING OF OFFICER
Three people accused of killing a New York City police sergeant in December were released from jail after four other people were charged in the same case.
B3.
REGION TOUGH RULES FOR BUSES
In response to a bus accident that left two Long Island students dead last month, Governor Cuomo proposed legislation that would require new charter buses to have seat belts and would require bus drivers with bad driving records to be recertified.
Officials with national highway safety organizations said they believed the new legislation would be the toughest in the nation.
B6.
RANSON DEMAND FOR EXECUTIVE
Investigators have received a ransom demand for the safe return of Sidney J. Reso, an Exxon official who disappeared from his home in Morris Township, N.J., a law enforcement official said.
But he said investigators had not been able to confirm whether the demand was genuine and had not disclosed its existence for fear of jeopardizing Mr.
Reso's return.
B6.
A REFERENDUM ON THE FUTURE
New Jersey has a $342 million budget gap with just seven weeks left in the current fiscal year, the State Treasurer said the gap, a result of a drop in revenue from the state income tax, will further complicate efforts by the Legislature's Republican majority to roll back the sales tax from 7 percent to 6 percent.
B6.
A FINALE IN HARTFORD
The Connecticut General Assembly ended its regular legislative session with most budget-related bills completed and a handful of major proposals, including the legalization of video slot machines and an overhaul of the income-tax code, languishing as the clock ran out.
B6.
Our Towns by Andrew H. Malcolm B7  Chronicle B7


Albert Parry, Russia Expert, 92; Predicted Sputnik 1 Launching
Albert Parry, a professor emeritus of Russian civilization and language and the founder and former chairman of the department of Russian studies at Colgate University, died on Monday in Los Angeles.
He was 92 years old and lived in Los Angeles.
He died of kidney failure, said a son, Thomas.


Housing Development Dedicated in the Bronx


Politics and Pain
While many lawmakers embrace a balanced-budget amendment, few talk of its consequences, which would be bitter.
News analysis, page A21.


Olympia Offers Stakes to Banks
Olympia &amp; York Developments Ltd., the cash-short real estate giant, today offered its lending banks equity stakes in both its huge Canary Wharf development here and the parent company in return for debt-payment relief and new funds.
The meeting with 15 of Olympia's largest lenders on restructuring $12 billion in debts continued into the night and how the banks would respond was not clear.


Dinkins Fights Pressure to Spend $200 Million Surplus on Schools
Mayor David N. Dinkins insisted yesterday that it would be "a grave error in public policy" to use $200 million in surplus funds exclusively for schools.
In a strongly worded letter, Mr.
Dinkins sent a clear message that he should be the arbiter of how the funds are spent rather than the Governor or the chairman of the Municipal Assistance Corporation, the source of the money.


Lancit Media Productions Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


I.B.M. in Property Ventures
I.B.M. and two leading property companies announced a plan to form two alliances to provide corporate property-management and other business-support services for I.B.M. and third-party companies.
The venture will be between the International Business Machines Corporation and the Grubb &amp; Ellis Company, based in San Francisco.
In addition I.B.M. has acquired a minority interest in the Norrell Corporation, based in Atlanta, and will use a Norrell subsidiary to provide general business-support services.


Corrections
An article yesterday about ties between the Nixon White House and Ross Perot, the undeclared Presidential candidate, referred erroneously to his dissolution of duPont Glore Forgan, a Wall Street brokerage house he controlled.
Mr.
Perot liquidated it; he did not declare it bankrupt.


Clorox Names a New Chief; Investors Cool to the Choice
Talk about a bad first day on the job.
The stock of the Clorox Company lost 5 percent of its value yesterday after the company announced that it had promoted G. Craig Sullivan to chief executive.
The shares ended the day at $49.375, down $2.625, in trading on the New York Stock Exchange.


BTU International Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Kerr Group reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


California Refunds By Insurer
In the first case completed under a voter-initiated rollback of automobile insurance rates, California's Insurance Commissioner today ordered the 20th Century Insurance Company to pay more than $100 million in refunds to 650,000 policyholders.
But company officials, contending that their rates were among the industry's lowest, said they planned to appeal the refund order in California state courts.
Insurers had fought the voter initiative, known as Proposition 103, before it was passed in November 1988, and most have continued to oppose its provisions in court.
The measure, together with court rulings, requires rate rollbacks based on the profitability of the insurers.


The Swiss Army Knife Just Got Better, With Time
The pocket knife first delivered to the Swiss Army in 1891 by its inventor, Karl Eisener, has undergone a century of changes.
And now the Swiss company that Eisener founded has produced a pocket knife for the second century: It not only can slice an apple, it will also tell you when it's time to eat.
The Victorinox Cutlery Manufacturing Company of Ibach, Switzerland, which produces the Original Swiss Army Knife brand of pocket knife, recently began marketing the Super Timer.
The multipurpose pocket knife comes with 22 miniature implements, from scissors to a toothpick.
On one side is a Swiss quartz watch.


INSIDE
Hearing in Delivery Dispute
A judge opened a hearing to review a newspaper drivers union's actions in a dispute with a delivery company and The New York Times.
Page 25.
Tracking Retirees for Taxes
In pursuit of revenues, some states are following retirees out of state and taxing their pension income.
Page 38.
A Day for Ma Bell, as Well
A.T.&amp; T. expects that this year, for the first time, Mother's Day will be its busiest holiday.
Page 37.


Savannah Foods reports earnings for Qtr to March 29


St. Joe Paper Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Domtar Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Bryant Park Event Delayed
A concert that was to have opened a series of free chamber-music performances at Bryant Park yesterday has been rescheduled for Wednesday at 12:30 P.M.
The principal performers are to be the Essex String Quartet from the Juilliard School.
The program also includes the world premiere of "A Reveling Fanfare," by Caroline W. Trowbridge.
The pianist Emanuel Ax, who was to have performed yesterday, will not perform on Wednesday.


Pinelands, Owner of WWOR-TV, Agrees to Be Acquired
Pinelands Inc., owner of WWOR-TV in Secaucus, N.J., has agreed to be acquired by Chris-Craft Industries Inc. in an unsolicited bid worth about $310 million.
The deal for WWOR, Channel 9, which produces the nationally syndicated "Howard Stern Show" and about half of the broadcasts of New York Mets baseball games, dissolves an agreement that Pinelands had previously made with the Walt Disney Company.
That deal called for Pinelands to acquire Disney's independent Los Angeles television station, KCAL-TV.
In return, Disney was to acquire a 45 percent stake in Pinelands.


Gates Says Department Made Crucial Mistakes
Chief Daryl F. Gates acknowledged today that he and some field commanders made crucial errors in the first hours of the riot that tore through this city last week.
But at a crowded news conference, the Chief insisted that with the exception of a single intersection, the Police Department had handled the situation appropriately.
Mr.
Gates has been criticized for leaving his downtown headquarters for a political fund-raising event on the other side of the city about an hour after violence broke in South-Central Los Angeles on April 29 and for staying at the event after being told of the mayhem.
"You're right, I should not have been at that function," he said today.
"You're right, I should have turned around when I heard what was going on."


Long-Term U.S. Issues Up Sharply
Treasury bond prices rose smartly and long-term interest rates fell to their lowest levels in three weeks yesterday despite an employment report that was stronger than expected.
Most analysts had expected nonfarm payroll employment to show an increase of around 75,000 for last month, not the 126,000 increase that was reported.
And the one-tenth of a percentage point decline in the unemployment rate was also a surprise.


Intrenet Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Review/Dance; Living on the Edge, Explosively
American Ballet Theater's second premiere of the season, Ulysses Dove's "Serious Pleasures," is something of a music video in the abstract; as such, it makes its impact on the spot rather than in any lasting after-image.
But its intensity does have the exciting cannonball drive familiar from Mr.
Dove's choreography for Alvin Ailey's company, and his bleak message is not obscured by the blinding chic of the work's state-of-the-art production values.


Classical Music in Review
Karen Kushner Weill Recital Hall


Patents; Fragrances Linger On Manicured Finger
For people who want fingernails that not only look good but smell good, a chemist in New Jersey received a patent this week for a clear acrylic fingernail top coating that exudes the scent of popular perfumes like Ralph Lauren's Safari or Opium by Yves Saint Laurent.
Invented by Mario W. Medri, a chemist specializing in fragrances, the new nail coating is being sold through nail parlors by Satin Scent Products Inc. of New York City.


Thomas Ervin, 80, Nuremberg Lawyer And NBC Executive
Thomas E. Ervin, a retired executive vice president and general counsel of the National Broadcasting Company and a former prosecutor at the Nuremberg war crimes trials, died on Thursday at New York Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 80 years old and lived in Manhattan and Saltaire, L.I.
He died of a cerebral hemorrhage, a spokesman for the family said.


Klan Vows to 'Have Our Say' After Mayor Cancels a Permit
A Ku Klux Klan leader vowed today to hold a news conference in the courthouse square of the north Alabama city of Athens because city officials rescinded the group's permit for a larger gathering.
Thomas Arthur Robb, 45 years old, the national director of the Knights of the Ku Klux Klan, said the Saturday news conference, while not the same as a rally, would nevertheless allow the group to "have our say." He said that as far as he was concerned the group had won the weeklong dispute with city officials.


Aritech Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 28


Masstor Systems reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Home Beneficial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Review/Music; A Purcell That Outlived Its World
Important music endures; the world it was created for may not.
Orphaned masterpieces result, creations for which the modern network of concert halls and opera houses can never quite provide a home.
Schubert's keyboard duets are one example: under one's own hands, with a partner on the same piano bench, Schubert at his most mysterious and wrenching rises up.
This same music on a concert stage has a way of turning clotted and remote.
Purcell's "Fairy Queen," removed from the play-plus-music format that made it such a success in 1692, seemed similarly homeless when Les Arts Florissants took it to Alice Tully Hall on Thursday night.
In a virtual separation of two arts, those original productions alternated actors in a bowdlerized version of Shakespeare's "Midsummer Night's Dream" with interludes of elaborate musical commentary.
Time, expense and the endurance of modern audiences make literal revival a daunting prospect, though it is occasionally done.


Classical Music in Review
'Interpretations: Robert Ashley' Merkin Concert Hall


15 Days Are Added To Tyson's Prison Time
A hearing officer has found MIKE TYSON guilty of threatening a guard and of disorderly conduct at the Indiana Youth Center.
The ruling yesterday cost the boxer good-credit time, setting back his earliest possible release date 15 days, to April 9, 1995.
The hearing had been scheduled for next Wednesday but was moved up after Tyson waived his right to 24-hour notice of a conduct-adjustment board hearing.


Scotland Yard Loses I.R.A. Duty
With its agents looking for new duties now that the cold war is over, Britain's chief counterespionage service, M.I.-5, was designated today to take over the clandestine war against the Irish Republican Army within mainland Britain.
Home Secretary Kenneth Clark told the House of Commons that he was shifting coordination for I.R.A. domestic undercover operations from the Special Branch of the Metropolitan Police, or Scotland Yard, to the Security Service, as M.I.-5 is less familiarly known, to make "best use of all the skills and experience available within the law to the Government."


Citizen Shoppers
To the Editor:
Thank you for including the Body Shop chain of cosmetics stores in "When Products Are Tied to Causes" (Business Day, April 18).
But I take exception to your statement that "Stepping into a Body Shop can be like attending a protest rally."


Everett Thatcher, 88, A Naval Researcher
Everett W. Thatcher, a former director of research at the Navy Electronics Laboratory in San Diego, died on April 24.
He was 88 years old and lived in San Diego.
He died of respiratory and heart failure, said his son, James.


N.J. Transit Boss Learns to Joust With Legislative Critics
As head of N.J.
Transit, Shirley A. DeLibero holds top-level staff meetings in gritty rail yards.
She crawls under buses and peers into locomotives to see what ails them.
She responds to customers' complaints by calling them herself.
"How else can I manage," she asked, sitting in the agency's 12-story glass tower overlooking Penn Station here, "if I don't know what's going on out there?"


Sundowner Offshore Services reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


HemaCare Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


How to Tell Water and Sewer Charges From Real Estate Taxes
To the Editor:
In "New Yorkers Can't Take Stiffer Water Taxes" (letter, April 20), Alan Pekelner lumps his Upper West Side co-op's charges for water and sewer services with real-estate taxes.
Charges for water and sewer services are not taxes.
Real-estate taxes are based on the assessed valuation of real property, not according to use.
Charges for water and sewer services are akin to the rates charged by a public utility.


NWA Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Study Sees Rise in Child Death Rates
The rapid spread of AIDS and a resurgence of malaria and cholera threaten to wipe out more than a decade of health gains among the world's poorest children, according to the United States Agency for International Development.
"We are confronting a major problem with AIDS, seeing death rates we have never seen before," Richard E. Bissell, Assistant Administrator for the agency's research and development, said at a news conference today.


Review/Film; A Soviet Family That's Close, Very Close
"Adam's Rib" was shown as part of last year's New York Film Festival.
Following are excerpts from Janet Maslin's review, which appeared in The New York Times on Sept. 21, 1991.
The film, in Russian with English subtitles, opened yesterday at the Lincoln Plaza Cinema, Broadway and 63d Street in Manhattan.
If ever there was a good argument for family life in close quarters it is "Adam's Rib," a wonderfully wry Soviet comedy about three generations of women living in nerve-jangling proximity to one another.
Sharing a bathroom, some clothes, some onerous chores and a lot more intimacy than any of them bargained for, the heroines of this story manage to make the best of a desperately claustrophobic situation.


Political Rarity: 2 Lawmakers Bask in Thanks
As Senator Christopher J. Dodd and Representative Sam Gejdenson arrived at the shipyard gate just after dawn today to meet the workers who build Seawolf submarines, an ebullient union leader exclaimed: "Say hello to Chris and Sam. They're the guys keeping us afloat. We would have lost our jobs without them!"
Those were the words that Mr.
Dodd and Mr.
Gejdenson woke up early to hear.
Facing potentially difficult re-election races in November, they shook hands and joked with the workers at the Electric Boat division of General Dynamics, knowing that their jobs, too, may be riding on the Seawolf.


Nymagic Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Porta Systems Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


2 Arrested in Welfare Scheme For Taking Bribes to Open Cases
Two employees in the New York City Human Resources Administration were arrested this week and charged with taking cash bribes to open fraudulent welfare cases.
The arrests brought to 50 the number of people charged as a result of the city's widening investigation of a scheme that may have been operating for 14 years.
The city's Department of Investigation announced yesterday that it had also arrested a woman who has been accused of opening 12 phony welfare cases under different names since 1985 and collecting $313,000 in benefits, more than anyone arrested so far.
Investigators refused to give the woman's name or provide any information about her.


Prudential Realty Trust reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Patents; Lens to Aim Laser During Eye Surgery
USING a doughnut-shaped lens to guide laser beams, an ophthalmic surgeon in New York has invented a system that he says further refines the art of reshaping the cornea to correct eye problems.
The invention by Dr.
Barry M. Belgorod represents a variation in the race to use laser beams to correct nearsightedness, farsightedness and other eye problems.
In general, the systems employ low-powered pulsed lasers that reshape the curve of the cornea, the transparent tissue over the eyeball, and help refocus light waves entering the eye.


What's Radical About Legal Rights?
One of Government's best buys is the national program of legal services for the poor -- yet the White House
hates
it.
That opposition is more rabid than reasonable, and next week Congress gets a rare chance to affirm justice, and enlarge it.
The Legal Services Corporation was created to protect poverty lawyers from hostile governors and Presidents -- like Ronald Reagan, who was both.
But the program has not been reauthorized by Congress since his election in 1980.
He tried to kill it and Congress has saved it by voting money every year.
These money bills often have included restrictions demanded by business and farm interests.


Canadian Roxy Petroleum reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League
MILWAUKEE BREWERS -- Placed Darryl Hamilton, outfielder, on the 15-day disabled list, retroactive to May 6.
Activated Ron Robinson, pitcher, from the 15-day disabled list.
National League
CHICAGO CUBS -- Recalled Alex Arias, infielder, from Iowa of the American Association.
CINCINNATI REDS -- Activated Barry Larkin, shortstop, from the 15-day disabled list.
Sent Gary Green, shortstop, outright to Nashville of the American Association.
MONTREAL EXPOS -- Signed Steve Lyons, outfielder, for the remainder of the 1992 season.
Designated Eric Bullock, outfielder, for assignment.
PITTSBURGH PIRATES -- Announced the resignation of Douglas Danforth, chairman of the board.
Named Vincent Sarni chairman of the executive committee of the board.
SAN DIEGO PADRES -- Placed Dave Eiland, pitcher, on the 15-day disabled list, retroactive to May 4.
Recalled Jeremy Hernandez, pitcher, from Las Vegas of the Pacific Coast League.
South Atlantic League
CHARLESTON RAINBOWS -- Promoted Steve Gliner, assistant general manager, to chief operating officer.
Basketball  United States Basketball League
PHILADELPHIA SPIRIT -- Extended the contract of Bill Lang, head coach, and Ron Dick and Joe Betteridge, assistant coaches, through the 1992 season.
Released Henri Abrams, center; Jeff Herdman and Richard Lucas, forwards; Ron Lacey, guard, and Mat Miller, guard.
World Basketball League  ERIE WAVE -- Assigned Rodney Glassnor, guard, to the taxi squad.
Activated Darelle Porter, guard, from the taxi squad.
Football  National Football League
GREEN BAY PACKERS -- Released Mark Murphy, safety, and Kurt Larson, linebacker.
INDIANAPOLIS COLTS -- Signed Derrick Franklin, Stacy Danley and Brian Lattimore, running backs; Eddie Britton, Mike Bellamy and Reggie Thornton, wide receivers; Mark Garalczyk, defensive lineman; Frank Gianetti, John Davis and Chad Thorson, linebackers; Rob Luedeke and Michael Heldt, centers; Mark Tucker ann John Ray, offensive linemen; Charles Arbuckle, tight end; Error McCorvey, Alex Thomas, James Williams and Isaac Morehouse, defensive backs, and Edward Toner, fullback.
SAN FRANCISCO 49ERS -- Signed Steve Bates, Scott Curtis and Leroy Smith, linebackers; Clarence Siler, defensive end; Mark Seay, wide receiver.; Derrick Deese, guard.
World League  OHIO GLORY -- Signed Calvin Nicholson, cornerback.
SACRAMENTO SURGE -- Activated Michael Jones, linebacker, from injured reserve.
Released Herb Welch, safety.
Hockey  National Hockey League
NHL -- Suspended Adam Graves, New York Rangers forward, for four games for a blatant slash in a game on May 5.
VANCOUVER CANUCKS -- Signed Jason Fitzsimmons, goaltender, and Dan Kesa, forward, to multiyear contracts.
College
GEORGIA SOUTHERN -- Named Eddie Garfinkle assistant football coach.
HARTFORD -- Named Paul Brazeau men's basketball coach and signed him to a five-year contract.


U.S. Backs Efforts To Assist Somalia
To the Editor:
An April 26 news article and "Uncle Pygmy Pleads Poverty" (editorial, April 28), on the United States position on United Nations assistance to the northeast African nation of Somalia, were off base.


Bonar Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Fresh Start at the Javits Center
Union employees at New York City's Javits Convention Center are now sporting buttons that read, "We are here to help you." Until recently, that would have been more joke than slogan.
But sensible work rule changes just announced by the Javits Center's president, Fabian Palomino, promise a fresh commitment by the center to treat exhibitors as valued customers -- not as sitting ducks ripe for union ripoffs.
The work rules are part of a refreshing reversal of attitude at the vast crystal palace.
Ever since it opened in 1986, the center has been stifled by some of the same uncompetitive practices that sent customers fleeing the old New York Coliseum.


Union Drivers Threatened With Fines
The labor dispute between a newspaper deliverers union, a wholesale delivery company and The New York Times continued yesterday on the streets and in the courts, where a Federal judge threatened to fine the union if it obstructed delivery of papers to distributors.
At the request of The Times, Judge Pierre N. Leval of Federal District Court in Manhattan opened hearings on a possible contempt citation against the union for violating his temporary restraining order issued late Thursday night.
The order forbade drivers for The Times, who transport papers each night to the distributors, to hamper delivery of the paper to two wholesale centers, where other members of the drivers' union have set up picket lines.


U.S. Lobbies Business on Free Trade
Taking their trade lobbying from the marble corridors of Congress to the foggy hills of southwestern Virginia today, senior Government officials urged top corporate leaders here to support global free-trade talks and to invest in the former Soviet republics.
Carla A. Hills, the United States trade representative, asked executives gathered here for the semiannual meeting of the Business Council to obtain stronger backing from European companies for global trade talks in Geneva.
The talks are aimed at lowering tariffs, limiting subsidies and eliminating obstacles to the international operation of service industries, like banking and insurance.


Gorbachev on Tour: The Artful Supplicant
The poignancy of Mikhail S. Gorbachev as Bolshevik turned mendicant is undeniable these days as he makes a grand tour of America intended to capitalize a new life for himself.
He is darting about as a kind of foundation Firebird rising from the ashes of Communism to flap on westward toward the future, a hard-currency glint in his eye to finance the endless vents of talk and ideas that keep him aloft.


Traffic Alert
TODAY Because of the Five Borough Bike Race, these streets and bridges will be closed: Madison Avenue Bridge, 9 A.M. to 10:30 A.M.; Third Avenue Bridge, 9:00 A.M. to 10:45 A.M.; F.D.R.
Drive, 9:00 A.M. to 11:15 A.M.; Queensboro Bridge, 9:15 A.M. to 11:40 A.M.; Pulaski Bridge, 10:40 A.M. to 1:15 P.M.; Brooklyn-Queens Expressway, 10:45 A.M. to 2:40 P.M.; Belt Parkway, from 11:20 A.M. to 3:15 P.M.; Verrazano-Narrows Bridge, 11:40 A.M. to 3:40 P.M.
Because of the Lower Amsterdam Street Fair, Amsterdam Avenue will be closed between 65th Street and 71st Street, from 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.
TOMORROW Because of the Cuban Independence Day Parade, Madison Avenue will be closed between 37th Street and 56th Street, from noon to 3 P.M.


Mother of Bishop's Son Tells of Irish Love Affair
Depressed, newly divorced and needing a change of scene, Annie Murphy went to Ireland in 1973 to visit her father's friend, Eamonn Casey, then the Roman Catholic Bishop of Kerry who had a promising future in the church's hierarchy.
There, despite the vow of celibacy that Bishop Casey took when he joined the priesthood, the two began a love affair that lasted about six months and eventually produced a baby boy, Ms.
Murphy said in an interview here today.
She told of kissing in the back seat of his official car, meeting at various spots across Ireland, and discussing religion and politics while feeling "like a Cole Porter song."


Plans for Drought Emergency Are Dropped
New York City officials said yesterday that they had abandoned plans to declare a drought emergency, which would have imposed mandatory restrictions on water use, because the city's reservoirs had risen to acceptable levels and New Yorkers had sharply reduced water consumption.
The Environmental Protection Department said the reservoirs were at 86.8 percent of capacity, compared with 58.5 percent in February.
Consumption has declined, to 1.2 billion gallons a day from 1.7 billion in September.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
Company payrolls grew by 126,000 in April, while the unemployment rate edged down to 7.2 percent, the Labor Dept. reported, in the first clear sign that recovery has spread to the job market.
The figures were better than expected and solidified the view that the recovery had reached solid ground.
The drop from 7.3 percent was the first decline since July.
The increase in payrolls was the largest of three straight gains.  [ Page 1. ]
Some good deals on air fares remain as summer approaches, even after the fare restructuring.
Consumer's World.  [ 30. ] Companies
California's insurance commissioner ordered 20th Century Insurance to pay over $100 million in refunds to 650,000 policyholders.
It was the first case completed under a voter-initiated rollback of auto insurance rates.
The company said it would appeal.  [ 37. ]


American Vanguard Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Guilty Plea By Landlord In Fire Case
Two days after his co-defendant struck a similar plea bargain, the owner of the building that housed the Happy Land social club interrupted his trial yesterday and pleaded guilty to not having an adequate sprinkler system in the building where 87 people died in an arson fire two years ago.
The building owner, Alexander DiLorenzo 3d, heir to one of New York's larger real-estate empires, agreed to perform 50 hours of community service and to pay $150,000 toward a community center for Hondurans living in the Bronx.
Many of the victims were Honduran immigrants.


Hudson General reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Oakland No Cure For Woes Of Yanks
Mark McGwire leads the major leagues in home runs, but tonight all he needed was a double to beat the slumping Yankees.
McGwire's three-run double off reliever Steve Farr in the eighth inning brought the Oakland Athletics back from a two-run deficit to an 8-6 victory and sent the Yankees to their fourth consecutive loss and sixth in seven games.


Uniforce Temporary Personnel reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Trimac Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


American Drug Screens reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Daniel W. Woods, 87, A Retired Archeologist
Daniel E. Woods, an internationally known archeologist who taught at Manhattanville College in Purchase, N.Y., for many years, died in Nashville at the home of his daughter on May 6.
He was 87 years old.
His daughter, Sigourney Cheek, said he died after a brief illness.


International Imaging Systems reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


ARMS DEALER TAPE IS MADE AVAILABLE
The Justice Department has agreed to allow review of secret Federal Bureau of Investigation wiretaps by Congressional investigators looking into charges that Ronald Reagan's 1980 Presidential campaign plotted to delay the release of American hostages in Iran, Government officials said today.
Attorney General William P. Barr approved the arrangement in the last few days, allowing the Congressional panel to listen to tapes recorded more than a decade ago during a criminal investigation of Cyrus Hashemi, an Iranian arms dealer.
He was a main figure in the long-rumored but never-proven conspiracy.


Morden &amp; Helwig reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


SHUTTLE IS AIMING FOR SPACE LINKUP
The space shuttle Endeavour and a wayward satellite today sped toward an orbital rendezvous on Sunday in which the astroanuts are to walk in space to boost the $150 million communications satellite into its correct orbit.
The Endeavour, which began its inaugural flight here on Thursday, had few of the problems that have troubled some of the nation's winged spaceships on their first flights.
The biggest glitch was a lint-clogged air filter, which was little more than a nuisance.


Oak Hill Sportswear Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Review/Dance; Debuts in 'Sleeping Beauty'
New incarnations of good and evil appeared on stage at the New York State Theater on Sunday night.
Darci Kistler and Teresa Reyes made their debuts as the benign Lilac Fairy and the wicked Carabosse in the New York City Ballet's production of "The Sleeping Beauty."
Ms.
Kistler was always serene and at ease as the Lilac Fairy, Princess Aurora's fairy godmother.
She moved with such untroubled authority that it seemed whenever this magical being was present, nothing could ever go seriously wrong.


Water Main Break Disrupts Traffic in Lower Manhattan


Ronson Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Yugoslavia Forces Top Officers to Retire
After 10 months of bitter fighting that has accompanied the disintegration of Yugoslavia, the Government of what remains of the country today announced a sweeping shake-up of military commandersthat forced the retirement of the Acting Defense Minister, the army chief in Bosnia and Herzegovina and 38 other senior generals.
The purge affected almost a quarter of the Yugoslav military's officers of general rank, including many who played important roles in the campaigns in Slovenia, Croatia and Bosnia, three republics where independence declarations were followed by warfare between the army and secessionist forces.
The fighting, still raging in Bosnia and to a lesser extent in Croatia, where a four-month-old cease-fire has been repeatedly violated, is believed to have cost at least 10,000 lives.


CSA Management reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Oil Lamp Makes Candle's Light Without Its Mess
Karen Boss has invented a better oil lamp that is showing up in an array of places: the chapel of the Queen's Court in Belgium, on the set of the television series "Star Trek: The Next Generation" and on the tables at the Burt Reynolds Dinner Theater in Jupiter, Fla.
The lamps, made by Ms.
Boss's company, Firelight Glass, in Emeryville, Calif., have a fiberglass wick that does not burn; it just wicks the oil up to the top, where the oil burns in a candlelight effect.
Each vessel is handblown at the factory from highly refined glass, giving each finished piece an extraordinary clarity, Ms.
Boss said.
Firelight's oil, also highly refined, is virtually smokeless and odorless.


Cambridge NeuroScience reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Campign Finance; Big Donor Gives G.O.P. a Headache
The Republican Party thought it had found a new financial angel earlier last month when it received $400,000 in donations from a little-known Los Angeles businessman.
But what it got instead was an embarrassing headache.
It turns out that the generous yet mysterious businessman, Michael Kojima, has a string of debts and court judgments against him for considerably more than $1 million.
And several of these creditors, including a former wife, think they, and not the Republican Party, should get the $400,000.


SciClone Pharmaceuticals Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Calgene Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Kimmins Environmental Service reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


New York Police to Re-evaluate Methods Used to Stop Corruption
New York City police officials in charge of internal affairs said yesterday that the arrests of six active officers and a retired colleague in a buy-and-sell drug dealing operation would lead them to re-evaluate the department's methods to root out corruption.
The officials said the arrests this week had managed to puncture what has long been a source of pride for the department: an internal watchdog mechanism that includes undercover investigators, volunteers among the rank and file, and lieutenants in the precincts who do nothing else but look for corrupt officers.
Investigators say the arrested officers sometimes bought drugs while on their beats in Brooklyn. 'So Brazen'
"We are going into every aspect of this, from commanding officers, to division commanders to borough commanders," said Deputy Chief Robert J. Beatty, the head of the Inspectional Services Division.
"We have a good system, but this case causes us to pause and re-evaluate. It's absolutely a serious problem."


May Gets April Showers and a March Chill


Entergy Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Corrections
A front-page chart yesterday with an article about a constitutional amendment on Congressional pay indicated the actions of three states incorrectly in some copies.
Neither Illinois nor Mississippi has ratified the amendment; Alabama did so on May 5. (A list with the article's continuation in those copies also misstated Illinois's position.)


Beliefs
Capt.
Sven-Erik Ljungholm belongs to about the only army that is actually expanding its reach in Russia -- the Armeija Spasinjia, the Russian Salvation Army.
About 6 feet 5 inches tall and weighing, say, 270 pounds, Captain Ljungholm (pronounced YOUNG-holm) is not a man anyone overlooks.
He has a direct and practical manner to go with his physique, and a direct and practical religious belief to go with his manner.


Margate Industries reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Staying Put, Fixing Up
In an uncertain real-estate market, many homeowners decide to expand and improve the house they own instead of buying a new one.
There are several ways to pay for improvements.
The two most popular are home equity lines of credit, usually tax exempt, and home improvement loans.
The typical home equity line of credit has a floating rate tied to the prime lending rate, and is usually over the prime by 1.75 percentage points.
Home improvement loans can also have a variable rate, but if there is no collateral, like a house, it is likely to be higher.
The rate on a home improvement loan with collateral is about 2 percentage points over the prime rate; the unsecured rate, without collateral, is about 13 percentage points over the prime rate.
Qualifications and repayment rules vary by lender.
Here are some typical rates and terms based on a $10,000 loan.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Campaign Finance; Big Donor Gives G.O.P. a Headache
The Republican Party thought it had found a new financial angel earlier last month when it received $400,000 in donations from a little-known Los Angeles businessman.
But what it got instead was an embarrassing headache.
It turns out that the generous yet mysterious businessman, Michael Kojima, has a string of debts and court judgments against him for considerably more than $1 million.
And several of these creditors, including a former wife, think they, and not the Republican Party, should get the $400,000.


Ranger Fans Sense a Cup and Crave a Sip
Year after year, they have come together in the stands of Madison Square Garden, comrades in the perennial communion of sweet misery that is Ranger fandom.
Giddy with hope, frustrated by dreams deferred, they talk like out-of-luck gamblers at a final poker game, pledging that if their team fails again to win the Stanley Cup, this season will be their last.
Now as the hard-luck Rangers hurtle toward the promised land -- they lead last year's champions, the Pittsburgh Penguins, 2 games to 1 in their division final series, with the fourth game tonight in Pittsburgh -- the faithful say the the ante is up.
They have been patient.
They want to win.
A Gamer Since 1940
And no fans are more adamant than the three in Section 330, Row C, seats 1, 2 and 3.


How America Can Help Hong Kong
Congress and the Bush Administration can reintroduce a measure of principle into America's relations with Beijing.
The vehicle at hand is the U.S.-Hong Kong Policy Act, approved on Thursday by the Senate Foreign Relations Committee and soon to be considered in the House.
The act would allow America to reinforce Hong Kong's freedom by treating it as a legally distinct entity after its return to Chinese rule.
That final gasp of Communist expansionism, set for five years from this July, is a sad fate for a people who have long known freedom.
But Americans are obliged to honor the good faith agreement Margaret Thatcher reached with Beijing's leaders eight years ago.
Washington can at least insist that the Sino-British Declaration of 1984 be faithfully carried out.


Ben Franklin Retail Stores reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Jury Orders Broker to Pay $36 Million
A jury ordered Morgan Stanley &amp; Company today to pay $36 million in damages to West Virginia because the state lost government money through risky investments that violated state guidelines.
A jury found that the brokerage firm broke state rules by putting the money in investments like futures contracts when state guidelines specifically called for the money to be placed in safer short-term securities.


Sparton Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Medical Care in Russia Seems Near a Collapse
Mikhail B. Sagalovich, chief of nephrology at Russia's best children's hospital, uses his car to drive his friends and their luggage to and from Moscow's airports.
A practical man, he once joined the Communist Party to get ahead; now he drives an informal taxi to keep his family in shoes.
"I need just four days to make what I make as a doctor in one month," he said.
Olga A. Yevdokimova, a 25-year-old nurse, said simply: "There's a lack of medicines, disposable syringes, cotton, bandages. We don't have anything to treat the children with."
Valery I. Guz, a 40-year-old thoracic surgeon, earns 1,500 rubles a month, just above the official poverty line.
"The cleaner in the metro station gets 2,500 rubles," he said.
"Why? It's the Communist system. A kitchen maid can rule the country, and a cleaner can be a senator." A Protest May Widen
Communism may be dead, he suggested, but its disparities and inefficiencies remain.
And in an inflationary economy, with a new Government trying to cut spending, medical care is being starved of money (the usual situation here), while socialism's creaking manufacturing and distribution system has broken down, causing severe shortages of medical supplies and pharmaceuticals as basic as aspirin.


Pulaski Furniture Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to April 19


An Injustice to Antigua
To the Editor:
Your April 20 "Santo Domingo Journal" paints a picture of the Dominican Republic's poor and unfortunate women that is horrid.
However, you do a great injustice to my small Caribbean country by quoting an unidentified "expert" who claims that there "are now 4,000 Dominican prostitutes among a total of 80,000 people" in my small Antigua.


BUSH PLEDGES HELP TO RIOT-TORN AREA
President Bush concluded his 38-hour inspection tour of Los Angeles today, offering words of compassion for anguished welfare mothers and victims of street violence, and a promise that "government has an absolute responsibility to solve these problems."
He announced a $19 million aid package for Los Angeles that includes more money for Head Start programs, health and drug-treatment clinics, housing for about 175 low-income families, worker retraining and law enforcement to combat drug dealers.


Despite a Day of Mishaps, 3 Fordham Crews Advance
The five Fordham crews at the Dad Vail Regatta today experienced the ebb and flow of success and failure.
Three qualified for Saturday's finals on a rainy day that saw 456 crews from 109 colleges ply the waters of the Schuylkill.
A total of 2,955 men and women competed at this 58-year-old event for so-called small colleges.
The most gratifying moment for the Fordham contingent came in the last 200 meters of the heat for men's novice lightweight eights.
In a field of six, the Ram crew established a comfortable lead of about a length over Coast Guard and Ithaca, the two closest contenders.


Teamsters Say the Union Will Honor Picket Lines
Officials of the International Brotherhood of Teamsters said yesterday that their members had not been hired by a wholesale delivery company embroiled in a labor dispute with the newspaper deliverers union and said teamsters would not cross the deliverers' picket lines.
In a message that was sent to teamster locals in the metropolitan New York area Thursday night and again yesterday, Ron Carey, the international president, said all teamsters are expected to honor pickets set up by members of the Newspaper Mailers and Deliverers' Union of New York and Vicinity, his spokesman said.


Czyz Pummels Lalonde To Handily Retain Title
Bobby Czyz gave Donny Lalonde a systematic beating tonight at the Rivera Hotel and Casino, scoring a unanimous 12-round decision to retain his World Boxing Association cruiserweight title.
All three judges, Rafael Carbano (116-113), Hector Hernandez (117-111) and Jerry Roth (116-110), scored the bout for Czyz.


Green Mountain Power reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Handex Environmental Recovery Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Bang on a Can Cancellation
The Goldberg Ensemble, a chamber group from England, has canceled its appearance in the Bang on a Can Festival, Tuesday at 8 P.M. at the Ethical Culture Society, Central Park West at 64th Street.
The American premiere of David Lang's work "Fire and Forget" will take place instead during the marathon concert on May 17.
The other Bang on a Can performances on Tuesday will take place as scheduled at 5:30 and 11 P.M.
Information: (212) 459-4852.


Cub Scouts Told to Readmit 2 Atheists


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.25-6.5
6.25-6.5
8.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.56
3.74
5.69
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.62
3.58
5.44
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.74
3.70
5.62
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.06
7.10
7.96
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.89
7.96
8.34
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.85
8.88
9.35
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.67
6.69
7.23
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Observer; For Lack Of a Butler
In the good old murder-mystery days the butler did it.
Yet he still hasn't even been hauled in for questioning in the Los Angeles case.
He's the only one who hasn't.
In the past week practically everybody has accused practically everybody else of doing it.
Here are just a few of the accusations, with learned comment:


AFTER THE RIOTS: South-Central Journal; Amid the Ruins, a Frustrating Struggle to Reconstruct Lives
Arms akimbo, weight on both feet, Juan David Soto stood patiently outside a check-cashing store in South-Central Los Angeles this week while his wife and a friend waited in line inside.
It has been a week to practice patience.
People who live among the ruins of riot-devastated South-Central Los Angeles are trying to reconstruct their day-to-day lives.


Allied Capital Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Nobel Insurance Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Knicks Try to Remain The New Scare Crew
After two games of their playoff series, the Knicks have shown they intend to give the Chicago Bulls nothing but a hard time.
Some clutch plays by B. J. Armstrong, and some crucial late-game mistakes by the Knicks, propelled the Bulls to an 86-78 victory on Thursday in Chicago that tied the four-of-seven-game playoff series at one game apiece.


Citing Political Straits, Walesa Seeks Wider Power
President Lech Walesa, in a dramatic speech to Parliament, acknowledged today that Poland's political instability was scaring off foreign investors and appealed for stronger executive powers.
"Our credibility is slipping away," he said.
"Poland belongs to the countries of so-called high risk, and no one will invest money in risky businesses. Only stable authority and a real program of changes, conscientiously realized, can revise our image."


Correction
An article yesterday about the National Basketball Association misstated the year the Los Angeles Lakers dismissed Paul Westhead, their coach.
It was 1981.


Charles Rothenberg, Divorce Lawyer, 88
Charles Rothenberg, a lawyer specializing in divorce and child custody cases who supported changes in the laws, died on April 20 at Bethesda Memorial Hospital in Delray Beach, Fla.
He was 88 years old and lived in Delray Beach.
He died of pneumonia, his family said.


Syms Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Beliefs
Capt.
Sven-Erik Ljungholm belongs to about the only army that is actually expanding its reach in Russia -- the Armeija Spasinjia, the Russian Salvation Army.
About 6 feet 5 inches tall and weighing, say, 270 pounds, Captain Ljungholm (pronounced YOUNG-holm) is not a man anyone overlooks.
He has a direct and practical manner to go with his physique, and a direct and practical religious belief to go with his manner.


Labor Case From '62 Strains Black-Jewish Ties
To the Editor:
Your article about criticism of "Bridges and Boundaries: African Americans and American Jews," an exhibition of the Jewish Museum in New York City (arts pages, April 20), states that labor unions have objected to material in the show.
You report that museum officials removed references to past discriminatory racial practices of the International Ladies Garment Workers Union in response to objections from the union, which characterized the material as "30-year-old discredited charges by an official of the N.A.A.C.P."


What Cup Finalists Have in Common: Swimming in Money
The America's Cup series is a sailboat regatta in which tactics and strategy are as finely honed as a master battle plan.
But this time around, it is also a war of technology between two billionaires.
Beginning Saturday, Bill Koch's defense yacht, America  , will race against Raul Gardini's challenger, Il Moro di Venezia, in a four-of-seven-race series for the America's Cup.
The racing begins at 3:05 P.M.
Eastern time.


Magic Software Enterprises reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Bayou Steel Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Details Emerge on Proposed Trade Compromise
New details emerged today about a tentative agreement between the United States and the European Community to limit government subsidies to commercial aircraft companies.
The compromise calls for government contracts to be limited to 4 percent of any single company's revenue and to 3 percent of each national industry's revenue, said a Bush Administration official today who insisted on anonymity.
The original deal called for a 5 percent restriction on each company and a 4 percent industry limit.


A Physician Who Heals With Both Science and Art
Cleve Francis knows hearts, how to fix them when they're ailing and how to move them with a song.
One week recently Mr.
Francis, a rising country-music star, was making the rounds of local radio and television stations, promoting his new album.
But that was between visits to his office and to a hospital emergency room where, in his other life as a cardiologist, he arrived at a diagnosis of a split aorta in a patient.


Selvac Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 29


American Song Recital
The bass-baritone John Eppler and the pianist Frank Daykin are to perform a recital of art songs by living American composers at 3 P.M. tomorrow at Christ and St.
Stephen's Church, 120 West 69th Street, Manhattan.
The program includes a premiere by the Cherokee composer Louis Ballard, as well as works by Ned Rorem, Alan Hovhaness, Donald Martino and others.
Tickets are $10.
Information: (212) 662-9462.


N.H.L. Slaps Graves With 4-Game Suspension
Adam Graves was given a four-game suspension today for his two-handed, chest-high slash at the left glove of Mario Lemieux in Game 2 of the Rangers' playoff series with Pittsburgh on Tuesday night.
But the Ranger forward was found not to be guilty of attempting to injure Lemieux, who suffered a broken left hand that will keep him out of the rest of this series, if not the rest of the National Hockey League playoffs.
The decision assures that Graves will not play in any more playoff games against the Penguins, since the Rangers lead the Patrick Division finals, 2 games to 1, and play cannot extend beyond four more games.


Masco Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Brooks Bros. Strike Averted
The unionized sales staff of four Brooks Brothers stores in the New York area accepted management's latest contract offer last night after five weeks of wrangling, thus averting a threatened strike.
Jo-Ann Mort, a spokeswoman for the Amalgamated Clothing and Textile Workers Union Local 340, said the union had ratified the contract late last night.
The union represents 200 employees at Brooks Brothers stores on Madison Avenue and Liberty Place in Manhattan, as well as in Scarsdale and Manhasset, L.I.


Olympia Wins Reprieve for London Project
With its vast Canary Wharf office-development project about to run out of money, Olympia &amp; York Developments Ltd. won a reprieve today.
Eleven banks agreed to lend it an additional $:21 million, or $37.5 million.
But the reprieve apparently did not mean that banks were enthusiastic about Olympia's proposal on Thursday to restructure $12 billion of company debt.
"Nobody was overwhelmed by the proposals," said an official at one of Olympia's larger lenders who insisted on anonymity.
But bankers stressed that they were still studying the proposal, which offers the banks nonvoting equity in return for debt-payment relief.


Messier Puts On Skates But Puts Off Decision
The spasms in Mark Messier's back have subsided to the extent that he has a chance of returning to action on Saturday night after missing two games of the Patrick Division finals against the Penguins.
The Ranger captain skated with the rest of his teammates this morning, the first time he had been on the ice in five days.
He said afterward that he felt 100 percent better than he had over the previous four days.
He said a decision on whether to play would be made before Saturday's fourth game here.


No Clear Winners Seen in German Strike Outcome
Trains rolled again, garbage was cleared from city streets, and mountains of undelivered mail were sorted today as public employees returned to work after a costly 11-day strike.
Neither labor nor management emerged as a clear winner in the conflict.
If there was a loser, it was the public, which saw the strike as a symptom of the country's weakening political leadership.


Penn Central Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Philadelphia Suburban reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


COMPANY NEWS
ALOHA AIRGROUP INC., Honolulu, filed a registration statement with the S.E.C. to sell 5.5 million class A common shares.
AMERICAN FRANCHISE GROUP INC., Fort Lauderdale, Fla., a thermography printing company, declared a 4-for-1 reverse stock split, effective on May 12.


Classical Music in Review
New York Philharmonic Avery Fisher Hall


E.P.A. Head Allows Project On a Lake Michigan Marsh
Responding to appeals from the Republican Governor of Michigan, the head of the Environmental Protection Agency today overruled a top aide and cleared the way for a prominent developer to build a golf course across an unspoiled freshwater marsh along the northern shore of Lake Michigan.
In announcing the action in Chicago, William K. Reilly, the Administrator of the environmental agency, said the states should be the final arbiter in such decisions and that Michigan had given its approval.


Excerpts From Speech By Bush in Los Angeles
Following are excerpts from President Bush's remarks yesterday at the Challenger Boys' and Girls' Club in South-Central Los Angeles, as provided by News Transcripts Inc., a private transcription service.
It was important, I feel, that as President I come here to Los Angeles.
The community has been the site of a terrible tragedy.
Not just for you who are impacted the most, but for our entire country.
And everyone around the world feels this trauma, everyone who looks to us as a model of freedom and justice.
And that's why I want to say just a few things about my visit, to speak to you about what I've seen in the city, and most importantly, as I said at a marvelous ecumenical church service yesterday at Mount Zion, we are one people; we are one family; we are one nation under God.


Your Money; States in Pursuit Of Ex-Residents
ONE care that many workers in high-tax states like California, New York and Massachusetts plan to leave behind when they retire is state income tax, so they move to havens like Nevada and Florida that have none.
But increasingly the states where they earned their living are making aggressive efforts to tax them.
Matthew R. Rosenberg, senior tax partner of Anchin Block &amp; Anchin, a New York accounting firm, said, "With the fiscal crisis in the Northeast, states are getting more aggressive in going after taxpayers." Not only are they claiming as residents people who say they have moved away, they are also taxing pension income, contending that it is deferred compensation subject to taxation in the state where it was earned.


CHRONICLE
It was no easy job being press spokesmen for royal families this week.
In several palaces around the world press attaches were busy fending off inquiries about royal engagements, affairs and divorces.
Some of the responses were testier than others.
In London, the tabloids and the BBC had a field day with reports that PRINCESS ANNE, the ink barely dry on her divorce papers, would marry Commander TIMOTHY LAURENCE of the Royal Navy, the Queen's former equerry, with whom she has been linked for some time.


Unser's Car Is Wrecked
AL UNSER, a four-time winner of the Indianapolis 500 who failed to find a set of wheels for last year's race, had found one for this year's.
But then a teammate wrecked it.
Unser, who will turn 53 five days after the May 24 race, was given today's first qualifying spot.
He was going to drive a 1992 Buick-powered Lola for Team Menard, but that car was wrecked yesterday when GARY BETTENHAUSEN, shaking it down for Unser, crashed after the engine blew.
Thecar isn't expected to be ready until next week.
Unser may pass on qualifying for now because his backup car is thought to be too slow.


History's Long, Angry Arm
Congressional pay ignites voters in the calmest of times; in this era of anger at politics, the issue has become positively incendiary.
Four state legislatures this week reached back 203 years to restrain Congress in setting its members' pay.
They ratified a constitutional amendment to that effect, one that made sense when James Madison offered it in 1789 and still does.
But the long lapse in its ratification begs for updating.
This week's approvals gave the amendment a three-fourths majority of the 50 states.
It's now up to the National Archivist or Congress to determine whether the ratifications of states that voted long ago remain valid.


Hartco Enterprises reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 1


'90 Report on Older Drivers Produces Little in Albany
Nearly two years ago, a New York State task force urged Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo to take a series of steps to better oversee the the driving performance of older motorists.
But the task force's recommendations, with one exception, have yet to be adopted.
The task force, created at the Governor's urging, recommended that New York State make greater use of restricted licenses, road signs that could be read more easily by aging motorists and a publicity campaign aimed at getting older people to take defensive driving courses, among other measures.


NewTel Enterprises reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Correction
Because of a typographical error a letter May 4 by David Andrews, acting president of Planned Parenthood Federation of America, misstated the number of women in the United States who have abortions each year.
It is 1.6 million, not 16 million.


Old Veterans Share Cancer's War Stories
THEY call themselves "square heads," these men who long ago came to Brooklyn from Norway to build the docks of New York.
On Thursday morning, they gathered for their monthly meeting to discuss what they call "this cancer business."
There were three of them, plus an Italian-American who spent most of his working life repairing televisions and an Irish-American who did maintenance work in city schools until he retired.
These were men who fought wars, worked like oxen to support families, scrambled to fulfill their modest versions of the American dream.


Let Elvis Help Pay for National Health
To the Editor:
With the simultaneous advent of the Elvis Presley stamp and the need for funds for a national health care package, perhaps the Postal Service could issue the Presley stamp as a semipostal issue.


COMPANY NEWS: Mouse Without Immunity; Genpharm Expects Patent for an Animal
A Silicon Valley biotechnology company says it expects to receive a patent soon for a genetically engineered mouse that lacks an immune system.
It would be only the second animal patent ever issued.
The patent anticipated by Genpharm International would end the Patent and Trademark Office's four-year recess in awarding animal patents.


Ameribanc Investors reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


U.S. Wrongly Denied Aid For Impaired, Judge Rules
A Federal judge in New York ruled yesterday that the Federal Government improperly denied disability benefits to 20,000 mentally and physically impaired New Yorkers in the late 1970's and early 1980's by systematically and restrictively misapplying its own eligibility regulations.
In a decision that could affect similar suits on behalf of 100,000 other disability applicants across the country, Judge William C. Conner held that the Department of Health and Human Services and its Social Security Administration had "engaged in a pattern and practice of misapplication" of its regulations.


Mediq Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Campign Finance; Big Donor Gives G.O.P. a Headache
The Republican Party thought it had found a new financial angel earlier last month when it received $400,000 in donations from a little-known Los Angeles businessman.
But what it got instead was an embarrassing headache.
It turns out that the generous yet mysterious businessman, Michael Kojima, has a string of debts and court judgments against him for considerably more than $1 million.
And several of these creditors, including a former wife, think they, and not the Republican Party, should get the $400,000.


Integral Systems reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


United Tire &amp; Rubber reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Mother of Bishop's Son Tells of Irish Love Affair
Depressed, newly divorced and needing a change of scene, Annie Murphy went to Ireland in 1973 to visit her father's friend, Eamonn Casey, then the Roman Catholic Bishop of Kerry who had a promising future in the church's hierarchy.
There, despite the vow of celibacy that Bishop Casey took when he joined the priesthood, the two began a love affair that lasted about six months and eventually produced a baby boy, Ms.
Murphy said in an interview here today.
She told of kissing in the back seat of his official car, meeting at various spots across Ireland, and discussing religion and politics while feeling "like a Cole Porter song."


Review/Music; From Bell and Floyd, The Two Sides of Soul
One of the great mysteries of soul music is its simultaneous expression of sadness and celebration.
Its ballads are meant for crying, its uptempo tunes for rejoicing.
In the best soul music, the confrontation of pain leads to a kind of redemption and transcendence.
At Tramps on Wednesday night, in the first night of a four-evening double bill that concludes tonight, William Bell and Eddie Floyd presented two sides of soul.
Both singers recorded for the Memphis-based Stax label at the height of the soul era in the 60's; both wrote and recorded songs -- Mr.
Bell's "You Don't Miss Your Water," Mr.
Floyd's "Knock on Wood" -- that remain standards today.
Wearing a bright purple shirt and trousers, Mr.
Bell performed a set that addressed the more introspective side of soul; by the second number, he was already directing the band to slow down the groove.
He sang ballads like "I Forgot to Be Your Lover" and "Every Day Will Be Like a Holiday" in a warm, crooning voice that melted the tempos like soft wax.
In the middle of these songs, he gave little monologues about the difficulty of relationships; this was soul music as therapy and release.
"You Don't Miss Your Water" is a consummate ode to shattered love, but even after the saddest lines Mr.
Bell flashed a disarming smile.


Back on the Campaign Trail


Vermont Research reports earnings for Qtr to March 28


Florida East Coast Industries reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Review/Film; Coming of Age at 12 With a Stripper as Mom
Goldie Hawn does not giggle or act bubble-headed once in "Crisscross." She is thoroughly restrained and convincing as Tracy Cross, a divorced mother raising her 12-year-old son, Chris, in a seedy Florida hotel in 1969.
That is just the first of many surprises in a film that offers a deeply touching and tough-minded treatment of motherhood and adolescence.
Seen largely from Chris's point of view, the story is as understated as his admission that he has "a screwed-up life." Things are so messed up in this hard-scrabble family that Chris has two jobs in addition to his paper route.
And while Tracy keeps her day job as the Eden Hotel's waitress, at her night job she has moved on from bartending to stripping in a local dive.
She'll make five times as much money, but doesn't want her son to find out.


When 97.2 Million Dial 'M' for Mom
Starting about 7 A.M. on Mother's Day, telephones will begin jingling in a gradual sweep across the country.
More Americans are expected to try to make long-distance calls on this one day than on any other holiday, putting stress on many telephone networks, but on A.T.&amp; T.'s most of all.
Aided by recent improvements in its call-routing computers, the American Telephone and Telegraph Company expects some 97.2 million calls to get through on its network, but many may not.
Who gets to say, "Hi, Mom," right away and who gets a recording that says, "All circuits are busy now, please try your call again later," will depend largely on the skill and flair of William C. Leach and his crew at the A.T.&amp; T. Network Operating Center here.





Demonstrators Gather in Times Square to Protest Police Brutality


Rochester Medical Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


SHOWDOWN IS SET ON CAMBODIA ARMS
The head of the United Nations peacekeeping operation in Cambodia has set a deadline of early June for the start of its most difficult and dangerous mission: disarming the powerful Khmer Rouge and the country's other three warring factions.
To prepare for the showdown, the United Nations plans to fly in another 10 infantry battalions over the next three weeks from such countries as France, India, Bulgaria and Uruguay to join the Malaysian and Indonesian battalions already deployed there.


Dr. Carl W. Walter, an Inventor Of Medical Equipment, Dies at 86
Carl W. Walter, a noted surgeon and inventor who developed blood transfusion equipment and crusaded for infection control in operating rooms, died Tuesday at the Stillman Infirmary in Cambridge, Mass.
He was 86 years old and lived in Holliston, Mass.
He died of a stroke, his family said.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 2-7  RUSSIA'S HEALTH-CARE CRISIS
To make ends meet, the chief of nephrology at Russia's best children's hospital moonlights as a taxi driver, and earns much more than he does in medicine.
With lingering inefficiencies and disparities from Communism, and a new Government trying to cut spending, medical care is being starved of money.  1


Corrections
The caption of a sports picture by The Associated Press in some editions yesterday about the New York Rangers misidentified one of the hockey players who were celebrating after their overtime victory.
Joe Kocur left the ice with Mark Hardy, not Kris King .


After Air-Fare Restructuring, Some Bargains Still Remain
When several major airlines eliminated a number of fares last month as part of a simplification process, they cut out not only some of the highest fares, but also some of the lowest ones.
But as the summer travel season approaches, there are still some good deals available to the traveler with the time and patience to look for them, said several travel experts.


Kansas City Life Insurance Co. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Quotation of the Day
"My life is beyond hell. I cannot take any more." -- ALICE DEBORD, who was a juror in the Rodney King case.  [ 1:3. ]


Corrections
A picture caption in some copies yesterday with an article about executions in Texas and Arkansas misidentified the convict put to death in Texas.
He was Justin May; Steven Douglas Hill was the convict executed in Arkansas.


A Physician Who Heals With Both Science and Art
Cleve Francis knows hearts, how to fix them when they're ailing and how to move them with a song.
One week recently Mr.
Francis, a rising country-music star, was making the rounds of local radio and television stations, promoting his new album.
But that was between visits to his office and to a hospital emergency room where, in his other life as a cardiologist, he arrived at a diagnosis of a split aorta in a patient.


After Police-Beating Verdict, Another Trial for the Jurors
Nine days after they delivered the verdict that stunned the nation and set South-Central Los Angeles aflame, the jurors who acquitted the four police officers charged for beating Rodney G. King are variously frightened, defensive, agonized by second thoughts or firmly resolved that they did the right thing.
"My life is beyond hell. I cannot take any more," said Alice Debord, a 43-year-old grounds worker at a local college.
Standing outside her modest home in the verdant remote hills near Ojai, a 75-mile drive from riot-scarred Los Angeles, she looked shaken as she recalled getting death threats.
Some Left Home
Other jurors have left their homes in various parts of Ventura County, a mountainous area northwest of Los Angeles that stretches from the far suburbs of the city, like Simi Valley, through vast citrus groves and strawberry fields, through oil fields near the coast in Ventura and over lush horse country in the mountains near the resort of Ojai.
The courts ordered the trial transferred there on the ground that the Los Angeles police officers could not get a fair trial in the city.


Peenemunde Journal; At Space Age Cradle: Shades of Nazi Rocketeers
The crisp white sign announcing, "Peenemunde, the Cradle of Space Flight," seems a mouthful, since about all that remains are the ruins of brick factories where rocket fuel was once made, and jagged concrete chunks jutting from moonscape-like dunes where prototype moon rockets were tested.
Some planners are working here to create a space park on the site of Nazi Germany's rocket testing grounds, where some 18,000 German technicians and scientists toiled feverishly for more than a decade.


Robert H. Buche; Pastor, 86
The Rev.
Robert H. Buche, a former pastor of the Trinity Presbyterian Church in Manhattan and a chaplain of the St.
George Society of the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey, died on May 1 at his home in Maywood, N.J.
He was 86 years old.
He died of natural causes, a spokesman for the Trinka-Faustini Funeral Home in Maywood said.


Newton Undermines an Asteroid Theory
To the Editor:
In "The Events at Gibeon" (letter, April 18), Shane Mage interprets Joshua 10:9-13 ("the sun stood still and the moon stayed") as Biblical support for the thesis that an asteroid or "deadly meteor shower" not only killed many Amorite soldiers at the battle of Gibeon but also stopped the earth's rotation.
Newton's laws of motion, however, militate against so literal an exegesis.


Harmony Products reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Mott's Holdings Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 28


CHRONICLE
And then there was Monaco.
The London tabloids, the BBC and some American newspapers reported that PRINCESS CAROLINE had asked her father, PRINCE RAINIER, for permission to marry a French actor, VINCENT LINDON.
The princess was widowed in 1990 when her husband and the father of her three children, STEFANO CASIRAGHI, was killed in a boating accident.


Joyner and the Police
AL JOYNER, an Olympic gold medalist in 1984, was pulled over and handcuffed twice yesterday by Los Angeles police investigating stolen-vehicle and hit-and-run incidents, then freed after officers realized they had the wrong man.
The 32-year-old Joyner, a triple-jump gold medalist who is the husband of sprinter FLORENCE GRIFFITH JOYNER and the brother of heptathlete JACKIE JOYNER-KERSEE, said he feared being shot and "didn't make any sudden moves because I remember Rodney King."


In Wee Small Hours, Little Rallies Win for Mets, 4-3
The weather was wet, the game was long and the spectators who remained after a 2-hour-2-minute rain delay in the second inning were few.
That was unfortunate because the Mets made the game exciting with three late rallies and emerged with a 4-3 victory over the Los Angeles Dodgers last night at Shea Stadium.
The Mets won the game in the ninth inning when Rodney McCray smacked a bases-loaded single off Tim Crews for his first National League hit.
It helped snap the Mets' losing streak at three games and increased their winning streak at Shea to nine games.


CHRONICLE
As if all this were not enough, a spokesman for the royal court in Amman denied on Thursday that KING HUSSEIN would divorce his American-born wife, QUEEN NOOR, to wed RANA NEJEM, described as an employee in the palace press office.
King Hussein married the former LISA HALABY, a Princeton graduate, in June 1978.
Before that he had been divorced twice and widowed once.


Tipperary Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Media; For Perot, What TV Gives It Can Also Take Away
It began promisingly with "Larry King Live," took a slight turn for the worse on "Face the Nation" and ended stormily with "Meet the Press."
Phase I of Ross Perot's unofficial Presidential campaign -- the candidate does television -- came to an abrupt close this week after the Texas billionaire was confronted Sunday with some basic questions he could not answer.
Two days later, Mr.
Perot declared that he would significantly curtail his interview schedule to devote himself to studying the issues and coming up with some responses.


Officers in Drug Case Formed Tightly Knit Group
As young police officers, Kenneth Eurell and Michael Dowd were assigned to the 75th Precinct in the tough East New York section of Brooklyn.
They chased muggers and broke up family fights.
They also built a friendship, investigators said, that years later would bring them money and and comfort.
But that relationship collapsed on Wednesday night, when they and four other officers were arrested and accused of running a cocaine ring in which drugs bought in bodegas in Brooklyn were sold in bars and restaurants on Long Island.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Top Players Advance  Top-seeded players Monica Seles and Gabriela Sabatini stayed on course for another much-awaited championship match meeting with easy straight-set victories in the Italian Open yesterday in Rome.
In one of the semifinals, Sabatini will meet Mary Joe Fernandez, who staged a comeback against Anke Huber of Germany, 3-6, 7-6 (7-2), 6-3.
Seles, ranked No. 1 in the world, defeated 10th-seeded Leila Meskhi, 6-1, 6-4, to reach the semifinals.
Sabatini, the defending champion, had an even easier time, crushing No. 7 Nathalie Tauziat of France, 6-0, 6-1.
Seles, beaten by Sabatini in the final last year, will meet Amanda Coetzer of South Africa in the other semifinal. (AP) Edberg Struggles but Wins: Top-seeded Stefan Edberg of Sweden struggled into the semifinals at the rain-plagued A.T.P.
German Open in Hamburg, defeating Omar Camporese of Italy, 2-6, 7-6 (7-5), 6-2.
Edberg will face unseeded Carlos Costa of Spain, who beat unseeded Paul Haarhuis of the Netherlands, 4-6, 6-4, 6-3. (AP) GOLF  Kite Grabs Lead  Tom Kite, trying to end a 16-month victory drought, built a two-shot lead halfway through the Atlanta Golf Classic with a seven-under-par 65 yesterday in Marietta, Ga.
Kite took advantage of the soggy conditions to make nine birdies, the longest putt covering 15 feet.
He had a nine-under 135 total for two trips over the hilly, 7,018-yard Atlanta Country Club course, which softened up after two days of steady, light rain. (AP) DIVING  Future Olympians Win  Two divers honing their skills for the 3-meter competition at the Olympic Games this summer placed one-two in the 1-meter final of the Alamo International yesterday in Fort Lauderdale, Fla.
China's Li Deliang, a bronze medalist in the 3-meter in the 1988 Olympics, totaled 361.56 points off the 1-meter board and edged the Mark Lenzi of Fredericksburg, Va., by nine-one-hundredths of a point.
Lan Wei, also from China, finished third at 338.88.
Edwin Jongejans, the defending 1-meter world champion, was a distant fourth.
In the women's event, 13-year-old Fu Mingxia of China, last year's world platform champion, finished next to last among the 12 qualifiers for today's finals.
Her total of 294.15 points were 17.13 behind the first-place finisher, Maria Jose Alcala of Mexico.


Canstar Sports reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


LeMond Slips to Third After a Tire Goes Flat
A flat tire tonight cost Greg LeMond the overall lead in the Tour Du Pont, America's most important bicycle race.
LeMond, America's most successful rider, fell to third place after two days of this 11-day, 1,000-mile race.
Dave Mann, a 29-year-old Englishman, took the lead by 74 hundredths of a second over Stephen Swart of New Zealand.
LeMond was 12 seconds behind the leader.
Mann and Swart are training partners on the American Coors Light team and are roommates during the tour.


Protein Databases Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


2 Europe Jobs Are Won by Perot Venture
The Perot Systems Corporation, the fledgling information systems contractor controlled by Ross Perot, said yesterday that it had signed its first two contracts in Europe to take over the computer management of two large companies.
Perot Systems said the contracts would be worth more than $1 billion over the next 12 years.
The company, based in Herndon, Va., said it signed a 12-year agreement with East Midlands Electricity, a British utility, and a 10-year agreement with Europcar, a vehicle rental company based in Paris.
The Perot company declined to provide a breakdown of how much each contract was worth.


CBL Medical Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Chief Resigns as Company Says It Overstated Revenues
The chief executive of a small medical equipment company, one of many that raised large sums of money in last year's strong stock market for health-care companies, resigned yesterday, as the company said it had overstated its quarterly revenues by more than 50 percent.
Efraim E. Landa -- the chairman, president, treasurer and chief executive of Fidelity Medical Inc. -- resigned after an emergency meeting of the company's board on Thursday night, a director said.
Mark Hoffman, the director, said the meeting was called after the Securities and Exchange Commission questioned the accuracy of the reported sales.


N.J. Transit Boss Learns to Joust With Legislative Critics
As head of N.J.
Transit, Shirley A. DeLibero holds top-level staff meetings in gritty rail yards.
She crawls under buses and peers into locomotives to see what ails them.
She responds to customers' complaints by calling them herself.
"How else can I manage," she asked, sitting in the agency's 12-story glass tower overlooking Penn Station here, "if I don't know what's going on out there?"


Gorbachev on Tour: The Artful Supplicant
The poignancy of Mikhail S. Gorbachev as Bolshevik turned mendicant is undeniable these days as he makes a grand tour of America intended to capitalize a new life for himself.
He is darting about as a kind of foundation Firebird rising from the ashes of Communism to flap on westward toward the future, a hard-currency glint in his eye to finance the endless vents of talk and ideas that keep him aloft.


Plans for Drought Emergency Are Dropped
New York City officials said yesterday that they had abandoned plans to declare a drought emergency, which would have imposed mandatory restrictions on water use, because the city's reservoirs had risen to acceptable levels and New Yorkers had sharply reduced water consumption.
The Environmental Protection Department said the reservoirs were at 86.8 percent of capacity, compared with 58.5 percent in February.
Consumption has declined, to 1.2 billion gallons a day from 1.7 billion in September.


Sizeler Property Inv reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Labor Case From '62 Strains Black-Jewish Ties; The Old Alliance
To the Editor:
You assert that "Blacks and Jews, old partners in better times, disagree sharply over affirmative action, racial solutions and American policy in Israel" in an article on the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (The Week in Review, March 29).
While no one will argue that blacks and Jews have experienced tension in recent years, this is hardly the whole story.


Restor Industries reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Lidco Industries reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Corrections
An article yesterday about residents' reactions to President Bush's visit to areas in South-Central Los Angeles damaged in riots referred incorrectly to Mayor Tom Bradley.
He has been Mayor since 1973, not 1974.


Payrolls increase and Joibless Rate Retreats to 7.2%
In the first clear sign that economic recovery has spread to the job market, company payrolls grew by 126,000 in April while the unemployment rate edged down to 7.2 percent, the Labor Department reported today.
The latest figures, which represented the first broad assessment of economic conditions for the month, were better than expected and solidified the view that the recovery had finally reached solid ground.


Bridge
One of the world's great players is a quiet Pole named Pyotr Gawrys (pronounced GAV-ris).
His credentials include a victory in the World Olympiad Teams in 1984 and a silver medal in last year's Bermuda Bowl Championship in Yokohama, Japan.
It is likely that he will soon become his country's first grandmaster in the rankings of the World Bridge Federation.
He and his partner, Krzysztof Lasocki, have been engaged in a successful playing tour of North America.
Last weekend in Manhattan they came very close to victory in the Cavendish Invitational Charity Pairs, an event Gawrys had won two years earlier with a different partner.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Third-Party Candidate; In Petition for Texas Ballot, Perot Has Signers to Spare
At one o'clock next Monday afternoon, Ross Perot is expected to leap across one of the first big hurdles in his probable race for President with plenty of room to spare.
To get his name on the ballot in Texas, he has to deliver petitions with the signatures of at least 54,275 qualified, registered voters at the capitol in Austin by that day, and Mr.
Perot plans to be on hand with thousands of his supporters -- and an overflow of signed petitions.


Atkinson (Guy F.) Co. (O) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Federal Realty Investment Trust reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Uranium Resources reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Goldfield Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Classical Music in Review
'Sacred Music in a Sacred Space' Church of St. Ignatius Loyola


Screens With Built-In Alarms Ward Off Both Bugs and Burglars
If a home is a castle, then an alarm system is a moat.
And screened windows and doors that sound alarms are an increasingly popular addition to existing protection systems.
These custom-made security screens look like any other screens, but besides keeping out bugs, they can scare off burglars, too.
Woven into the mesh are wires for electric alarms or optical fibers for fiber-optic alarms.
Both protect against intruders by making a loud noise when the screens are cut or removed -- a whistle, a buzzer or whatever is built into the basic system.


Landmark Bank for Savings reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


METRO DIGEST
REPERCUSSIONS IN DRUG CASE
New York City police officials said the arrests of six officers in a drug-dealing case had guaranteed a re-evaluation of the department's methods for rooting out corruption among its own.
Particularly galling, the officials said, was the failure of what has long been a source of pride for the department: an elaborate internal watchdog mechanism.
Page 1.
The trail to Long Island drug deals.
Page 26.
NEW YORK CITY  CUOMO PROPOSES AND DINKINS OPPOSES
In a clear rebuff to the Governor, Mayor Dinkins sent a letter to the chairman of the state Municipal Assistance Corporation rejecting a plan that the Governor supports to spend $200 million in surplus money from the corporation solely on schools.
Mr.
Dinkins said committing the entire amount to the schools without considering other agencies where the city might reap long-term savings "would be a grave error in public policy." Page 1.
A PLEA IN HAPPY LAND FIRE
The owner of the building that housed the Happy Land social club pleaded guilty to not having an adequate sprinkler system in the building where an arson fire two years ago killed 87 people, many of them Honduran immigrants.
He agreed to perform 50 hours of community service and to pay $150,000 toward a community center for Hondurans living in the Bronx.
Page 27.
Two welfare workers arrested.
Page 27.
REGION  LITTLE AID FOR OLD DRIVERS
Nearly two years ago, a New York State task force urged action to better oversee the driving performance of older motorists.
But the recommendations, with one exception, have yet to be adopted.
The reason, the state says, is money.
Page 29.
SAVING SEAWOLF AND JOBS
Senator Christopher J. Dodd and Representative Sam Gejdenson visit the shipyard in Groton, Conn., where Seawolf submarines are built -- knowing that their jobs, as well as those of the workers there, may be riding on whether the submarine program is saved.
Page 29.
DISABILITY BENEFITS IMPROPERLY DENIED
A Federal judge in New York ruled yesterday that the Federal Government improperly denied disability benefits to 20,000 mentally and physically impaired New Yorkers in the late 1970's and early 1980's by systematically and restrictively misapplying its own eligibility regulations.
Page 29.
CANCER CLINIC IS SCRAPPED
Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center has abruptly scrapped plans to open its first satellite treatment center -- a $2.4 million clinic in Danbury, Conn. -- after encountering strong opposition from Danbury Hospital.
Page 29.
THE BISHOP'S LOVER'S STORY
A Ridgefield, Conn., woman talked about feeling "like a Cole Porter song" when she was with an Irish Bishop who resigned recently among rumors about his secret family.
She described their relationship as one that began in 1973 with flirtation, escalated into passion and crumbled as he pressured her to surrender their son for adoption.
Page 2.
About New York by Douglas Martin 27


Associated Communications Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


International Capital reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Corrections
The "Pulse" chart in The Metro Section on April 23, showing gallons of gasoline used by motorists, included an erroneous introduction that designated the figures incorrectly.
They were not in thousands.
For 1990 in Connecticut, 407 gallons was used per person; in New Jersey, 435; in New York, 332, and in the United States, 459.
For 1991 in Connecticut, 454 was used; in New Jersey, 473; in New York, 385, and in the United States, 480.


Sports of The Times; Striking A Hotter Kind of Cool
WALT FRAZIER popularized what became known as the cool style of playing professional basketball.
As a guard for the Knicks from 1967 to 1973, Frazier became the essence of refinement.
He was a player who didn't get angry but simply got even.
So it was surprising to learn earlier this week that Frazier, who works as a radio analyst on Knicks broadcasts, had nearly lost his temper on air after Sunday's game in which the Knicks eliminated Detroit from the National Basketball Association playoffs.


Sayett Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Disease Detection International reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Financial Data Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Patrick Petroleum Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Overseas Shipholding reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Wahlco Environmental Systems reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


With the Legislators Away, the Children Play


BTR Realty Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Lassonde Industries reports earnings for Qtr to April 4


Clorox Names a New Chief; Investors Cool to the Choice
Talk about a bad first day on the job.
The stock of the Clorox Company lost 5 percent of its value yesterday after the company announced that it had promoted G. Craig Sullivan to chief executive.
The shares ended the day at $49.375, down $2.625, in trading on the New York Stock Exchange.


Moore Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Patents; Pineapple Enzymes For Treating Burns
Two scientists in Cambridge, England, have patented a pair of enzymes derived from pineapples that could prove useful in treating people with serious burns.
Called ananain and comsain, the enzymes were identified by Andrew D. Rowan and David J. Buttle of Strangeway Laboratories in Cambridge.
They are now being incorporated by the Genzyme Corporation of Cambridge, Mass., in a cream that would be used for removing dead tissue from the area of a burn without surgery.
Although the cream would not eliminate the need for skin grafts, Genzyme officials said it could prove much easier than surgery and could help patients lose less healthy tissue as they are treated.


Gothic Hoosier: $350
Before Formica, American cooks rolled dough on the enameled tops of kitchen cabinets called Hoosiers.
The Hoosier Manufacturing Company of Indiana was the original maker; the name became generic.


Writing His Way to the Finish
INTOXICATED BY MY ILLNESS
And Other Writings on Life and Death.
By Anatole Broyard.
Edited by Alexandra Broyard.
Foreword by Oliver Sacks. 135 pp.
New York: Clarkson N. Potter. $18.


Vanity Labels: Good Business Or an Ego Boost?
When pop stars want to flex their muscles, they often do so by setting up their own record companies.
Although generally viewed with skepticism -- such companies are widely referred to within the music business as vanity labels -- personal imprints remain a powerful and seemingly irresistible status symbol: a confirmation that the artist-proprietor is a superstar.
"It's a lube job for the ego," says Peter Grant, a pop manager whose clients included Led Zeppelin and who managed its Swan Song label.
Although there are no real estimates as to how many artist-owned labels exist, their scope and financing vary greatly.
Some are simply vehicles for releasing the star's own recordings.
Others are attempts to find and nurture new artists.
But at the core of such labels is an often complex partnership between the superstar and an established record company.
Artist labels give stars a larger portion of the sale price of their own recordings and offers them a stake in the career of other artists the stars may sign.


The Northwest Passage
Sailing the so-called Northwest Passage is not so unusual a feat as it once was, but it is still a rarity.
Cruise ships have accomplished it only three times -- in 1984, 1985 and 1988.
Last year impassable ice at Point Barrow prevented the Frontier Spirit, an expedition ship with a reinforced hull, from getting through.
This year at least two passenger-carrying vessels will attempt the voyage: the Frontier Spirit for a second time and a true icebreaker, the Kapitan Khlebnikov, which will enter the Canadian Arctic for the first time.


On Sunday; Open Libraries And the Links To Open Doors
"Here they come!" said Eleanore Kalmring, a librarian at the Ridgewood, Queens, branch, ducking behind the reference desk.
At 2:30 Intermediate School 93 across the street lets out, and students charge in, racing for a seat.
In minutes, all are taken.
Kimberly Luo, Beatriz Cintron and Regina Weber -- three fast eighth graders -- bagged a table up front.
They rushed to find books for a report, then Beatriz and Regina eyeballed two cute boys.
"I don't look at boys," said Kimberly.
"Sometimes I look at boys, but when it's for a serious report, I don't look. This paper depends on whether we'll pass."
"It does?" asked Regina, who wasn't looking any more.


Recession's Toll on School Volunteers
WHEN Roberta Leiner started scouting late last fall for parent volunteers to offer indoor lunchtime activities for students at Ardsley's Concord Road Elementary School during the winter months, she was discouraged by the light feedback.
"We didn't get a great response in our initial appeal," said Ms.
Leiner, who is co-chairman of Concord Road's three-year-old program called Helping Enrich Learning Through Lunchtime Options as well as a full-time professional social worker.
"It seemed a little more difficult to find parents this year. We weren't able to offer as wide a variety of programs to the children as we had before. Some of the parents who volunteered during the last two years moved on from Concord Road when their children graduated, but some parents went back to work."


Housing Values in New York City
In a city where trends in housing values are impossible to measure with precision, one rough indication is provided by the United States Census Bureau in newly released data from the 1990 count.
It shows a wide disparity in values -- or at least what people believe their homes are worth.
The census asked people who owned their homes how much they thought they would receive if they were to immediately put them up for sale.
Not surprisingly, perceived values were highest -- over $242,000 -- in most of Manhattan below 96th Street, and in the most affluent neighborhoods of the other boroughs, including Riverdale in the Bronx, Brooklyn Heights and Park Slope, and several sections of eastern Queens and central Staten Island.


Mother's Day Specials and More
IF you like choral music, this is your week in Westchester, with more than half a dozen vocal groups performing.
Today at 4 P.M., the area's only fully professional choir, the Stamford-based Pro Arte Singers under Arthur Sjogren, comes to Grace Episcopal Church in White Plains.
Its lighthearted program, titled "Magic Melodies, Childhood Memories," includes Janacek's "Nursery Rhymes," "Street Cries" of London and Cologne, several Mozart Canons and folk and minstrel songs.
The number to call for more information is 949-0384.
Also coming to the county from Connecticut are the 140 members of the Greenwich Choral Society, with two Mother's Day Musicales, at 5 and 8 P.M. today at the State University of New York at Purchase.
The program, under the director Richard Vogt, includes Brahms's "Liebeslieder" waltzes, in the composer's own edition with chamber orchestra; the Beethoven Choral Fantasy, some Gershwin songs and -- to give the singers a rest and the audience a bonus -- Gershwin's "Rhapsody in Blue." Both soloists are excellent: Lucille Beers, a mezzo-soprano who takes the vocal leads, and David Buechner, the pianist in the Gershwin and Beethoven.
More details can be got by calling 251-6200.


Rangers Squander Lead and Lose
The Rangers got their superstar back tonight, but the Penguins found one of their own to answer him.
Ron Francis scored his third goal of the game 2 minutes 47 seconds into overtime as Pittsburgh defeated the Rangers, 5-4, to even the Patrick Division finals at two games apiece.
Francis deflected a shot from Larry Murphy between his legs, and the puck caromed inside the left post past goaltender John Vanbiesbrouck.


Three Classic Country Houses
UNLIKE the term English country house, which connotes a stately home for a British aristocrat or member of the landed gentry, the concept of an American country house today runs from robber baron chateaus to rustic cottages.
Yet, in the early years of this country, an English-style country seat in a rolling landscape was an ideal as well as a badge of prosperity.
Even in the young state of Maine, an important house would miraculously appear near a town still "hewing at the forests of which it is built," in Thoreau's words.
The wonder of how these elegant houses came to be in the wilderness adds to the pleasure of visiting them now.
Such houses are not necessarily historic, the sites of momentous events.
For example, on a journey down the coast of Maine from Ellsworth to Lubec, devotees of American domestic architecture can explore three architectural gems furnished as they were by the families who lived in them.
Each of the three -- the Colonel Black Mansion in Ellsworth, the Ruggles House in Columbia Falls and, across the bridge from Lubec, the Roosevelt Cottage on Campobello Island -- represents a different aspect of Maine life.


Talking: Reserves; Keeping The Fund Up to Snuff
A GROWING number of co-ops are being forced to seek new ways to build their reserve funds because the traditional sources of such money -- flip taxes, rents from store space and special assessments -- may no longer prove adequate.
Revenues from flip taxes -- the charges a co-op board imposes at the time of an apartment sale -- have declined because sales have slowed.
The recession has made it harder to find store tenants willing to pay good rents, and special assessments on the shareholders are difficult to levy in hard times.


Catholic U. Graduates Told to Live Their Faith
"Translate your faith into a lifetime of service," the Rev.
Edward A. Malloy, C.S.C, president of the University of Notre Dame, told the 810 undergraduates and 640 graduate students at the Catholic University of America's 103d commencement yesterday.
Father Malloy was awarded an honorary doctor of humane letters degree at the commencement, on the steps of the Basilica of the National Shrine of the Immaculate Conception in Washington.


Conversations/Bryan A. Stevenson; Wanted: A Few Good Lawyers For Tough Cases in 'the Deathbelt'
GIVEN the kind of news that has dominated Bryan A. Stevenson's line of work this spring, Mr.
Stevenson might reasonably consider changing careers.
As it happens, reasonableness has never been a hallmark of his line of work.
He represents prisoners on Alabama's death row, and tries to persuade lawyers at well-heeled firms that they should do the same.
It appears to be a losing battle.
Last month, editorials in Alabama papers cheered the state attorney general for challenging a state supreme court decision overturning the death penalty for a 15-year-old.


Guinness Takes a Luxury Tack
When Anthony J. Tennant, the Etonian who turned Grand Metropolitan P.L.C. into a world power in spirits and wines, was recruited to work similar magic at Guinness P.L.C. in 1987, the British brewer and distiller was in disarray.
Its last chairman, Ernest W. Saunders, had been fired and later jailed for his part in illegally manipulating Guinness's stock price to win the 1986 takeover battle for the Distillers Company, which made Guinness the world leader in Scotch and gin.
Distillers had tried to maintain sales volumes of its all-important Scotch business by cutting prices and granting a private label to any distributor who requested one.
But that had only eroded market share and the power of its leading brands, which included Johnnie Walker, Dewar's, White Horse and Old Parr.
Mr.
Tennant has abandoned that strategy and in the process has turned Guinness into one of the world's most profitable beverage companies.
Only the Coca-Cola Company earns more in beverages.
Today, Guinness is indisputably one of the most adept marketers of consumer goods around, a testimony to the power of selling liquor as a luxury rather than a commodity product.


Riots Shook Affluent Blacks Trying to Balance 2 Worlds
A week after the acquittal of four white police officers in the beating of a black motorist and the start of this city's worst riots, a defiant and angry sign still stood at the foot of the most exclusive black neighborhood in town.
Beneath the stucco mansions with their sculpted lawns and satellite dishes, the sign said simply, "Guilty" in four-foot-high, hand-painted letters.


Annie Towe, George Egan
Neely Anne Towe, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Rolf H. Towe of Greenwich, Conn., was married there yesterday to George MacAllister Egan, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert B. Egan of Fox Chapel, Pa.
The Rev.
Neely P. Towe, the bride's mother, performed the ceremony at the Stanwich Congregational Church.
Mrs.
Egan, 27 years old, is known as Annie.
She graduated from the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill and is to receive an M.D. from Yale University this month.
Her father is a managing partner in the Clipper Group, a merchant banking firm in New York.
Her mother is the pastor of the Stanwich church.


Postcards From Pskov
The Church of the Intercession on the Nerl River, near the ancient Russian town of Vladimir, stands silhouetted in the sunset behind a screen of leafless trees, seemingly afloat upon its water meadow.
A traditional peasant house on the banks of the Kamenka, in nearby Suzdal, is partly masked by blossoming fruit trees that spring from a carpet of dandelions.
Snow piles up around the Church of the Resurrection of Christ in Rostov, whose frescoed interior is bathed in a cold winter light.
These are only a few of the romantic and gorgeous images in THE GOLDEN RING: Cities of Old Russia (Abbeville, $45), a book to make any Russophile's heart beat faster.
The nearly 200 images by the Moscow photographer Vadim Gippenreiter, beautifully printed, are accompanied by an admirable text by the Moscow historian Alexei Komech that traces the development of Russian cities in general, and of each of the nine cities under consideration -- Novgorod, Pskov, Vladimir, Suzdal, Zagorsk, Pereslavl, Rostov, Yaroslavl and Kostroma -- in detail.
Mr.
Komech has further provided a clear account of how each building came to be the way it is, and of why it is peculiarly of its time and place.
That many of the monuments pictured are ecclesiastical should come as no surprise: from the evangelization of Russia 1,000 years ago, city centers were dominated by great churches. (Suzdal, a town of 400 households, had nearly 50 churches in the 18th century.) What is a surprise is to learn how much of Russian architectural style was shaped by fiat -- in 1652, for example, Patriarch Nikon forbade the building of tent roofs, and tent roofs were never seen again.
Ivan the Terrible could only wish for such clout.


Kyoko Soda and Shuji Nakano
ON Friday, May 1, at 12:30 P.M., a jet-lagged but nonetheless lovely Kyoko Soda, 27 years old, married Shuji Nakano, 32, in the chapel of the Church Center for the United Nations.
The bride and groom, who had flown in from Tokyo a week before, arrived at the chapel in a white stretch limousine.
Though few people were watching -- only Ms.
Soda's parents and two brothers, who had also traveled from Japan -- the bride emerged from the car with the grace of a ballerina onstage.
She wore a wildflower headband, a lace veil and a dress with big bow in back and long train, all of it as neatly assembled as origami.


Pamela Wheaton, Frank H. Shorr
Dr.
Earl Wheaton of Midland Park, N.J., and Barbara Wheaton of Secaucus, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Pamela M. Wheaton to Frank H. Shorr, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
David Shorr of Babylon, L.I.
An August wedding is planned.
Ms.
Wheaton, 34 years old, graduated from New Hampshire College.
She is a producer in Boston for the Lifetime Cable Network program "Your Baby and Child." Her father is the medical administrator of Valley Hospital in Ridgewood, N.J.


Mary Anne Koubek, Garth R. Smith
Mary Anne Koubek, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Edward Koubek of Annapolis, Md., was married there yesterday to Dr.
Garth Robert Smith, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard Smith of Billings, Mont.
The Rev.
Dennis Foley performed the ecumenical ceremony at St.
Mary's Roman Catholic Church.
Mrs.
Smith, 27 years old, is a nurse at the Center for Specialty Care, an ambulatory surgery center in New York.
She graduated from Towson State University.
Her father is a professor of chemistry at the United States Naval Academy in Annapolis, where her mother, Elizabeth A. Koubek, is a substitute teacher at the Naval Primary School.


POSTINGS: New Role for SoHo Factory; Cast-Iron Loft Restoration
A cast-iron loft building at Prince and Greene Streets that was once home to an electronics manufacturer is to be rebuilt by a partnership that includes Ileana Sonnabend, an art dealer and gallery owner.
The $2.5 million project has been designed by Kapell &amp; Kostow Architects of Manhattan, following by 109 years the work of the original architect, Jarvis Morgan Slade.
"We're restoring the building, as opposed to renovating it," said the architect, Michael G. Kostow.
Missing or deteriorated ornament will be replaced, including finials on the roof.
Windows and storefront bays will be replaced.
A fire escape on the Greene Street side will be removed and a new interior stairway will be constructed.
The building systems -- elevators, sprinklers, electric service -- will be upgraded.
Mr.
Kostow said the work is scheduled to begin this summer and be finished next spring.


The Best Is Gone At Sunrise
BE early, and ye shall find.
"The true vultures are here already," Steve Kaplan observed one recent Sunday at sunrise.
Mr.
Kaplan, an antique toy dealer, was surveying three grimy parking lots on the Avenue of the Americas that are New York's answer to the labyrinthine Marche aux Puces in Paris.
The newest lot, between 26th and 27th Streets, opened last month.


Public &amp; Private; Mommy Dimmest
I think sometimes about a girl I met in Brooklyn.
She was 14, and pregnant, and philosophical.
"If Vanise does it, I can," she said, Vanise being the neighborhood dim bulb, the girl whose conversation ranged from a giggle to a shrug, whose own mother said that if you looked in one of her ears you could see daylight.
Vanise had had a baby, and she was so dim that it was commonplace for her to order a slice at the pizza place and then discover she had no money and be obliged to cadge a buck from a boy. (There was some suggestion of a causal relationship between the slice, the cadging and the baby.) The bottom line was this: If Vanise could do motherhood, then motherhood couldn't be too tough.


A Wall Is a Wall Is a Wall
To the Editor:
Regarding "On Patrol Along the 'Chinese Wall,' " April 19, a Chinese wall need be in place when one representative of an organization is in possession of material nonpublic information concerning a situation while another representative of the same organization continues to trade the securities in question.


A Father and Son Are Close Relatives On Matters of Taste
When father and son both collect on a big scale, anything can happen.
Sometimes an Oedipal drive takes over and, whether consciously or not, the son by implication plays down or even destroys the importance of the father.
If the father lived for nothing but American Impressionism and the son scours the world for vintage teddy bears, something other than filial piety may be diagnosed.
But there have been cases of generational merging and melding in which father and son collected in the same field and with the same institution in mind.
Their activity was friction free, the level of taste was consistent, and the whirligig of time has brought unexpected insights.


Sara Sprung, Charles Eldred
Sara Sprung, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Jerome S. Sprung of Teaneck, N.J., was married yesterday in Purchase, N.Y., to Charles Dominic Eldred, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles Eldred of Binghamton, N.Y.
Rabbi Miriam Ansis performed the ceremony at Old Oaks Country Club.


Soviet Gunboat Gets Close Look As Still a Threat
Navy and civilian experts are poring over a Soviet-built gunboat from the former East German navy in a rare chance to study and operate a ship whose systems were sold to countries like Libya and Syria that could threaten the United States.
In many ways the sleek 184-foot gray patrol boat, now at home at a Navy testing site here, is a poor man's version of American seapower.
Its computer runs on mechanical gears, and the radars are spotty.
But Navy officials say the vessel is the kind of small, affordable weaponry that terrorist states could use in the Persian Gulf and other trouble spots to wreak havoc on more technologically advanced craft.


Fetes Eclectic
Dancing nobles and honors galore, all through the town all week.


Who's Listening?
To the Editor:
Edward Rothstein praises the Pulitzer music jury for nominating Ralph Shapey's "Concerto Fantastique" for this year's prize and then castigates the board for disregarding the recommendation  [ "In the Fracas Over the Prize, No One Won," April 19 ] .
In overturning the recommendation, Mr.
Rothstein reports, Walter Rugaber, a board member, argued that "the board should take into account 'the layman or consumer's point of view.' "


Fordham On Rise In Crew
In 1978 the Fordham crews's boathouse burned to the ground, a victim of vandalism as were all the boats and oars inside.
Then, rowing was dropped as a varsity sport and reverted to club status, which meant vastly reduced funding.
The once vibrant program staggered for a while, but now Fordham crew is flourishing again, thanks in part to an alumni group which raises half of the annual $16,000 budget.


Baskets Return to the Level of Artistry
THERE'S no doubt about it: basketry has finally emerged from its former lowly status among the crafts.
Two stunning shows prove that contemporary baskets can be far more than something to put all the eggs in -- or anything else in, for that matter.
The Sheila Nussbaum Gallery in Millburn has a display of 12 baskets made by Francina and Neil Prince, and the Newark Museum is featuring the work of Michael Davis.
Although these artists use all traditional basketry techniques, the shapes, surface decoration and added colors transmute their vessels into creative works of art.


Rubble, Rubble, Toil and Yet More Trouble
When the backhoes and jackhammers began to rip up Daphne Mahoney's East 14th Street block two years ago, she thought it was for the best.
After all, the workers would be replacing aging water mains and cracked sidewalks.
There would be new trees, lampposts and street signs.
No mere run-of-the-mill street reconstruction, this was to be the burnishing of an entire business district, she was told.


Nancy Adelson, Kenneth Allison
Nancy Robin Adelson, a daughter of Janet A. Hays of New York and the late Dr.
William J. Adelson, was married yesterday to Kenneth Ray Allison, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Ray L. Allison of Columbus, Ga.
The Rev.
Dr.
Anita Farber-Robertson, a Unitarian minister, officiated at the Pingree School in Salem, Mass.
Mrs.
Allison, 31 years old, is an architect with MBT Associates in San Francisco.
She graduated from Yale University and received a master's degree in architecture from Harvard University.
Her late father was a pediatrician and allergist in Sudbury, Mass.
Her mother is the director of marketing at NBBJ Architects in New York.
The bride is a stepdaughter of Dr.
David G. Hays of New York and Paula G. Adelson of Sudbury.


Basia Kolanowska to Marry in July
Mr. and Mrs.
Jan Kolanowski of London have announced the engagement of their daughter Basia Marta Kolanowska to Craig Bradley Coben, a son of Barbara Coben of Livingston, N.J., and the late Carl Coben.
A July wedding is planned.
Ms.
Kolanowska, 30 years old, organizes tours of France for EF Educational Tours of Cambridge, Mass.
She graduated from Oxford Polytechnic in Oxford, England.


Fueling A Frenzy: Swatch
"I AM a grown woman," June Berliner often says to herself.
She was muttering it on a Friday night last month while driving from Beverly Hills to Sherman Oaks, Calif., in hot pursuit of a Chicchirichi packed in an egg carton.
The night before, like a human hyena cunningly circling, she stalked the store entrance closest to the Swatch counter.
Like many so afflicted, Ms.
Berliner lives in a constant state of dread, knowing that at a critical moment her sandal could get stuck in the escalator, slowing her down.
"They make you want it so badly," she said.


An Island Of Innocence And Taste
No one studied the history of music more rigorously -- or ended up more rigorously ignoring it -- than Olivier Messiaen.
The French composer, who died in his sleep two weeks ago at the age of 83, leaves behind an island of music largely untouched by the world around it.
Iconoclasm is the word that comes to mind, but it is the wrong one.
Messiaen toppled no idols, nor did he blaspheme against accepted belief.
He invented his own music as he invented his own religion, and left the politics to true iconoclasts like Schoenberg and Stravinsky.
Messiaen's music and the woozy ardor of his Christian devotions are indivisible.
Rhythm rules the first.
He studied the geometric proportionings of Indian and Far Eastern theory and applied them with mathematical symmetry.
Yet from all this enormous intellectual enterprise emerged a childish innocence.
Abstruse ratiocination produced titles like "Joy of the Star's Blood," "Contemplation of the Prophets, the Shepherds and the Magi" and "The Kiss of the Infant Jesus."


Alison Mills, F. D. LeMaire
Mr. and Mrs.
A.
Slade Mills Jr. of New York have announced the engagement of their daughter Alison Brooks Mills to F. Dominique LeMaire, a son of Jacques H. LeMaire and Francoise J. Woodgate Mills, both of Paris.
An August wedding is planned.
Miss Mills, 27 years old, is a master's degree candidate in the pediatric nurse practitioner program at Yale University.
She graduated from Princeton University and has a degree in nursing from Columbia University.
Her father is the chairman of San Martin Investments, a financial consulting concern in New York.
Her mother, Phyllis J. Mills, is a vice chairwoman of the New York Philharmonic and a trustee of the Mary Flagler Cary Charitable Trust.


Boxer Shorts
ORIGIN -- The name comes not from that long-ago rebellion, but because they resemble what prizefighters wear on the job.
Harold Koda, the director of the National Museum of Fashion at the Fashion Institute of Technology, said boxers became popular after World War I; before 1900, men wore wool underwear.
The museum's collection has boxers in silk or Egyptian cotton.
But unlike their elastic-waist descendants, they have only a tab and some buttons.
A NEW GENERATION OF WEARERS -- Eighteen percent of American men wear boxer shorts, compared with 11 percent in 1986, the Joe Boxer Corporation estimates.
Its sales have jumped from 40,000 a year to two million a year in that time.
"They have a sexiness and a look and a wit, but not a brazen show-me concept," said Jim Nevins, the vice president and creative director of J. Crew, the mail-order and retail company.
Women wear them, too.
Calvin Klein said that by 1988, 20 to 25 percent of their boxers were bought by women.
WHY NOW? -- Faith Popcorn, the chairwoman of Brain Reserve, a trend-research firm in Manhattan, says boxer shorts reflect nostalgia for the 1950's.
"People think, 'Maybe if I wear them, everything will be all right,' the Ozzie and Harriet thing," she said.
WHAT SELLS -- Mr.
Koda called boxers "a canvas of personal expression" that can range from plain to pig prints.
His favorites are Brooks Brothers' yoke-tops, with an extra panel on the front and laces on the back, "a functional requirement when you have a non-elastic waistband," Mr.
Koda said.
J.
Crew sells "The Class of '69," a boxer with college-yearbook photographs on them.
And the big seller, at one Gap store, is a palm-tree print.
"They're a lot of fun," said Liz Fell, a saleswoman, "and you can buy a hat to match."


For Czyz, Lalonde Isn't Hard to Figure
It didn't take long for Bobby Czyz to discover what would work against Donny Lalonde on Friday night.
In the opening round, Czyz, the World Boxing Association cruiserweight champion, uncorked a left hook that spun Lalonde around and sent him sprawling face-first to the canvas.


Songwriter No. 1
To the Editor:
In his article "Stephen Foster's Songs Speak to a Modern Era"  [ April 12 ]  David Browne extends a tradition that ties Foster's music to the values and esthetics of the common people.
Foster's contemporaries said he wrote "the people's song"; in the early 20th century, he acquired the sobriquet "America's troubadour," and now Mr.
Browne has called him, in the language of our times, "America's first pop star."


The Danger of Taxing Business Too Much
The April 19 article "Industry-Aid Bill Stirs Tax Battle" said that a bill recently passed by the New Jersey State Legislature to more equitably spread the tax burden between homeowners and industry could cost residential taxpayers "tens of millions of dollars." As the author of the Business Retention Act, I must disagree with that and point up some poignant facts concerning the bill.
As Mayor of the state's third largest city, I had to weigh arguments for and against the Business Retention Act, and I am convinced that the taxing of business machinery as real property is a very dangerous and real threat to the economic vitality of New Jersey's urban areas.


Corrections
A report last Sunday about the wedding of Dina E. Siegel and Dr.
Ziv Haskal was published prematurely.
The ceremony took place last Sunday, not Saturday.


Democracy At the Derby
To the Sports Editor:
Arazi's defeat was "not good for racing," says one trainer quoted by Joseph Durso ("Back to the Starting Gate in Search for a Star," The Times, May 5).
But the victory of Lil E. Tee (purchased, Durso tells us, for $2,000) over Arazi (recently valued at $18 million) was a triumph in every way.
The dream horse gave his heroic all and came out of the race sound and able to run again, and Lil E. Tee -- shadowed across the finish line by the $7,500 Casual Lies -- confirmed that the grand hopes of modest owners can be realized on the first Saturday in May, and that the sport of kings, among its equine stars, can be relentlessly democratic.
MICHAEL BURNS South Woodstock, Vt.


Help From Many Sources; Repairing Los Angeles: High Enthusiasm and Long Odds
FROM the ravaged streets of South-Central Los Angeles to City Hall to the boardrooms of big corporations, there was a whirl of activity last week directed at putting the nation's second-largest city back together again.
Yet even as the highly publicized efforts were beginning, questions were being raised about whether the momentum for real change can be sustained.


KICKBACK SCANDAL CONVULSES ITALY
With ever more detentions of leading business and political figures, a new kickback scandal is rapidly widening to embrace all of Italy's major political parties, driving an emotional debate over political morality and raising questions about the country's future leadership.
Over the last week, the investigation, initially centering on the Socialist Party of Bettino Craxi, has been broadened to include leading figures from the dominant Christian Democrats and the Democratic Party of the Left, as Italy's retitled former Communist Party is now known.


The Power of a Video Image Depends on the Caption
In the wake of the Los Angeles riots, the videotape of Rodney King being beaten and kicked by a group of police officers will undoubtedly go down in history as defining evidence of the state of American society today.
This is a role usually reserved for photographs, whether Dorothea Lange's pictures of migrant workers in the Depression or Eddie Adams's 1968 photograph of the chief of the South Vietnamese national police summarily executing a Vietcong suspect.
As a number of critics have observed, television today tends to provide the first visual reports of a given situation, while still photographs define the event in the public mind thereafter.
In other words, television offers news, while photographs make history.
In this case, though, it's hard to imagine a still photograph that would have the excruciating impact of the videotape of the beating of Mr.
King.
Shot at night from a distance, the blurry, shaky tape reduces the event to a primal scene with the terrible power of nightmare, as the shadowy figures of the police lash out at the prone figure of Mr.
King, caught in the white glare of headlights.
The tape has a directness and gut-wrenching horror that is seldom found in the routine and closely formatted stories of television news.
Moreover, much of the power of the tape comes from its sheer duration -- the fact that the assault goes on and on, blow after blow.
A single photograph, no matter how powerfully composed, would show only one blow, one kick, and could never adequately convey the shock of the event.


War Veterans in Russia Mourn as They Celebrate
The veterans were out again in the spring sunshine today with their chestfuls of clanging medals and admiring grandchildren, just as they always were on Victory Days past.
Television ran old war movies, politicians paid sounding tributes, and the papers recalled great feats.
But like everything else in a world abruptly turned inside out for Russians, the commemoration was heavy with ironies and questions.
First among them was the most obvious, that the state these aging heroes had defended at such extraordinary cost in World War II no longer existed.


In This Director's Story, Men Are Linked by Broken Bodies
By the time the screenwriter Neal Jimenez had reached his mid-20's, his career seemed golden.
A script that he had written in film school for what would become the well-received "River's Edge" was set for production.
Agents and studios swarmed around dangling job offers even before he graduated from the University of California at Los Angeles.
On a personal level, Mr.
Jimenez's life was more complicated.
He was having a serious affair with a married woman who was considering leaving her husband.


Neptune Journal; Residents Dismayed About Cluttered Museum and Its Curator
THIS community has a rich and varied history.
The last band of New Jersey-born Lenape Indians lived here until 1954.
Jack Nicholson, the movie star, was born here 55 years ago.
Neptune was also the birthplace and childhood home of Isaac Schlossbach, an Arctic explorer who died in 1984.
Ocean Grove, the township's coastal district, was established in 1869 as a Methodist summer colony.
Since then, it has been visited by several United States Presidents, as well as John Philip Sousa, the American march king, who gave summer concerts at the Great Auditorium until 1926.


Editorial Notebook; A Very American Mother
She always disliked Mother's Day, which she derided as a florists' promotion.
Besides, her own birthday was in mid-May and she thought a single tribute from her son and daughter was enough, thank you.
In other respects, hers was a very American story, beginning with her name, Dvora Narefsky.
It was changed to "Dorothy" by an immigration officer when she arrived from Russia at age 7 in 1907.
Her parents, Bertha and Mordecai, were among the millions who sought jobs and dignity in the promised land.


H. Bert Mack, 82, Who Helped Develop the Meadowlands, Dies
H.
Bert Mack, a business executive and philanthropist who was active in Jewish communal affairs, died on Friday at his home in Palm Beach, Fla.
He was 82 years old and also had a home in the Jamaica Estates section of Queens.
His family said he died of lymphoma, said Sam Hartstein, director of public relations at Yeshiva University, where Mr.
Mack was a longtime member of the Board of Overseers.


Lauren Latkany, Rastislav Levicky
Mr. and Mrs.
Robert Latkany of Rye, N.Y., have announced July wedding plans for their daughter Lauren Latkany and Rastislav Levicky, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Vladimir Levicky of Los Alamitos, Calif.
Ms.
Latkany, 22 years old, and Mr.
Levicky, 23, graduated from Columbia University.
She is a trainee at the Hyatt Regency Hotel in St.
Paul.
He is a candidate for a Ph.D. in chemical engineering at the University of Minnesota.


Sarah Nelson, Gregg Dillaway
Sarah Daley Nelson, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
William James Nelson of Damariscotta, Me., was married yesterday to Dr.
Gregg Russell Dillaway, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Guy R. Dillaway of Weston, Mass.
The Rev.
Stephen Mulkern performed the ceremony at St.
Patrick's Roman Catholic Church in Newcastle, Me.
Mrs.
Dillaway, 28 years old, is the assistant director of early childhood education at the Regis College Children's Center in Weston.
Her father, who is retired, was the director of urology at St.
Luke's Roosevelt Hospital Center in New York.


Grace Hammond, Jack F. Boss 3d
Grace Palmer Hammond, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Harry Stevens Hammond Jr. of Branford, Conn., was married yesterday to Dr.
Jack Forrest Boss 3d, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Boss Jr. of North Olmsted, Ohio.
Dr.
J.
Christy Wilson Jr. performed the ceremony at Trinity Episcopal Church in Branford.
Mrs.
Boss graduated from the University of New Hampshire and received a master's degree in Christian education from Princeton Theological Seminary and a master's degree in teaching English as a second language from the University of Hawaii at Manoa.


A STITCH IN TIME
Thank you, Perri Klass (Hers: "A Stitch in Time," April 19).
As a fellow knitter and internist, I've often wanted to knit at conferences and meetings, but this is clearly
verboten
!


Amanda S. Sawyer, Curtiss G. Bruno
Conant Sawyer of Mount Kisco, N.Y., has announced the engagement of his daughter, Amanda Susan Sawyer, and Curtiss Gregory Bruno, the son of Gregory S. Bruno of Maplewood, N.J., and Joyce A. Bruno of Chatham, N.J.
An October wedding is planned.
Miss Sawyer, 33 years old, is an account executive in the USA Network's advertising sales division in New York.
She graduated from Lafayette College.
Her father, who is retired, was a vice president of D.D.B.
Needham Advertising in New York.
She is also the daughter of the late Nancy E. Sawyer.


O'Brien Is Missing, but Life Goes On With Jets
As 83 of a possible 84 players showed up today at Weeb Ewbank Hall on the Hofstra campus for the Jets' minicamp, Coach Bruce Coslet should have expected that he would be asked about the one who was missing: quarterback Ken O'Brien.
"How about the guys that are here?" Coslet said after a first question, on O'Brien, the starter since the last five games of the 1984 season, who has been in limbo since his $1.45 million contract expired at the end of last season.
"It's been talked about. I don't negotiate contracts. I just coach the players when they show up."


Promenade Amid Blossoms
A promenade of spring fashion was much in evidence last Wednesday at the Central Park Conservancy luncheon, held in the spectacular sunken gardens near East 104th Street.
Alleys of exploding apple and cherry blossoms and beds of pink and white tulips circled with purple pansies were some of the delights for the 1,100 guests, who added their own fashion color.


Strike the Gold Finds 13 Lucky
Strike the Gold, maligned and outrun and even sold since he won the Kentucky Derby a year ago, staged a rousing comeback in his new colors today when he outraced six of the most accomplished horses in America to win the $700,000 Pimlico Special and bring a dramatic end to his 12-race losing streak.
It was only four days after the chestnut son on Alydar walked into a large tent on the grounds at Belmont Park in New York to be sold a auction because his three owners were feuding over who should call the shots.
To his doting trainer, Nick Zito, the auction was "outrageous" and the ultimate insult to his colt.


Q and A
Women's Tennis Schedule
Q.
I would like to see a women's professional tennis tournament.
Can you tell me about locations and dates and how to get ticket information? -- Ann Prothero, Palmyra, N.Y.


Bugno Running at His Own Level
Gianni Bugno of Italy is the world cycling champion.
The international federation ranks him No. 1 in the world in its point standing.
He will earn $1 million this year racing a bike.
Everyone knows he is the best in the world.
Well, almost everyone. The main doubter is Bugno himself.


Cherokee Makes Its Grand Entrance
IT will come as no surprise that the automobile industry has been a leader in the necessary but regrettable downsizing of American business.
Plants have closed.
Thousands upon thousands of jobs have been lost.
General Motors has reorganized.
And now there is another small indicator, a drop in the number of passenger-car models available in the United States.
According to Automotive News, the weekly bible of the industry, domestic and foreign manufacturers now sell 555 models, down 36 from the 591 that were available at this time last year.
That compares with a post-World War II high of 614 in 1987 and an all-time high of 621 in 1928.


Love and the Loft Dwellers on MTV Soap
The producers of MTV's ballyhooed new series "The Real World," -- a documentary about life in a SoHo loft -- have finally filmed some romantic footage.
But it was not what they expected.
The producers had been hoping for some romantic involvement among the loft's residents -- seven men and women ages 19 to 26 who agreed to live together and be filmed for 12 weeks.
Alas, no sparks ignited among the inhabitants.


Miss Westerfield, A. W. Bingham 4th
Prof. and Mrs.
H.
Bradford Westerfield of Hamden, Conn., and Watch Hill, R.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Pamela Bradford Westerfield, to Arthur Walker Bingham 4th, the son of Mr.
Bingham 3d of New York and Judith H. Bingham of Paris.
A September wedding is planned.
Miss Westerfield is an assistant vice president in New York of Christie's, the auction house.
She graduated from Yale University, where her father is a professor of international studies and political science.
Her mother, Carolyn E. H. Westerfield, is a city planning consultant in New Haven.


A STITCH IN TIME
Last summer, I learned about kinesthetic intelligence in a class I took on new images of learning at the Institute of Cultural Affairs in Chicago.
Kinesthetic learners listen and learn best when they are moving some part of their bodies.
Perri Klass seems to have discovered this through the experience of knitting.


Aline C. Doino, Mark A. Weiller
Aline Celeste Doino, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William D. Doino of Weston, Conn., was married yesterday to Mark Alexander Weiller, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
William Weiller of Atlanta, , at St.
Michael the Archangel Church in Greenwich, Conn.
Msgr.
William Genuario performed the ceremony.
Mrs.
Weiller, 27 years old, is the marketing manager in the Berkley Publishing division of Time Warner Inc. in New York.
She graduated from the College of the Holy Cross.
Her father is a partner at Ernst &amp; Young in New York.


The Costs of Unification; For Helmut Kohl, Ending the Strike Was Just the First Step
AS politicians and commentators were issuing dire warnings last week that Germany was plunging into chaos, Chancellor Helmut Kohl flew off to New York to address a meeting of American newspaper publishers at the United Nations.
After he returned home, he presided over the opening of an art exhibition and then met with officials who are planning Berlin's bid for the Olympic Games.
Hundreds of thousands of German workers were on strike, leaving mail and garbage uncollected in many cities, trains and planes idle in others, and hundreds of clinics and kindergartens closed.
Parliamentary leaders were feuding over a variety of political issues, and commentators were portraying Mr.
Kohl's Government as adrift or falling apart.


You Know It When You See It, and You're Seeing It More
Twelve signs that pornography is becoming more mainstream:
1.
April 1990: Traci Lords, a former star of X-rated films, appears in John Waters's film "Crybaby."


It's Still Caveat Renter On Collision Waivers
IT has been three years since New York and Illinois banned the sale of collision damage waivers to auto-renters in their states after a period of acute complaint from people who rented autos, and no other state has followed suit.
But 22 other states have enacted some legislation governing the waivers, usually requiring that the customer be told that purchase is optional and that regular auto insurance may make it superfluous.
In addition, legislation to ban the sale of waivers nationally was introduced in Congress last year by Representative Cardice Collins, Democrat of Illinois, but it has made no progress at all.
The states, and now Representative Collins, have taken the legislation route because courts have ruled that collision damage waivers, known also as loss damage waivers, cannot be regulated by state insurance departments because they are not technically insurance, although their effect is the same: They are sold to relieve the renter of the cost of repairs or the cost of replacement in a total loss.


Stingley, in Cap and Gown, Hears Cheers Again
The brightness of his future in the National Football League blinded Darryl Stingley to a life beyond football.
After the New England Patriots drafted him in 1973, Stingley left Purdue University 24 credit hours short of a college degree, a standout receiver with all the hope and promise that is bestowed upon those fortunate enough to be a first-round draft pick.


Seeing Eye Dogs Allowed Here
PLACE: Park Avenue Cafe, 100 East 63d Street.
IDENTITY: Haute Americana.
Opened three and a half months ago by David Burke, the former chef at the River Cafe, and Alan Stillman, the owner of Smith &amp; Wollensky.
MAITRE D': Oliver Rohmann, age 26.
Q. How long have you been a maitre d'?
A. I've been in this business for a while now. I was originally from Dusseldorf.
Q.
Who is here tonight?
A.
There's a newscaster sitting in there now.
I'm not sure if I'm supposed to say the name.
Q.
I saw Chuck Scarborough.
A.
I didn't want that person mentioned by me.
I think even though he's a person of public, he has a right to his privacy, which he is exercising right now while he is having dinner.
Q.
What is it like dealing with all the celebrities?
A.
I didn't have one bad experience with a so-called celebrity.
They are the nicest, most uncomplicated people.
I'm serious.
Joan Rivers I saw again on Sunday.
She is the nicest sweetest person.
Q.
Did she bring her dog Spike?
A. No.
Q.
Do you let dogs in here?
A. I don't think it's considerate to all the other customers. I love dogs. I love cats.
Q.
What about Seeing Eye dogs?
A.
We had a dog two times in here for a lady who was blind, and I didn't have one customer complain.
But that's not a dog.
It is a dog in one way, but that's an instrument for that person to go around and to enjoy what it is for her to enjoy, her dinner.


Think the L.I.E. Is Hot? Try Searingtown Rd.
This letter is in reply to "Want to Speed on the L.I.E.? You'd Better Keep a Sharp Eye Behind You"  [ "About Long Island," April 12 ] .
Want to speed on Searingtown Road?
You don't have to keep a sharp eye out -- nobody cares.


Billy Ball
To the Editor:
George F. Will is entitled to spit on the grave of Billy Martin in his review of "The Last Yankee," by David Falkner (April 5), but he is not entitled to rewrite history in so doing.
When Mr.
Will asserts that Martin was not a "winner" on the field, he is flat wrong.
To begin with, Martin's lifetime managerial winning percentage was .553, an odd figure for a "bad manager." Translated, this means 90 victories a season.
Before Martin took over, his teams had an average winning percentage of .465 (or 76 victories), meaning that throughout his career he turned fifth-place teams into contenders.
His managing was just this side of sorcery.


Men's Style; The Strength of Ease
American Men's wear does not dazzle with range.
No one attempts the scope of Armani, the hedonism of Versace, the I-dare-you whimsy of Gaultier or the deconstructivist ethic of Kawakubo.
Stateside designers and their nervous backers are governed by function, guided by reality and goaded by pragmatism.
With "Wear this suit, get a promotion" as the fashion dictum of the past decade, it's no wonder the local fashion press had come to watch the home team with one eye on the runway and the other on their appointment books.
But by the second day of the New York men's-wear collections last month, editors' agenda books were slammed shut.
Had American designers suddenly realized that suiting up for success no longer rang true?
Was it that they caught their European contemporaries dressing men more sensually and getting away with it?
Perhaps they just got tired of their work looking like one another's.
Or maybe they finally just decided: To hell with projections, let's design some great stuff.


Dr. Washington, G. C. Armstrong
Dr.
Linda Jeanne Washington, a fellow in pulmonary medicine at the Hospital of the University of Pennsylvania in Philadelphia, and Gregory Clark Armstrong, an associate at Bankers Trust in New York, are engaged to be married.
A September wedding is planned.
Dr.
Washington graduated cum laude from Harvard University and has a medical degree from Yale University.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Milton Washington of Pittsburgh.
Her father is president of the Allegheny Housing Rehabilitation Corporation in Pittsburgh.
Her mother, Dr.
Nancy Washington, is an assistant dean of student affairs at the University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine.


The World; Food Production And the Birth Rate Are In a New Race
WITHOUT a huge increase in food production in the developing world, demographers are saying, millions more Africans, Latin Americans and Asians will be born in the coming century only to face short and miserable lives marked by poverty and near-starvation.
The United Nations is trying to prove the demographers wrong with a decade-long crash family planning program.
But without success from such an effort, the United Nations warned last month, the world faces "four decades of the fastest growth in human numbers in all history," with its population likely to double from 5.4 billion today to 10 billion by 2050 before leveling off around 11.5 billion after the year 2150.
Some 97 per cent of this increase is expected to occur in today's developing nations.


After 25 Bitter Years, Newark Faces Down Its Ghost
It has been 25 years since Newark experienced what Los Angeles just went through.
But unlike other riot-torn cities of that era, Newark found that its economic shoulders were not broad enough to sustain a recovery, and those five days in July 1967 became the city's defining moment and its unwanted legacy.
In the last 10 days, though, something seemed to change.
Newark stood up to the specter that haunts it, stared back and didn't blink.
The threat of violence, which exerted a tidal pull that washed across the city's business district for several days, subsided.
The city was not remade, but neither was it undone.


When Postermania Gripped Belgium
AT least one British writer has deplored the imminent "United States of Europe" on the grounds that, with everyone wearing the same clothes, it will no longer be possible to make fun of foreigners for their appearance.
Fears (and jokes) about the New European Community are not confined to Britain, of course.
And, in his foreward to the catalogue for "Homage to Brussels," at the Zimmerli Museum here, the Belgian Ambassador, Juan Cassiers, seeks to allay them, stressing the importance of national identity.


FACING UP TO INDUSTRIAL POLICY
Industrial policy advocates like Robert Kuttner can cogently argue that this or that Government policy, like the regulation of financial markets, needs change ("Facing Up to Industrial Policy," April 19).
But the problem is that they try to cobble these specific needs into a grand design called industrial policy.
In theory, a grand design sounds reasonable, but in practice, it will fail, because it must be implemented by Washington bureaucrats and politicians -- the same folks who gave us the savings-and-loan debacle.
BENJAMIN WRIGHT
Dallas


At Yale Repertory, S. J. Perelman's 'Beauty Part'
IN contemporary theater lore, few flops have been as celebrated, mulled over and positively entitled to cult status as "The Beauty Part," which S. J. Perelman wrote for the incomparable Bert Lahr in multiple roles.
Beyond the curiosity part, though, does Mr.
Perelman's peculiar play rate a revival?
Really?
The answer, based on the hearty and spirited current Yale Repertory production would seem to be a resounding, why not?


Need a Stock Photo? Find a Compute Disk
IN an effort to standardize the electronic merchandising of stock pictures, four picture agencies and two manufacturers have joined to offer a system for creating and selling compact disks for displaying stock pictures.
Their product, CD-ROM disks, which will be marketed for use in desktop publishing, advertising and other forms of computer graphics, are intended to replace catalogues of pictures, which are costly to produce, to mail and to redesign as picture tastes change.


Streetscapes: Monumental Parallels; The Arch and the Bandshell
AN impressive monument is built in a major public space and hailed for its beauty.
Later, it falls into disrepair and is criticized as an eyesore.
The city calls for its demolition.
Activists are unable to keep it on site, but a distant town offers to disassemble and reuse it, and does.
A telescoped history of Central Park's Naumburg Bandshell, which Peekskill, N.Y., now wants to reuse?
No, this is an account of the 1898 Dewey Arch at 24th Street and Fifth Avenue, which was taken by Charleston, S.C., in 1901.
But those hoping to preserve the bandshell through relocation cannot draw too optimistic a parallel; the relocated portions of the arch vanished from Charleston in 1902.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-15  POOR BUYERS FOR U.S. GOODS


Winifred Welch, Alexander Fuster
Winifred Marcia Welch, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph F. Welch of New York, was married yesterday in Reading, Pa., to Alexander Fuster, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
J.
M.
Fuster of Panama City, Panama.
The Rev.
Stanley Johnson performed the ceremony in Christ Episcopal Church.
Mrs.
Fuster, 28 years old, is the product and market development manager for the Bachman Company, a snack foods concern in Reading of which her father is president and chief executive.
She graduated from Dartmouth College and received an M.B.A. from Stanford University.


Alison Fontaine, Peter E. Engel
Alison Whitney Fontaine, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John C. Fontaine of New York, was married yesterday in Stapleton, S.I., to Peter Edwin Engel, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Peter H. Engel of Glendale, Queens.
The Rev.
William A. F. Blasingame performed the ceremony at St.
Paul's Memorial Episcopal Church.
Mrs.
Engel, 26 years old, is an account executive at the New York advertising agency of Ammirati &amp; Puris.
She graduated from Dartmouth College and received a master's degree in communications from Syracuse University.
Her father, a partner in the New York law firm of Hughes, Hubbard &amp; Reed, is also the general counsel and a senior vice president of Knight-Ridder Inc. in Miami.


Networking; Just What's on a Certain PC?
Once a network grows beyond a certain size, keeping track of how each personal computer is configured -- the type of central processing unit, amount of memory, size of hard disk, etc. -- becomes a record-keeping torment.
"When you have 20 or 30 users, it's possible to physically go to their PC's to audit them. But when you have 100 or more, it is impossible," lamented Steven Pearson, computer support coordinator for the Imperial Holly Corporation, a Texas-based sugar maker.


National Parks
To the Editor: John Brannon Albright's warning about crowded national parks ("U.S. Parks: Ever More Popular," March 15) is necessary and most unheeded, unfortunately so in both cases.
The plague of recreational vehicles and inhabitants is particularly vexing.
However, I disagree with Mr.
Albright's comment, "Some parks are underused." He cites Isle Royale National Park in Lake Superior specificially.
Isle Royale is accessible only by boat or float plane; there are no roads or automobiles.
It is easy enough to get to Isle Royale in the summer, when it is open, but you have to make an effort.


Benefits
To Aid the Blind
May 10 -- The 17th annual Iris Ball for the Manhattan League of the Helen Keller Services for the Blind will be held at the Metropolitan Club, 1 East 60th Street.
Cocktails at 7 P.M. will be followed by dinner and dancing.
Black tie.
Tickets, $300, from (212) 285-7029.


Kristine Barton, Kenneth Fishman
Kristine Elizabeth Barton, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James Newcomb Barton of New Canaan, Conn., and Kenneth Alan Fishman, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Alfred Fishman of Plainview, N.Y., were married Friday in Evanston, Ill.
The Rev.
Dr.
Timothy Stevens, a Congregational minister, and Rabbi Pavel Slavensky officiated at the interdenominational ceremony at the Alice Millar Chapel of Northwestern University.
Mrs.
Fishman, 26 years old, is the director of marketing for Compulit Inc., a litigation-support-services company, in Chicago.
She graduated from Northwestern University.
Her father is the director of general services for the Union Carbide Corporation in Danbury, Conn.


An Ode to Joy on Broadway
I have little doubt that you will cry tears of heartbreak at "Falsettos," the William Finn/James Lapine musical at the Golden Theater.
But long before the story it tells -- a story of friends, lovers and families in the age of AIDS -- takes the turn that is so rending, you may find yourself crying for another reason -- because artists are at work and their artistry is pure and beautiful.
Whatever the pleasures of "Guys and Dolls" and "Crazy for You," the reigning musicals of the current Broadway season, they are the pleasures of yesterday.
Mr.
Finn and a cast of seven gifted performers will tell you about today.
They will tell you what it's like to live in the flux, to grab for certainties and have them crumble, to turn to a relationship for comfort only to discover that it has altered and comfort is no longer there.
They will also show you that it is possible to hold to the ground, "when the ground keeps shifting," to forge new alliances that take the place of the old and to experience joy in what often seems an era of inconsolable grief.


Israel Commemorates Start of the Holocaust
Each year Israel offers a medal commemorating some facet of its history or present circumstances.
This year the design is as disturbing as any.
To commemorate the 50th anniversary of the Wannsee Conference, at which Nazi Germany's leaders formulated their policy to exterminate the Jews of Europe, Israel is offering a medal in bronze, silver or gold depicting the horrible aftereffects of that gathering.
The conference, which was held just outside Berlin, sealed the fate of millions of Jews.
To the Nazis, the "Final Solution" became a simple problem of transportation, housing and processing.


Crime
Mary Higgins Clark pushes buttons we never dreamed we had when she invites us, in ALL AROUND THE TOWN (Simon &amp; Schuster, $22), to identify with Laurie Kenyon, a 21-year-old college student who is accused of murdering a charismatic professor.
A victim of multiple personality disorder, the result of having been kidnapped and sexually abused as a child, Laurie comes to believe that one of her alter selves did the deed.
But while she undergoes intensive psychiatric therapy to regain the memories of her traumatic ordeal, and while her lawyer sister struggles to prepare a trial defense, the wicked couple who abducted Laurie have returned to town to silence her for good.
Along with the judge on this case, the reader might very well lift an eyebrow and say, "Well, I've been on the bench for 20 years and I've never seen anything like this." But there's no denying the author's formidable storytelling powers.
This is suspenseful stuff, handled with absolute authority.
Ms.
Clark's story sense has grown in sophistication since she began writing of helpless women and children in distress in books like "The Cradle Will Fall" and "Where Are the Children?" Besides doling out the visceral thrills in well-calibrated increments, she also knows how to translate more complex psychological terrors into simple, scary prose.
There is cunning here, and much craft.


In Wake of 3 Killings, New Alarm Over Guns
ON a late afternoon in February, the lights had begun to flick on in the buildings along South Columbus Avenue here.
Outside on the cold winter street, just a few doors down from his house, a 16-year-old Mount Vernon High School junior, the winner of a Most Valuable Player Award for football, lay on the sidewalk mortally wounded with a bullet in his side.
Hours before the shooting, which happened three days before Valentine's Day this year, the popular student had walked in his front door carrying a large, red-and-white stuffed teddy bear with a ribbon on it that read, "I Love You," and had asked his mother where to order a dozen roses, also for his girlfriend.


May 3-9: Egypt; Islamic Militants Target A Coptic Christian Town
Coptic Christians, who make up 6 million of Egypt's 58 million people, have seen their fortunes ebb and flow since first confronting Islam in 7th-century Egypt.
In the last decade, with the rise of Islamic fundamentalism, the Christians, like the Jews, have been singled out as heretics who defile Islamic soil.
So last week, when a raid by Muslim militants against Copts in southern Egypt left 14 people dead and five children wounded, the attack was grounded in more than family feuds, old grudges and property disputes.
Those elements were present, to be sure: A Christian family,refusing to accede to demands by neighboring militants that they sell their home to Muslims, shot and killed two militants in March.
So last week, a gang of militants with pistols, rifles and knives descended on the farming village of Manshiet Nasser in the midst of its wheat harvest, killing 12 farmers in the fields, a teacher in his classroom and a doctor in his home.


Bring Patience to Czechoslovakia
To the Editor:
"Capitalist Free-for-All in Czechoslovakia" (April 12) failed to convey the scope of the changes.
Almost all Czechoslovak industry will have been dramatically affected within a period of 18 months.


Brijit Bertsche, Jonathan Reis
Brijit Meehan Bertsche, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Copeland G. Bertsche of Montclair, N.J., was married there yesterday to Jonathan Scott Reis, a son of Peter R. Reis of White Bear Lake, Minn., and Mary Reis White of Wayzata, Minn., The Rev.
Nicholas T. Cooke performed the ceremony at St.
Luke's Episcopal Church.
Mrs.
Reis, 27 years old, graduated cum laude from Cornell University, from which she expects to receive an M.D. later this month.
Her father is an attorney with A.T.&amp;T. in Morristown, N.J.
Her mother, Andree Bertsche, is an associate broker with Stanton Realtors in Montclair.


BEST SELLERS: May 10, 1992
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
9
THE PELICAN BRIEF, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $22.50.) A woman law student seeks to discover the truth about the murder of two Supreme Court justices.
2
2
3
ALL AROUND THE TOWN, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $22.) The plight of a college student accused of killing her professor, and the part a childhood experience plays in it.
3
3
3
"I" IS FOR INNOCENT, by Sue Grafton. (Holt, $18.95.) Kinsey Millhone investigates the case of a man once charged with murdering his rich wife.
4 *
4
4
JAZZ, by Toni Morrison. (Knopf, $21.) A couple in the Harlem of the 1920's learn again and again that life does not keep its promises.
5
5
13
RISING SUN, by Michael Crichton. (Knopf, $22.) The mysterious death of a young woman leads to an investigation in which technology and the American-Japanese rivalry play major roles. (LP)
6
6
3
FOR LOVE ALONE, by Ivana Trump. (Pocket, $22.) The experiences of a Czechoslovak-born skier married to a wealthy entrepreneur from an old New York family.
7
15
2
FRENCH SILK, by Sandra Brown. (Warner, $18.95.) The ordeal and romance of a New Orleans businesswoman suspected of killing a television evangelist.
8
10
107
OH, THE PLACES YOU'LL GO! by Dr. Seuss. (Random House, $12.95.) Verse and pictures.
9
7
20
DISNEY'S BEAUTY AND THE BEAST. (Gallery Books/Penguin USA, $6.98.) A retelling of the classic fairy tale in words and pictures.
10
9
11
THE ROAD TO OMAHA, by Robert Ludlum. (Random House, $23.95.) A retired general and a lawyer scheme to take possession of Nebraska on behalf of an obscure Indian tribe. (LP)
11
8
9
THE ELF QUEEN OF SHANNARA, by Terry Brooks. (Del Rey/Ballantine, $22.) The third volume in a series about a fantasy land.
12
13
31
SCARLETT, by Alexandra Ripley. (Warner, $24.95.) The sequel to "Gone With the Wind."
13
11
12
VOX, by Nicholson Baker. (Random House, $15.) A man and a woman learn about each other through a telephone conversation on an "adult party line."
14
14
3
SILENT PREY, by John Sandford. (Putnam, $21.95.) A retired cop and a New York policewoman join hands to track down an escaped serial killer.
15
12
6
ACTS OF FAITH, by Erich Segal. (Bantam, $23.) The stories of three Brooklyn natives, one of whom rises high in the Roman Catholic hierarchy, two who break with their traditional Jewish heritage.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
3
3
GIVE WAR A CHANCE, by P. J. O'Rourke. (Atlantic Monthly, $20.95.) Satirical essays on recent social and political developments.
2
1
15
REVOLUTION FROM WITHIN, by Gloria Steinem. (Little, Brown, $22.95.) The reflections of a feminist on the struggle to achieve self-esteem.
3
2
8
ROGUE WARRIOR, by Richard Marcinko with John Weisman. (Pocket, $22.) The memoirs of the retired commander of a counterterrorist unit.
4
5
25
BACKLASH, by Susan Faludi. (Crown, $24.) A journalist contends that the media and political groups are staging a war against women's rights.
5
4
10
DOUBLE CROSS, by Sam Giancana and Chuck Giancana. (Warner, $22.95.) Two relatives of the late Sam Giancana recall his life in the Mafia.
6
6
3
HIGH TREASON 2, by Harrison Edward Livingstone. (Carroll &amp; Graf, $25.95.) Charges of a cover-up after the death of John F. Kennedy.
7
7
30
DEN OF THIEVES, by James B. Stewart. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $25.) How Ivan Boesky, Michael Milken, Martin Siegel and Dennis Levine plundered and created havoc on Wall Street.
8
8
5
REINVENTING GOVERNMENT, by David Osborne and Ted Gaebler. (Patrick/Addison-Wesley, $22.95.) How government should operate.
9
9
6
THE DISUNITING OF AMERICA, by Arthur M. Schlesinger Jr. (Norton, $14.95.) A historian considers the current emphasis on ethnicity.
10
14
23
MEMORIES, by Ralph Emery with Tom Carter. (Macmillan, $19.95.) The autobiography of a country-music broadcaster.
11
12
14
MAUS II, by Art Spiegelman. (Pantheon, $18.) An Auschwitz survivor's story, in comic-book form.
12
11
2
TWO NATIONS, by Andrew Hacker. (Scribners, $24.95.) A political scientist discusses the way racism affects American life, keeping blacks and whites separate, hostile and unequal.
13
15
6
EARTH IN THE BALANCE, by Al Gore. (Houghton Mifflin, $22.95.) The Tennessee Senator discusses factors affecting the environment.
14
1
HEAD TO HEAD, by Lester Thurow. (Morrow, $25.) An economist considers the upcoming economic battle among Japan, Europe and the United States.
15 *
13
4
BARCELONA, by Robert Hughes. (Knopf, $27.50.) The story of the Spanish city through 15 centuries.
16 *
25
TOUJOURS PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Knopf, $20.) The charms of rustic France, as savored by a London advertising man who moved there.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
1
12
A RETURN TO LOVE, by Marianne Williamson. (HarperCollins, $20.) Ways to replace feelings of fear with feelings of love in daily life.
2
2
3
THE JUICEMAN'S POWER OF JUICING, by Jay Kordich. (Morrow, $15.) A program for staying healthy and trim by consuming fresh fruit and vegetable juices.
3
3
23
MORE WEALTH WITHOUT RISK, by Charles J. Givens. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) An updated and expanded volume of financial advice.
4
3
THE ART OF WORLDLY WISDOM, by Baltasar Gracian. (Currency/Doubleday, $15.) Advice on how to live and labor; the work of a 17th-century Spanish Jesuit scholar.
5
4
23
HOW TO SATISFY A WOMAN EVERY TIME, by Naura Hayden. (Bibli O'Phile/Dutton, $14.95.) Sexual counsel for married couples.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,050 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 28,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.
And Bear in Mind
(Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)
FRANK CAPRA: The Catastrophe of Success, by Joseph McBride. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $27.50.) A comprehensive biography of the wizard director of "common-man" movies that were actually informed (as the author shows) by Capra's right-wing politics.
UNSILENT REVOLUTION: Television News and American Public Life, 1948-1991, by Robert J. Donovan and Ray Scherer. (Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars/Cambridge University, cloth, $49.95; paper, $17.95.) A history of the broadcast images that have largely molded our minds over the last 40 years.
THE LIVING, by Annie Dillard. (HarperCollins, $22.50.) Ms.
Dillard's novel, in a genuine epic mode, concerns what befell nearly everyone in the 19th-century Washington Territory.
DRIVEN PATRIOT: The Life and Times of James Forrestal, by Townsend Hoopes and Douglas Brinkley. (Knopf, $30.) This book unravels many mysteries about the Wall Street whiz who became our first Secretary of Defense and who killed himself in 1949.
RACE: How Blacks and Whites Think and Feel About the American Obsession, by Studs Terkel. (New Press, $24.95.) Conversations with people, mostly from the Chicago area, a number of whom seem still to have convictions that encourage us to hope.
THE SHRINE AT ALTAMIRA, by John L'Heureux. (Viking, $19.) A stark, cleanly told novel of guilt and redemption following a hideous act of child abuse; the climax is unspeakably terrible.
THE BUSINESS OF FANCYDANCING: Stories and Poems, by Sherman Alexie. (Hanging Loose Press, cloth, $18; paper, $10.) A collection (the author's first) that deals comically and poignantly with basketball, convenience stores, cars and other artifacts of everyday life; set mostly in the Pacific Northwest.


To the Barricades in Defense of American Classics
Maybe this is just a test pattern, or maybe it's the real thing, but last week, I heard the ugliest rumor to hit New York since they tore down Penn Station.
Pray God that it's a false alarm, of course.
But these days, it often seems that the uglier the rumor, the more likely it is to be true, so herewith, a warning to the citizenry -- not that they can do a damn thing about it, except cry, and maybe throw their radios out the window.
The rumor is that the current L.A.-based owners of WNEW-AM are about to sell their precious call letters to another group of L.A.-based owners, concerning which group all the rumor has to say so far is that it is most unlikely to continue playing the great American standards that have been WNEW's staple, and its glory, for over half a century, or at least five generations in musical time.


Revenge of the Dumped
THE FIRST WIVES CLUB
By Olivia Goldsmith.  480 pp. New York: Poseidon Press. $22.


Rebel Inmates Surrender in Peru
Almost 600 Shining Path terrorists who were holed up in Lima's maximum security prison surrendered today after 300 police stormed the cellblock the guerrillas occupied.
At least 45 wounded terrorists were carried out of Canto Grande prison by ambulances.
During the four-day siege, 11 terrorists and 2 policemen died, but police officials gave no indicatio of the total number of casualties as the siege ended.


One Director, Two Routes To American Indian Travail
The murder mystery "Thunderheart" and the documentary "Incident at Oglala" feature dramatic aerial shots in which the camera swoops down and glides across the vast Badlands of South Dakota.
The scenes, filmed on the Pine Ridge Indian Reservation, are remarkably similar.
But this is no case of plagiarism, unless you count a director borrowing from himself.
Michael Ap ted is behind both films, which offer fictional and nonfictional versions of the same story -- the exploitation of American Indians by the United States Government in the 1970's, with effects that reach into the present.
The fictional version speaks eloquently to the heart, while the documentary makes a cogent appeal to the mind; but the films did not start out as neat companion pieces.
Mr.
Ap ted was already shooting "Oglala" when he agreed to direct "Thunderheart." Acclaimed for documentaries such as the recent "35 Up" and fiction films such as "Coal Miner's Daughter," Mr.
Apted was a more natural choice for this material than any Englishman might seem.
His sense of texture and his ability to capture characters at revealing moments of crisis infuse both of his current films.


Jane M. Zennario and John J. Bolebruch
Jane Margaret Zennario, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John L. Zennario of Atlantic Highlands, N.J., was married in New York last night to John Joseph Bolebruch, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John Bolebruch of Raleigh, N.C.
The Rev.
Brian Lathrop, an Episcopal priest, officiated at the University Club.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: May 10, 1992
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
15
THE FIRM, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $5.99.) A young lawyer learns that his firm is engaged in secret, possibly illegal activities.
2
4
"H" IS FOR HOMICIDE, by Sue Grafton. (Fawcett, $5.99.) The private eye Kinsey Millhone on the trail of perpetrators of an insurance scam.
3
15
FRIED GREEN TOMATOES AT THE WHISTLE STOP CAFE, by Fannie Flagg. (McGraw-Hill, $6.95.) Life in rural Alabama.
4
3
AS THE CROW FLIES, by Jeffrey Archer. (Harper Paperbacks, $6.50.) A man strives to create the biggest store in the world.
5
4
THE SECRET, by Julie Garwood. (Pocket, $5.99.) A 12th-century English belle finds romance.
6
2
ASPEN GOLD, by Janet Dailey. (Little, Brown, $5.99.) A woman returns to her native Colorado to face a choice: fame in Hollywood or love with an old flame.
7
53
THE PRINCE OF TIDES, by Pat Conroy. (Bantam, $5.99.) Complex family relationships in South Carolina's low country and New York City.
8
12
LOVES MUSIC, LOVES TO DANCE, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Pocket, $5.99.) Two women get caught in the snare of a serial killer.
9 *
3
SKY MASTERS, by Dale Brown. (Berkley, $5.99.) The United States Air Force goes to the aid of the Philippines in a war with China in 1994.
10
3
THE SEERESS OF KELL, by David Eddings. (Del Rey/Ballantine, $5.99.) The fifth volume in the fantasy series "The Malloreon."
11
4
A TIME TO KILL, by John Grisham. (Wynwood, $9.95.) Racial tensions surface during a trial.
12 *
2
SHADOWS OF YESTERDAY, by Sandra Brown. (Warner, $4.99.) A widow in a crisis is rescued by a man who hides his past; first published in 1983 as "Relentless Desire."
13
11
HEARTBEAT, by Danielle Steel. (Dell, $6.50.) A chance meeting of a man and a woman, both successful in television, brings them happiness.
14 *
1
THE COVENANT OF THE FLAME, by David Morrell. (Warner, $5.99.) Pursuing a murderer in New York, a woman reporter and a policeman come upon a 2,000-year-old secret global conflict.
15
6
LONGSHOT, by Dick Francis. (Fawcett, $5.99.) An author of survival guides attempts to write about the world of horse racing.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
2
CRUEL DOUBT, by Joe McGinniss. (Pocket, $5.99.) The tribulations of a North Carolina woman whose son was accused of planning the murder of herself and her husband.
2
3
AMERICA: WHAT WENT WRONG? by Donald L. Barlett and James B. Steele. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $6.95.) How the practices of Washington lawmakers and Wall Street deal makers have benefited a few Americans at the expense of most.
3
4
JFK: CONSPIRACY OF SILENCE, by Charles A. Crenshaw with Jens Hansen and J. Gary Shaw. (Signet, $4.99.) A Dallas surgeon tells what he observed while treating the dying John F. Kennedy and Lee Harvey Oswald.
4
51
YOU JUST DON'T UNDERSTAND, by Deborah Tannen. (Ballantine, $10.) The different languages men and women speak.
5
8
IF YOU REALLY LOVED ME, by Ann Rule. (Pocket, $5.99.) The bizarre family relationships behind the murder of the wife of an entrepreneur.
6
9
YOU'LL NEVER EAT LUNCH IN THIS TOWN AGAIN, by Julia Phillips. (Signet, $6.99.) Life in Hollywood as experienced by a producer.
7
43
A YEAR IN PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A sojourn in the south of France.
8
12
IRON JOHN, by Robert Bly. (Vintage, $11.) The passage of the male from boyhood into manhood, as practiced in various cultures.
9 *
444
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Psychological and spiritual inspiration by a psychiatrist. (LP)
10
130
LOVE, MEDICINE, AND MIRACLES, by Bernie S. Siegel. (Harper Perennial, $8.95.) The importance of a patient's mind and emotions.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
39
LIFE'S LITTLE INSTRUCTION BOOK, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $5.95.) Some 500 tips for achieving a self-fulfilling life.
2
8
ATTACK OF THE DERANGED MUTANT KILLER MONSTER SNOW GOONS, by Bill Watterson. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $8.95.) "Calvin and Hobbes" cartoons.
3
87
THE T-FACTOR FAT GRAM COUNTER, by Jamie Pope-Cordle and Martin Katahn. (Norton, $2.50.) How to reduce fat in one's diet.
4
3
LIVE AND LEARN AND PASS IT ON, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $5.95.) Morsels of what they've learned about life, from people aged 5 to 95.
5
68
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $9.95.) Principles for success.


The Jury Said, 'I'm White, and You're Wrong'
To the Editor:
The not-guilty verdict for the police officers who beat Rodney King in Los Angeles is not justice but jive.
Anyone who looks at the videotape of Mr.
King's beating and says this was not a case of assault with a deadly weapon is missing a vital body nerve center.
Yet it should surprise no one who has lived in this country and seen or participated in the hundreds of daily acts of division that have become politics as usual from the White House in Washington to the white houses in the suburbs.


Prison Reaches Back To Its Farm Origins
DRESSED in a T-shirt and sweatpants, her hair falling into soft brown curls, Marie Rossignol recalled matter of factly the autumn night 27 years ago when the police arrested her in Hartford, accusing her of having sexual relations with a man to whom she was not married.
Though she lived as a guest in the man's apartment, they had a platonic arrangement and slept in separate bedrooms, said Ms.
Rossignol, an inmate at the Connecticut Correctional Institution in Niantic.
Nevertheless, the police broke down their front door late one night, handcuffed Ms.
Rossignol, took her to the police station, charged her with "lascivious carriage" and put her in jail.
In addition, two months later she was convicted of the crime "manifest danger of falling into vice," a charge brought against women pregnant out of wedlock, after doctors at the jail discovered that the unmarried 17-year-old was five months pregnant.


May 3-9: 'Mosquitoes to Ants'; After a Rough Week, Perot Calls Time Out
His supporters view him as the Man on the White Horse, but last week Ross Perot, who is considering a run for the Presidency, learned that such a steed could also be a bucking bronco.
After weeks of largely laudatory press, Mr.
Perot ran into the hard realities of a political campaign including scrutiny by reporters.


South Korea's Vietnam Veterans Begin to Be Heard
The tales of chaotic battles in Vietnamese jungles are much the same as those heard in the United States.
The anger at a government that some say used its young men as pawns in a cold war power game is also familiar.
But the faces of these bitter Vietnam veterans are different: They are Korean, and after years of bearing their hurt in near silence, they are finally being recognized for their role in a war few know South Korea fought.
It is almost as little known here as it is in the West, but South Korea sent 312,853 solders to Vietnam from Sept. 22, 1963, to April 30, 1975, according to the Defense Ministry.
After the United States, South Korea had the largest contingent of soldiers fighting Hanoi.


Wall Street; DVI, the Wizard and the S.E.C.
When Jay A. Pritzker's name shows up in print -- in Forbes magazine's roster of the super-rich, for example -- it often is preceded by the term "financial wizard." His family's fortune, built on the bedrock of the Hyatt Hotel chain, conjures up visions of blue chips and gilt-edged deals.
Such visions do not color the corporate history of the DVI Health Services Corporation, a medical equipment leasing company currently marketing two million new common shares.
DVI Health, based in Irvine, Calif., was first sold to the public in 1986 by a tiny brokerage firm that no longer exists.
Its more recent underwriting business has been handled by Stratton Oakmont, which is defending itself against charges of sales fraud and stock manipulation brought in March by the Securities and Exchange Commission.
Moreover, DVI Health is a significant investor in three other Stratton deals involving DVI's major customers.


Unbalanced
What's wrong with the proposed constitutional amendment to make Congress balance the budget each year?
Only that it's wrong in principle and destructive in practice.
It may sound like a direct remedy for Washington's toying with trillions in deficit spending.
In fact, such an amendment would threaten precisely the long-term investments society needs most and risk pushing a soft economy into icy recession.
These risks aren't warranted.
Congress has to get control over spending on medical care and other entitlements.
But that can be done without perilous grandstanding.
The amendment is no solution; it's an unbalanced problem.


The Jury Said, 'I'm White, and You're Wrong'; Violence in Our Hearts
To the Editor:
The outrage and violence that followed the trial of four police officers for beating Rodney King was, unfortunately, predictable and all too understandable.
What shocked many, what appeared incomprehensible, was the jury's verdict.


Teen-Ager Charged in a Subway Station Slaying
A teen-ager who was being chased along a Brooklyn subway platform by five other teen-agers after a confrontation on a train was arrested yesterday on charges that he stabbed one of the youths to death, the police said.
The stabbing took place at about 1:40 P.M.
Friday at the Seventh Avenue station on the D line, a Transit Authority police spokesman, Lieut.
Robert Valentino, said.


Paula Carr, Mark Lindblom
Mr. and Mrs.
Ambrose A. Carr Jr. of New York and Quogue, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter Paula Michelle Carr to Mark Norwood Lindblom, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Norwood W. Lindblom of Short Hills, N.J.
An October wedding is planned.
Miss Carr is a vice president of Chemical Bank in New York.
She graduated from Middlebury College and received an M.B.A. degree from New York University.
She is a member of the New York Junior League.
Her father, who is retired, was a managing director of I.B.M.


Time to Change Date of the Primary?
HO-HUM.
In a nutshell, that sums up the prevailing mood of political experts, party leaders and the public as the state's June 2 Presidential primary approaches.
To be sure, sparks are expected to fly in state and local races.
But with President Bush already assured the Republican nomination and Gov.
Bill Clinton a clear front-runner on the Democratic side, experts say that New Jersey voters, among the last in the nation to vote, will have little if any impact in deciding who runs for President in November.


Sports of The Times; Another Milestone For Eddie Murray
SOME baseball players need to pass a milestone to be recognized, to be fully appreciated.
Until then, they seem to blend into the scenery, if not the shadows.
It was like that for Billy Williams, who finished with 426 homers while Ernie Banks, his Cubs teammate, hit 512.
It was even like that for Eddie Mathews, the Braves third baseman who hit 512 homers while Henry Aaron was hitting 755.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
Landmark Yard Sale
LIKE many people planning yard sales, Ted Dragon of East Hampton was in the attic combing through some old chests.
"They had never even been unpacked," Mr.
Dragon said.
"We accumulated so much stuff."


The New Europe; Continental Block Party or Exclusive Club?
LIKE the philosophers of the Enlightenment, whose wonderful logic always seemed to fail in the face of the way things really were, Europe now finds itself groping for a new identity just as it commits itself to a far-reaching plan for monetary and political union.
Last February, the European Community's 12 nations signed a treaty designed as the most dramatic single leap toward unity since the slow process of European integration began in the 1950's.
But the treaty had been drafted in very different times, when the cold war still imposed a very different set of assumptions about how the various parts of Europe might fit together.
Now, even before the new arrangements can be tested, the community is deluged with requests for new membership, creating a profound conflict over whether it should greatly expand or should concentrate on deepening the ties that exist.


On Norway's Border, Russian Arctic in Crisis
Since the end of the cold war, the military might of the former Soviet empire has actually grown modestly in size just across from this Arctic border outpost.
The heavily armored divisions protecting the old Soviet northern flank have not withdrawn as they have in Central Europe.
But in all other ways, the cold war seems as dead here as anywhere and security in the Nordic countries facing the old empire to the east is being defined increasingly in nonmilitary terms, like environmental security, economic and social stability in Russia and the improvement of Arctic trade.
And if anything, these new security challenges are no less daunting than the old and familiar ones.


After L.A., How to Revive Hope In the Inner City
RICHARD D. PARSONS Chairman and chief executive, Dime Savings Bank of New York
For many black executives and business owners, the brutality of life in the ghettos commanded their attention long before the Rodney King verdict ignited the worst riots in recent history.
Asking them how to bring those inner cities back to life called forth personal recollections melded with practical measures, anger shadowed by despair.


Needed: Help for Those Facing Loss of Homes
An April 26 article reported that thousands of New Jersey residents were losing their homes in mortgage foreclosures and that in some counties forced sales of homes have tripled.
There can be no doubt that this surge in foreclosures is due principally to the recession.
At least 23,574 families were subject to mortgage foreclosure suits in 1991 alone.
These are our neighbors, friends and relatives.
President Kennedy once said that if a free society could not help the many who are poor, it could not protect the few who are rich.


A Tradition of Caution; Confronting New Ideas, Doctors Often Hold On to the Old
IN an age when medical breakthroughs are reported in the mainstream press as routinely as house fires, patients frequently find that their doctors are not familiar with the details of the new treatments or decline to use them.
Despite what many physicians and researchers consider a history of solid results, for instance, some doctors have not adopted radiation therapies for certain cancers or aspirin treatment during heart disease.
One of the most recent breakthroughs promotes a dramatic cure for ulcers using antibiotics.
Researchers from all fields of medicine say it can take years, or decades, for new treatments to be adopted.
Contributing factors cited include traditional medical education and practice, aggressive drug promotions and many physicians' unfamiliarity with current studies.


Eva Hesse and the Lure Of 'Absurd Opposites'
No one who cares about contemporary art should miss the Eva Hesse retrospective here at the Yale University Art Gallery (through July 31).
It's a wonderful show, which brings together more than 100 works by an artist whose stature seems to have grown each year since her death in 1970, at the age of 34, from a brain tumor.
Her works are full of the pain she suffered, both mental and physical, and of the absurdity and wit she wielded to combat her suffering.
The trick is to acknowledge the tragic dimensions of her life without succumbing to sentimentality or cliche, or romanticizing her death as some sort of martyrdom.
Hesse's achievement can be measured in many ways.
She became expert at incorporating light into her work.
Like other sculptors of her generation, she used industrial materials, but instead of inflexible ones like iron she favored the pliancy of wire, rubber tubing, fiberglass and latex.


Boxer Shorts
ORIGIN -- The name comes not from that long-ago rebellion, but because they resemble what prizefighters wear on the job.
Harold Koda, the director of the National Museum of Fashion at the Fashion Institute of Technology, said boxers became popular after World War I; before 1900, men wore wool underwear.
The museum's collection has boxers in silk or Egyptian cotton.
But unlike their elastic-waist descendants, they have only a tab and some buttons.
A NEW GENERATION OF WEARERS -- Eighteen percent of American men wear boxer shorts, compared with 11 percent in 1986, the Joe Boxer Corporation estimates.
Its sales have jumped from 40,000 a year to two million a year in that time.
"They have a sexiness and a look and a wit, but not a brazen show-me concept," said Jim Nevins, the vice president and creative director of J. Crew, the mail-order and retail company.
Women wear them, too.
Calvin Klein said that by 1988, 20 to 25 percent of their boxers were bought by women.
WHY NOW? -- Faith Popcorn, the chairwoman of Brain Reserve, a trend-research firm in Manhattan, says boxer shorts reflect nostalgia for the 1950's.
"People think, 'Maybe if I wear them, everything will be all right,' the Ozzie and Harriet thing," she said.
WHAT SELLS -- Mr.
Koda called boxers "a canvas of personal expression" that can range from plain to pig prints.
His favorites are Brooks Brothers' yoke-tops, with an extra panel on the front and laces on the back, "a functional requirement when you have a non-elastic waistband," Mr.
Koda said.
J.
Crew sells "The Class of '69," a boxer with college-yearbook photographs on them.
And the big seller, at one Gap store, is a palm-tree print.
"They're a lot of fun," said Liz Fell, a saleswoman, "and you can buy a hat to match."


Corrections
An article on April 26 about children and photography misstated the name and nationality of the Victorian photographer who took the pictures for the book "Street Life in London." He was John Thomson, and he was Scottish, not English.


In the Region: Connecticut and Westchester; Connecticut's War of the Malls Intensifies
FOR the last six years the wars of the malls have been intensifying in Connecticut's planning and zoning commissions and its courts.
In a major battle, the Taubman Company of Bloomfield, Mich., owners of the 18-year-old Westfarms Mall on the Farmington-West Hartford border, is determined to prevent the Wilmorite Company of Rochester from building a competing mall in Plainville, six miles away, that it feels could take up to 15 percent of its business.


Fetes Eclectic
Dancing nobles and honors galore, all through the town all week.


Sports of The Times; Chicago Tries To Survive Bumper Pool
THEY are not among the most talented teams.
They are not particularly attractive to watch.
They do not think well on their feet.
They cannot remember to get the ball to their best player.
For all that, these Knicks are the hardest-working team New York has seen in a while.
They have got as much out of themselves as a mix-and-match transition team could expect and they should be respected immensely.
The only thing is, it may not be enough.


Cubans Can Teach a Lesson
To the Editor:
As an American Latino writer who successfully crossed over into the mainstream culture many years ago, I was pleased to read the articles by Enrique Fernandez and Ruben Blades  [ "Spitfires, Latin Lovers, Mambo Kings" and "The Politics Behind the Latino Legacy," April 19 ]  on the traditional conflict between our Hispanic culture and the host culture in the United States.


The Jury Said, 'I'm White, and You're Wrong'; Mass Media's Fault
To the Editor:
The people who have died and the millions of dollars in property damage in Los Angeles are not a result of a failure of the criminal justice system, but of failed expectations created by the mass media.
From the beginning, we have been bombarded by images from the videotape of the four police officers and Rodney King.
As the trial began, the electronic media aired the tape with excerpts from the prosecution's case.
Nowhere, however, was the public exposed to the defendants' side.


As Shock Passes, Mystery and Misery of Killing Linger
He gets up whenever he wakes up, for he is in no hurry to start the day.
Outside of meals, the television serves as the centerpiece of his life.
His parents lug home movies from the video store, and he sees several a day.
He blends in hours of video games, perfecting an already well-honed talent.
Otherwise, he lazily twirls through the channels and whatever is on he watches.
When the weather cooperates, he troops into the backyard.
By now, he no longer cries all that much.
He is 14, the age for venturesome roaming, but he is forbidden to stray more than 150 feet from the telephone in his house.
Even the attic is too distant.
Only relatives and his lawyer can visit him without court consent.
His phone calls must wrap up within an impossibly short 15 minutes.


CORRECTION
An article on April 26 about delays in getting home mortgages referred erroneously to the time taken by the U.S.
Trust Company to act on a recent loan application.
The article noted that U.S.
Trust had not responded to telephone calls requesting its response to an assertion that it had taken two months.
After the article was published, U.S.
Trust said that within 24 hours of the loan request it had advised the applicant's mortgage broker that it would not make the loan.
The mortgage broker confirms that account.


Mary Hartman, M. J. LaMourie
Ralph R. Hartman of Swarthmore, Pa., and Marjorie E. Smith of Newark, Del., have announced August wedding plans for their daughter, Mary Catherine Hartman, and Matthew John LaMourie, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Lawrence L. LaMourie of Allen Park, Mich.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
'LOVE LETTERS'
It may still be possible to snare a couple of tickets to the single performance of A. R. Gurney's "Love Letters," starring Jessica Tandy and Hume Cronyn, to be performed at Long Wharf in New Haven tomorrow at 8 P.M.


The Best Is Gone At Sunrise
BE early, and ye shall find.
"The true vultures are here already," Steve Kaplan observed one recent Sunday at sunrise.
Mr.
Kaplan, an antique toy dealer, was surveying three grimy parking lots on the Avenue of the Americas that are New York's answer to the labyrinthine Marche aux Puces in Paris.
The newest lot, between 26th and 27th Streets, opened last month.


Q and A
Rules for Building Owners  Question: I am considering buying a brownstone to rent out and possibly live in as well.
Can I find out beforehand any restrictions on occupancy, rents and alterations? . . .
Leslie Griffith, Manhattan Answer: Yes.
The Department of City Planning, which has jurisdiction over the city's zoning code, and the Department of Buildings can give you information on the laws and regulations that govern the use of the property and any alterations you might want to make.


What About Roger?
To the Editor:
Many of the current problems at the General Motors Corporation ("Pulling Down the Corporate Clubhouse," April 12) can be traced to Roger Smith, Robert Stemple's immediate predecessor.
During his tenure as chief executive, Mr.
Smith did the following:


Microsoft Nails Some Pirates
When the Microsoft Corporation unveiled its updated MS-DOS 5 software operating system last June, it was confident that it had devised a way to thwart the loss of $1 billion a year from software piracy.
Its packaging contains two one-of-a-kind holograms, one a circular image on the package box and the other a rectangular image pasted inside on the product manual, viewable through a window on the box.
The multidimensional images bear the company's name or the MS-DOS logo and tell consumers that the product is the real McCoy.
Microsoft pamphlets said the holograms are "virtually impossible" to reproduce and "raise the counterfeiting barrier to a level previously unattempted in the software industry." Yet within two weeks of the introduction, a Taiwanese counterfeiter commissioned a holographer in China to copy and produce the holograms.
Over the next half-dozen months, Microsoft's counterattack took it to Taiwan, Japan, Hong Kong and Melbourne.
The idea was to track down the counterfeiters, mostly without the aid of foreign governments.
Ultimately, the company helped bust a major Asian couterfeiting ring that may have produced up to $150 million worth of the company's hottest products.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Political Memo; Perot Tries to Keep Pace With Force He Unleashed
Here in the air-conditioned sprawl of a Sunbelt office complex, Ross Perot is trying to reinvent Presidential politics.
No one is quite sure where he is headed, but these days everyone is paying attention.
The Texas billionaire has won himself a nomination, of sorts, by taking his bid for the Presidency to the electronic primaries of Larry King, David Frost and Phil Donahue (a lot easier than slogging through Iowa and New Hampshire).
Recent public opinion polls show him neck and neck for second place with Gov.
Bill Clinton nationally, and at the head of the pack in Texas and California -- must-win states for Republican Presidential campaigns.


Elizabeth Murphy, Dan Cooke
Elizabeth Marie Murphy, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James Francis Murphy 3d of Garden City, L.I., and George Daniel Cooke, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
James Jackson Cooke of Atlanta, were married yesterday in Garden City.
Msgr.
Robert Emmet Fagan, an uncle of the bride, performed the ceremony, with Msgr.
John Thomas Fagan, also an uncle of the bride, and Msgr.
John Gilmartin assisting at St.
Joseph's Roman Catholic Church.
Ms.
Murphy, 27 years old, who will keep her name, is an assistant editor with John Wiley &amp; Sons Inc., publishers in New York.
She graduated from Fordham University.
Her father is the president of the New York Shipyard Corporation, a ship repair company in New York.


Israel Commemorates Start of the Holocaust
Each year Israel offers a medal commemorating some facet of its history or present circumstances.
This year the design is as disturbing as any.
To commemorate the 50th anniversary of the Wannsee Conference, at which Nazi Germany's leaders formulated their policy to exterminate the Jews of Europe, Israel is offering a medal in bronze, silver or gold depicting the horrible aftereffects of that gathering.
The conference, which was held just outside Berlin, sealed the fate of millions of Jews.
To the Nazis, the "Final Solution" became a simple problem of transportation, housing and processing.


The Rage Rage
'I DON'T KNOW WHAT to do about the depression and the inflation and the Russians and the crime in the street," the incendiary speaker announced to the media populace. "All I know is that first you've got to get mad.
You've got to say, 'I'm a human being, goddammit!
My life has value!"'
This populist instigator looked the viewers straight in the television eye and gave them their marching orders: "So I want you to get up now. I want all of you to get up out of your chairs. I want you to get up right now and go to the window, open it and stick your head out and yell, '
I'm mad as hell, and I'm not going to take this anymore!
"'


Los Angeles Police Differ Sharply With Prosecutors on Arrest Totals
Reflecting the confusion that has characterized this city's response to the violence that broke out 10 days ago, prosecutors and the police are giving widely different estimates of the number of riot-related arrests.
Police officials said today that they had arrested 18,000 people from Wednesday night, April 29, the day the riots began, through this morning.
But prosecutors said they could not account for as many as 10,000 of those people.


The Appeal of the Unusual in Suburbia
TO many people, particularly longtime city-dwellers, the thought of a home in the New York area suburbs conjures up images of split-level tract houses and cookie-cutter condominiums.
Not every suburbanite, though, lives in such conforming confines.
For those appreciative of an offbeat urban-style ambiance, there are old school houses and factories that have undergone what preservationists call "adaptive reuse." And for those craving a more rural atmosphere, there are renovated guest cottages, barns and gatehouses.


Kyoko Soda and Shuji Nakano
ON Friday, May 1, at 12:30 P.M., a jet-lagged but nonetheless lovely Kyoko Soda, 27 years old, married Shuji Nakano, 32, in the chapel of the Church Center for the United Nations.
The bride and groom, who had flown in from Tokyo a week before, arrived at the chapel in a white stretch limousine.
Though few people were watching -- only Ms.
Soda's parents and two brothers, who had also traveled from Japan -- the bride emerged from the car with the grace of a ballerina onstage.
She wore a wildflower headband, a lace veil and a dress with big bow in back and long train, all of it as neatly assembled as origami.


Ann Magliocco, James Combias
Mr. and Mrs.
John T. Magliocco of Rye, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter Ann Marie Magliocco to James Combias, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Anthony Combias of Summit, N.J.
A September wedding is planned.
Ms.
Magliocco, 25 years old, is a sales assistant at Peerless Importers, a Brooklyn liquor company.
She graduated from Boston College.
Her father is the chairman and the executive officer of Quaker Equities, a venture capital concern in New York.


Younghee Kim, Jarett Wait
Younghee Michelle Kim, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Hak Yong Kim of North Brunswick, N.J., was married yesterday in Manhattan to Jarett Francis Wait, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Kevin P. Wait of Albany, N.Y.
The Rev.
Randolph L. C. Weber performed the ceremony at Fifth Avenue Presbyterian Church.
Mrs.
Wait is a vice president with Lazard Freres &amp; Company.
She graduated Phi Beta Kappa from Amherst College and received an M.B.A. from New York University.
Her father is a port captain with Maritime Overseas Corporation, a shipping company, in New York.


Traffic Alert
Because of the Cuban Independence Day Parade, Park and Fifth Avenues will be closed today between 37th Street and 56th Street, from noon to 3 P.M.


At the Lehman Gallery, Social Commentary With a Pop Face
IT would seem that for Jerry Kearns, as for so many of his contemporaries, there is no art without politics, and it has been that way since 1968 when he was radicalized by the sight of the Chicago riots on television.
The story is told in the catalogue to "The Deadly Art of Illusion: Deep Cover," which comes to the Lehman College Art Gallery here from the Tyler Galleries of the Tyler School of Art, part of Temple University in Philadelphia.


Residential Resales
Closings in the week ended April 25  MANHATTAN  East Midtown 950,000
480 Park Avenue (58th St.)  3-bedroom, 4-bath, 3,000-sq.-ft prewar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, concierge, 3 maid's rooms, fireplace; maintenance $2,016, 50% tax-deductible (Broker: David Day Realty)  Greenwich Village 150,000
105 West 13th Street  1-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 900-sq.-ft. postwar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, dining area, remodeled kitchen; maintenance $936, 50% tax-deductible (Broker: Eychner Associates)  Sutton Place 675,000
60 Sutton Place South  3-bedroom, 4 1/2-bath, 2,200-sq.-ft. postwar, duplex-penthouse co-op; 24-hr. doorman, maid's room, fireplace, 2 terraces, partial East River view (Broker: S.W. Bird)  Upper East Side 2.675 million
1030 Fifth Avenue (84th St.)  4-bedroom, 5-bath, 4,000-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, manned-elevator, 2 maid's rooms, library, 2 fireplaces, Central Park view; maintenace $5,833, 35% tax-deductible (Brokers: Corcoran Group-William B. May)  West Village 650,000
166 Bank Street  (Riverbank)  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 2,400-sq.-ft. loft-co-op in a converted warehouse; library, fireplace, jacuzzi, renovated kitchen and bath, Hudson River view; maintenance $800, 50% tax-deductible (Broker: William B. May)  BRONX  Baychester 135,000
1937 Nereid Avenue  3-bedroom, 2-bath, single-family, detached, frame house; dining room, enclosed front porch, 2-car garage, 25- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,300 (Broker: Century 21/Best Match Real Estate) Fieldston 550,000
330 College Road  5-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, single-family, brick split-level; dining room, family room, remodeled kitchen, fireplace, 2-car garage, 1/4-acre lot; taxes $5,188 (Broker: Marilyn &amp; Morris B. Sopher)  BROOKLYN  Brooklyn Heights 750,000
161 Clinton Street  2-family, 4-story, brownstone; 5 bedrooms, 2 1/2 baths, dining room, 4 fireplaces and greenhouse in primary triplex unit; 2 bedrooms, 1 bath, dining area in simplex; rear garden, 20-by 100-ft. lot; taxes $4,000 (Broker: Harborview Realty)  Ditmas Park West 280,000
465 Westminster Road  6-bedroom, 3-bath, single-family, Victorian; dining room, double-parlor, 2 fireplaces, stained-glass windows, 40- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,800 (Broker: Brooklyn Properties of 7th Avenue)  Park Slope 419,500
253 6th Avenue  2-family, 4-story brownstone; 2 bedrooms 3 baths, floor-through parlor, den in primary triplex, 1 bedroom, 1 bath, skylight on top-floor simplex; 19- by 127-ft. lot; taxes $2,260 (Broker: F.J. Kazeroid Realty)  QUEENS  Bayside 80,000
18-40 211th Street  (Bay Terrace)  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 1,000-sq.-ft. postwar co-op; dining room, renovated kitchen and bath; maintenance $610, includes gas and electricity, 48% tax-deductible (Broker: Value Lane Realty)  Forest Hills 278,000
99-27 74th Avenue  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, single-family, detached, frame house; dining room, finished basement, front porch, 1-car garage, 60- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,554 (Broker: Sarah Jones Real Estate)  STATEN ISLAND  Castleton Corners 176,500
203 Fairview Avenue  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, single-family, detached, frame colonial; dining room, fireplace, 2-car garage, 57- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,200 (Broker: Coldwell Banker/DeSimone Realty)  Randall Manor 140,000
35 Rokeby Place  3-bedroom, 1-bath, single-family, detached Colonial; dining room, fireplace, beamed-ceilings, 1-car garage, 50- by 75-ft. lot; taxes $1,350 (Broker: Rand Properties)


Children's Books; Bookshelf
Additional titles of interest:
NO PLAIN PETS!
By Marc Ian Barasch.
Illustrated by Henrik Drescher.
HarperCollins. $14.95. (Ages 4 to 8) The narrator of this aggressive agenda of desire is ready for a pet, and he has some firm ideas of what would suit his life -- say a gorilla or an electric eel, a penguin or a goat.
But like most children, he'll settle for something he can love.
Dizzy illustrations portray a neon-bright world of jazzy creatures.


Allison Miller, Oren C. Lewin
Dr. and Mrs.
Frederick Miller of Stony Brook, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Allison Ilene Miller, to Oren Chaim Lewin, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Arie Lewin of Chapel Hill, N.C.
An August wedding is planned.
Ms.
Miller, 24 years old, is an assistant buyer at Saks Fifth Avenue in New York.
She graduated from Duke University, as did her fiance.
Her father is a chairman of the department of pathology at the State University of New York at Stony Brook.


High Costs for Shuttles Limit Their Future Use
A Delta-2 rocket on a launching pad here is scheduled to hurl a communications satellite into orbit on Wednesday at a cost of about $50 million.
In contrast, launching a payload from a space shuttle costs far more -- by some estimates up to 20 times as much, or $1 billion.
The high price of shuttle flights prompted the National Aeronautics and Space Administration to institute a five-year cost-cutting program.
More important, it was a prime factor behind the Government's decision last year to forgo building more shuttles in favor of developing a new generation of rockets and spaceships.


Miss Gutierrez, Mr. Rivas-Micoud
Silvia Gutierrez Hidalgo de Quintana, the daughter of Angel Gutierrez Escudero and Carmen Hidalgo de Quintana of Madrid, was married yesterday in Spain to Alejandro Rivas-Micoud, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Jose P. Rivas-Micoud of New York.
The Rev.
Jose Luis, a Benedictine monk, performed the ceremony in the monastery of Santo Domingo de Silos, near Burgos.
Mrs.
Rivas-Micoud, 27 years old, graduated from the University of Madrid.
She is an economist, and a former market analyst at the Spanish Embassy in Japan.
Her father, a diplomat, is the former attache of the Spanish delegation to the European Community in Brussels.


Gothic Hoosier: $350
Before Formica, American cooks rolled dough on the enameled tops of kitchen cabinets called Hoosiers.
The Hoosier Manufacturing Company of Indiana was the original maker; the name became generic.


Laura C. Bull, Michael Bailey
Dr.
Sherman M. Bull and Dr.
Marcia Bull McCrum, both of New Canaan, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Laura Catharine Bull, to Michael Robert Bailey, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Wendell Bailey of Willow Springs, Mo.
A June wedding is planned.
Miss Bull, 28 years old, is a vice president of the LCP Group, a New York real-estate investment concern.
She graduated from Middlebury College.
Her father is a surgeon in private practice in Stamford.
Her mother is chief of cardiology at Stamford Hospital.


Abroad at Home; Only Connect
The events in Los Angeles have had one quite unexpected result.
They have made millions of Americans see their President as a man curiously unconnected to realities of life in the country they share with him.
Mr.
Bush muttered "unbelievable, unbelievable" as he toured Los Angeles last week.
He saw desperate people, black and white and Asian -- people without jobs, without the simplest level of security, without hope.
And he was evidently shocked by his discovery of that America.


Corrections
An article on April 26 about a proxy contest at the Jefferson-Pilot Corporation of Greensboro, N.C., misidentified the site of the Kentucky Derby.
It is Louisville, Ky., not Lexington.


Mayor and Chancellor: Ties, Often Cool, Turn Icy
Mayor David N. Dinkins and Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez face the same problem as castaways marooned on an island.
While they need each other's help to survive, they also have to wrangle over the same scarce morsels.
Still, last week's clashes over money between City Hall and the Chancellor's office struck many officials as a little too nasty, like a playful fight that suddenly turns bloody.


Learning the Delicate Touches Of a Master Floral Arranger
THE class in commercial flower arranging at the New York Botanical Garden here had already covered the basics: basic wedding design, basic funeral design, basic centerpieces.
This day near the end of an intensive five-week course promised something exotic, and all 24 students had dressed for the occasion in Hawaiian shirts and leis.
The teacher, Edward F. Nienstadt, wore a lei, too, as he demonstrated the morning's assignment: to create a "tropical paradise" centerpiece.
An expensive but chic arrangement, he told the students.
Just the thing to set off a white wall anywhere.


Conversations/Bryan A. Stevenson; Wanted: A Few Good Lawyers For Tough Cases in 'the Deathbelt'
GIVEN the kind of news that has dominated Bryan A. Stevenson's line of work this spring, Mr.
Stevenson might reasonably consider changing careers.
As it happens, reasonableness has never been a hallmark of his line of work.
He represents prisoners on Alabama's death row, and tries to persuade lawyers at well-heeled firms that they should do the same.
It appears to be a losing battle.
Last month, editorials in Alabama papers cheered the state attorney general for challenging a state supreme court decision overturning the death penalty for a 15-year-old.


Nina Jorgensen, Brian McGuinness
Nina Jorgensen, a daughter of Drs.
Eric and Virginia Jorgensen of Garden City, L.I., was married yesterday in East Hampton, L.I., to Brian McGuinness, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
William McGuinness of Lloyd Harbor, L.I.
The Rev.
Francis B. Creamer Jr. performed the ceremony at St.
Luke's Episcopal Church.
Mrs.
McGuinness, 33 years old, is an account executive at Weight Watchers magazine in New York.
She graduated from Ithaca College.
Her father is an orthopedist and her mother is a psychiatrist, both in private practice in Garden City.


More and More Look to a Post-Castro Cuba
The business consultant captured the mood of mounting anticipation here over Cuba.
"I know they are going to be selling their telephone company soon, and I have a client who is interested in buying," the animated businessman said between sessions of a two-day Florida Bar Association seminar called "Post-Castro Cuba."


Eve Cartwright, Kenneth Belscher
Mr. and Mrs.
George C. Cartwright of Fairfield, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Eve Elizabeth Cartwright, to Kenneth Gregory Belscher, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Martin Belscher of Hamburg, N.Y.
An August wedding is planned.
Miss Cartwright, 32 years old, is the human resources administrator for the Gartner Group, a market research firm in Stamford, Conn.
She graduated from Simmons College.
Her father is a senior vice president of the North American Reinsurance Corporation in New York.


Let's Not Take Rock Too Seriously
To the Editor:
In "Endangered Rock" (Op-Ed, April 16), a plea for Government support for rock as an art form, Camille Paglia again stakes her claim as high priestess of degeneracy in our time, but she shows a soul at odds with itself.
The result is the combination of anarchism and neo-fascism that has become a motif of her work.


Why House Investigator Is Joining the Exodus
An announcement by Representative Matthew F. McHugh, Democrat of New York and chairman of the House Ethics Committee, last week was a surprise even bigger than his election 18 years ago in an upstate New York bastion of Republicanism.
The 53-year-old legislator from Ithaca said he would not seek re-election.
Mr.
McHugh, who was the chief investigator of the House banking scandal, is one of almost 60 members who are voluntarily leaving Congress, the biggest exodus since World War II.
Against the backdrop of the bank scandal, the retirements reflect the growing frustration many members now express about the divisive tone dominating politics and the public's negative view of lawmakers.


May 3-9: Canada Plebiscite; An Eskimo Homeland Is a Step Closer
The Northwest Territories, one-third of Canada's land mass, stretches from the Atlantic to the Yukon.
Near the western fringes, two time zones from the Eskimos of the eastern Arctic, is the territorial capital of Yellowknife, populated largely by whites.
To the Eskimos this has always smacked of colonialism, and for years they have sought to speak for themselves on such issues as health, legal services, education, job creation and cultural preservation.


The U.N. Today
General Assembly INTERGOVERNMENTAL NEGOTIATING COMMITTEE ON CLIMATE CHANGE -- 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
General information phone: (212) 963-1234 Tours are conducted 9 A.M.-5:45 P.M.


May 3-9: Congress; Four-Square for Frugality In Oh So Many Ways
Shifting gears ever so slightly, Congress took a week off from dealing with sloppy bookkeeping at the House Bank to take a swipe at the Federal budget deficit.
The House voted to withdraw $5.8 billion in spending already approved for this year after the Senate voted to take back $8.2 billion.
Both exercises constituted political one-upmanship to President Bush's demand, when he vetoed the Democrats' middle-class tax cut in March, for $7.8 billion in cuts.
In the end, of course, everyone can claim a vote for frugality, even if no plan becomes law.


N.A.A.C.P. Chief Assails Bush as Graduates Cheer
New graduates of Howard University responded with cheers and applause today as their commencement speaker, Benjamin L. Hooks, executive director of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People, criticized the Bush Administration's response to the violence in Los Angeles.
"We have a President who does not seem to know which way to turn," Mr.
Hooks said.
Some of his sharpest barbs were aimed at Marlin Fitzwater, President Bush's spokesman, who said this week that the riot was the result of the Great Society programs of the 1960's and 1970's.


Erika Leslie Fox, Richard A. Eden
Erika Leslie Fox, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Jerome B. Fox of Hillsdale, N.Y., and Dr.
Richard Allen Eden, the son of Harry D. Eden of Pacific Palisades, Calif., and the late Nina Schuler Eden, were married Monday on Kibbutz Ketura, in the Arava region of Israel.
Rabbi Kinneret Shiryon officiated.
Ms.
Fox, 30 years old, graduated from the State University of New York at Oneonta.
She is a member of Kibbutz Ketura, where she works on the date plantation.
Her father retired as senior vice president of Merrill Lynch, Pierce, Fenner &amp; Smith in Red Bank, N.J.
Her mother, Marcia Fox, now retired, was the assistant manager of Five Star Travel in Matawan, N.J.


Orioles Get Relief And Stop White Sox
Orioles 5, White Sox 2
BALTIMORE, May 9 (AP) -- Bob Milacki struggled for five and a third innings before Baltimore's bullpen bailed him out, and the Orioles ended Chicago's six-game winning streak with a 5-2 victory tonight.
Milacki (2-2) gave up two runs on eight hits and a walk.
Alan Mills, Mike Flanagan and Gregg Olson shut out the White Sox the rest of the way, with Olson pitching the ninth for his sixth save.
The Orioles won for the ninth time in 11 games.
They are 13-3 at Camden Yards, and the victory enabled them to avoid losing consecutive games at home for the first time this season.
Frank Thomas got two hits and drove in both Chicago runs.
He is 13 for 29 with 11 runs batted in and 12 walks in his last 9 games.
Alex Fernandez (2-3) gave up five runs on 10 hits in seven and one-third innings.
It was his first appearance since his one-hitter against Milwaukee on Monday.
Red Sox 5, Royals 0
KANSAS CITY, Mo. (AP) -- Roger Clemens, facing only two batters over the minimum, pitched a three-hitter for his 31st career shutout and Boston broke a losing streak at three games by stopping Kansas City.
Clemens (4-3) struck out four and walked one in beating the Royals for the 12th time in 15 career decisions.
He pitched his second shutout of the season, having blanked Cleveland with a three-hitter on April 12.
The first two Royals to reach base, Curtis Wilkerson with a walk in the first inning and George Brett with a single in the second, were thrown out trying to steal by catcher Tony Pena.
After Brett's single, Clemens retired 16 in a row until Bob Melvin and Brett led off the eighth with singles.
Expos 9, Giants 3
MONTREAL (AP) -- Archi Cianfrocco hit his first major league homer and drove in five runs as Montreal routed San Francisco.
Cianfrocco, a rookie making his second consecutive start at third base in place of slumping Bret Barberie, hit a bases-empty homer in the second, a two-run triple in the fourth and a two-run single in the fifth.
The Expos ruined the season debut of Bud Black (0-1).
He lasted only four and two-thirds innings in his first appearance since he sprained his lower back in spring training.
Black was charged with seven earned runs on seven hits.
Chris Nabholz (2-2) worked seven innings, allowing four hits.
He gave up Cory Snyder's two-run homer in the second, which gave the Giants a 2-0 lead.
Reliever John Wetteland allowed a run in the ninth on Willie McGee's pinch-single.
Black retired the first five batters before Cianfrocco homered over the left-field wall.
Cubs 3, Reds 1
CHICAGO (AP) -- Frank Castillo pitched seven strong innings, helping Chicago break Cincinnati's winning streak at three games.
It was the first victory for Castillo (1-3) since defeating San Francisco 3-2 on Sept. 8.
He gave up one run on five hits, walked two and struck out four in seven-plus innings.
He left in the eighth when he walked leadoff batter Bip Roberts.
Paul Assenmacher relieved, and Roberts scored on a groundout by Paul O'Neill.
Assenmacher pitched one and two-thirds innings for his first save.
Padres 5, Phillies 1
PHILADELPHIA (AP) -- Craig Lefferts stopped Philadelphia for seven innings and Fred McGriff had three hits, including a two-run triple, in San Diego's victory.
Lefferts (3-2), who became a starter this season after eight years as a reliever, struck out two and walked one.
He gave up five hits, among them Dale Murphy's 398th career home run with one out in the seventh inning.


Nightmares of a Dream Trainer
RINGS
On the Life and Family of a Southern Fighter.
By Randolph Bates.
Illustrated. 421 pp.
New York: Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $25.


Bathsheba and the Nazis
THE BRIDE PRICE
By Grete Weil. Translated by John Barrett. 183 pp. Boston: David R. Godine. $20.95.


Auto Rentals
To the Editor: It may be of value to auto renters to know that Alamo Rent-A-Car charges an additional-driver charge for the spouse of the renter.
While the other rental companies I contacted permit the spouse to drive without added cost, Alamo tacks on a fee of $2.50 a day or $17.50 a week to its advertised rates.
It is deceptive when one compares rates with those of other companies.


Bronwyn Smith, John McElroy
Bronwyn Smith, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William D. Smith of Dallas, was married yesterday in New York to John Justin McElroy, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph L. McElroy of Westfield, N.J.
The Rev.
John Dinneen performed the ceremony at the Holy Trinity Roman Catholic Church.
Mrs.
McElroy, 27 years old and a graduate of James Madison University, is the manager of press relations in New York for Nickelodeon/Nick at Nite, a division of MTV Networks.
Her father is the senior media officer of the Exxon Corporation in Dallas.


The Executive Computer; Whither the ACE Consortium? Maybe Nowhere
Despite the recent defection of an influential founder, the Advanced Computing Environment consortium remains committed to developing an industrywide standard for business computers that use reduced-instruction set computing, known as RISC.
But the ACE vision has fogged over, leaving business customers to wonder what, if anything is really there.
The defector is the Compaq Computer Corporation of Houston, which said late last month that it was resigning from ACE after having helped found it only a year ago.
Compaq, struggling for more than a year, said it wanted to refocus its plans on conventional chips made by the Intel Corporation instead of helping to develop RISC computers.


Amy Brett, Jeffrey Mester
Amy Kamerman Brett, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Jay Elliot Brett of Buffalo, and Jeffrey Stuart Mester, a son of Judy B. Church of Chapel Hill, N.C., and Jack W. Mester of Los Angeles, were married yesterday evening in Buffalo.
Rabbi Dr.
Martin L. Goldberg performed the ceremony at Temple Beth Zion.
Mrs.
Mester, 25 years old, is studying for a master's degree in education at Columbia University.
She graduated from Tufts University.
Her father is a senior partner in the Buffalo law firm of Cohen Swados Wright Hanifin Bradford &amp; Brett.
Her mother, Marcia Barmon Brett, is a member of the accounting firm of Dean &amp; Associates.


Fraud Among The Buds This Spring
If the numbers are not good enough, manufacture some better ones. And then sell stock.
That seems to have been the theory used by more than a few companies in the past year.
The latest example of this damaging little trend surfaced at the end of last week when Fidelity Medical, a medical products company, admitted that it had overstated its sales in the most recent quarter by an immodest 50 percent or so.
The chairman was booted out, and the shares plunged to $4, down 58 percent from what the company got six months ago in a public offering, part of whose proceeds went into the chairman's pocket.


Israel Commemorates Start of the Holocaust
Each year Israel offers a medal commemorating some facet of its history or present circumstances.
This year the design is as disturbing as any.
To commemorate the 50th anniversary of the Wannsee Conference, at which Nazi Germany's leaders formulated their policy to exterminate the Jews of Europe, Israel is offering a medal in bronze, silver or gold depicting the horrible aftereffects of that gathering.
The conference, which was held just outside Berlin, sealed the fate of millions of Jews.
To the Nazis, the "Final Solution" became a simple problem of transportation, housing and processing.


Noted With Pleasure
The Only Homeland
Language may offer a unique solace to immigrants, as the novelist Paule Marshall notes in this memoir of her mother and her mother's friends.
It is in "Mothers: Memories, Dreams and Reflections by Literary Daughters," edited by Susan Cahill (Mentor, paper).


FACING UP TO INDUSTRIAL POLICY
This country already has an industrial policy.
It takes the form of laws and regulations designed to protect the environment.


AMERICAN EXPORTS TO POOR COUNTRIES ARE RAPIDLY RISING
The American economy, badly in need of bright spots, is gaining strength from an unlikely source: the third world, where purchases of American goods rose 15 percent last year.
Nonindustrialized nations have increased their purchases from American businesses and farmers to $146.79 billion last year.
And this year they are expected to buy even more.
The United States still runs a large, but shrinking, trade deficit with these nations through purchases of fruit and vegetables, steel and oil.


Need a Stock Photo? Find a Compute Disk
IN an effort to standardize the electronic merchandising of stock pictures, four picture agencies and two manufacturers have joined to offer a system for creating and selling compact disks for displaying stock pictures.
Their product, CD-ROM disks, which will be marketed for use in desktop publishing, advertising and other forms of computer graphics, are intended to replace catalogues of pictures, which are costly to produce, to mail and to redesign as picture tastes change.


Jewish Identity Pondered in 'Two'
"TWO," at Stamford Theater Works, tells a tale that needs to be told but it is not the play that had to be written.
In a confrontation between two unlikely characters -- a despairing rabbi and a former member of the German SS who is affirming her Jewish identity -- a playwright from Australia, Ron Elisha, mistakes the crushing weight of collected guilt for theatrical momentum.


Tracy Lee Baron, Joel Beckerman
Mr. and Mrs.
Harvey Baron of New Rochelle, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Tracy Lee Baron, to Joel Leonard Beckerman, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Stephen Beckerman of Livingston, N.J.
A July wedding is planned.


Concern, Cash, But No Accord On Urban Woes
Despite trillions of dollars spent over the years on thousands of different Government social programs, politicians and scholars are no closer to agreement today than they were a generation ago about the best ways to lift people out of poverty and make the cities better places to live.
Experts at universities and research institutes and in Government agree that if a consensus could be reached about which programs have worked, the country would embrace those solutions, regardless of cost.
But enormous ideological and political differences inhibit such a consensus, and the gulf has widened in the aftermath of the riots in Los Angeles.


A Seance With History
Anna Deavere Smith captures voices.
Lately, she's been in Crown Heights, Brooklyn, catching voices there.
Her method is not much different from that of the reporters who tramped through the racially torn neighborhood, tape recorders in hand, seeking interviews about what happened to pit black against Jew and Jew against black so violently last summer.
Except that while journalists commit their interviews to the airwaves and ink, Ms.
Smith commits hers to memory.
She releases those captured voices in "Fires in the Mirror: Crown Heights, Brooklyn and Other Identities," which is in previews at the Joseph Papp Public Theater and opens Tuesday.
Among the voices are those of Carmel Cato, the father of 7-year-old Gavin, killed by a car in a rebbe's motorcade; the Rev.
Al Sharpton, the black activist; Reuven Ostrov, an assistant chaplain at Kings County Hospital Center, where a Hasidic scholar, Yankel Rosenbaum, was admitted in August after being stabbed by a group of blacks, and later died, and Mayor David N. Dinkins, whom Ms.
Smith interviewed last week about comparisons between Crown Heights and the Los Angeles riots.


'Wake Up Little Susie'
To the Editor:
I was very gratified that Andrew Hacker gave such serious and respectful attention to my book, "Wake Up Little Susie: Single Pregnancy and Race Before Roe v. Wade" (March 29).


Calm Prevailed Where Riots Once Ravaged


You Wish It Didn't Exist
You can never be underdressed when you wear a message T-shirt.
The scene was a dinner party at Cafe Luxembourg last week in honor of Afrika, a 25-year-old Russian conceptual artist.
Among the usual basic black was a certain T-shirt worn by Diego Cortez, an art critic.


Miss Showalter, Mr. Reynders 3d
Dr. and Mrs.
C.
Robert Showalter of Harrisonburg, Va., have announced the engagement of their daughter Claudia Robyn Showalter to Charlton Reynders 3d, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Reynders Jr. of Bedford Hills, N.Y.
A November wedding is planned.
Miss Showalter, 25 years old, graduated from Princeton University and expects to receive an M.D. this month from Yale University.
Her father is a psychiatrist in Harrisonburg.


Disaffection With National Leaders Sharpens in the Glare of Los Angeles
WITH the war on the streets of Los Angeles in a cease-fire, Americans caught their breath last week, turning to their President and their leading would-be President for insight, leadership and a plan for the future.
What they got were old, relatively modest proposals and plenty of it's-not-our-fault, it's-their-fault finger-pointing.
There are times when such political bickering can be funny.
If politics isn't going to be meaningful, it might as well be entertaining -- a sort of Presidential "Honeymooners." Ralph and Alice Kramden on the evening news.


O'Brien Is Missing, but Life Goes On With Jets
As 83 of a possible 84 players showed up today at Weeb Ewbank Hall on the Hofstra campus for the Jets' minicamp, Coach Bruce Coslet should have expected that he would be asked about the one who was missing: quarterback Ken O'Brien.
"How about the guys that are here?" Coslet said after a first question, on O'Brien, the starter since the last five games of the 1984 season, who has been in limbo since his $1.45 million contract expired at the end of last season.
"It's been talked about. I don't negotiate contracts. I just coach the players when they show up."


Update; Waste Incinerator Site Rejected by a Judge
After a seven-year search for a place to build a hazardous waste incinerator, a New Jersey state panel could be forced to renew its quest.
Judge Joseph Lavery, an administrative law judge, on Thursday scuttled a proposal to build an $80 million toxic waste burner in Linden, a heavily industrial area of Union County, saying the site did not meet environmental standards and that the builder, the GAF Corporation, had not proven that it could safely transport waste to the site, which is half a mile from a residential area.


Judith Wall, Joseph Dirnfeld
Mr. and Mrs.
E.
Craig Wall Jr. of Conway, S.C., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Judith Atkins Wall, to Joseph Bonivento Dirnfeld, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Manfred Dirnfeld of Monte Carlo, Monaco.
An August wedding is planned.
Ms.
Wall, 26 years old, is an assistant vice president at Donaldson, Lufkin &amp; Jenrette, a New York securities firm.
She graduated from Davidson College.
Her father is the president and chief executive of Canal Industries, a forest products company in Conway.


May 3-9; Lebanese Government Resigns After Riots


Who's That Neat Kayaker in a Zoot Suit?
David Lee Roth, a rock star whose name was once synonymous with big hair and spandex, pulled up his California roots last fall, moved to New York, tamed his hair and restyled himself.
Recently, he made a zoot-suited appearance in Women's Wear Daily.


Lemieux Worth His Weight in Penguins
The tall and handsome man with the imposing figure walked into the Penguins dressing room, his left arm in a cast from the tip of his fingers to up near his elbow.
He nodded and walked out.
His lips said nothing, but Mario Lemieux's eyes spoke volumes.
Bryan Trottier, the veteran center for the Penguins, who has four Stanley Cup rings with the Islanders and one from last year with the Penguins, had little difficulty finding the words to measure Lemieux's value to the Penguins.


'Wake Up Little Susie'
To the Editor:
In the interview accompanying Andrew Hacker's review of her book, "Wake Up Little Susie," Rickie Solinger explains her enigmatic title by saying that the young girl in the Everly Brothers' song "thinks her association with imagined sexuality will doom her, and this book is really about the ways society and culture stigmatize girls in very damaging ways."


Seeing Eye Dogs Allowed Here
PLACE: Park Avenue Cafe, 100 East 63d Street.
IDENTITY: Haute Americana.
Opened three and a half months ago by David Burke, the former chef at the River Cafe, and Alan Stillman, the owner of Smith &amp; Wollensky.
MAITRE D': Oliver Rohmann, age 26.
Q. How long have you been a maitre d'?
A. I've been in this business for a while now. I was originally from Dusseldorf.
Q.
Who is here tonight?
A.
There's a newscaster sitting in there now.
I'm not sure if I'm supposed to say the name.
Q.
I saw Chuck Scarborough.
A.
I didn't want that person mentioned by me.
I think even though he's a person of public, he has a right to his privacy, which he is exercising right now while he is having dinner.
Q.
What is it like dealing with all the celebrities?
A.
I didn't have one bad experience with a so-called celebrity.
They are the nicest, most uncomplicated people.
I'm serious.
Joan Rivers I saw again on Sunday.
She is the nicest sweetest person.
Q.
Did she bring her dog Spike?
A. No.
Q.
Do you let dogs in here?
A. I don't think it's considerate to all the other customers. I love dogs. I love cats.
Q.
What about Seeing Eye dogs?
A.
We had a dog two times in here for a lady who was blind, and I didn't have one customer complain.
But that's not a dog.
It is a dog in one way, but that's an instrument for that person to go around and to enjoy what it is for her to enjoy, her dinner.


After L.A., How to Revive Hope In the Inner City
EARL G. GRAVES Editor and publisher, Black Enterprise magazine, New York
For many black executives and business owners, the brutality of life in the ghettos commanded their attention long before the Rodney King verdict ignited the worst riots in recent history.
Asking them how to bring those inner cities back to life called forth personal recollections melded with practical measures, anger shadowed by despair.


Orioles Get Relief And Stop White Sox
Orioles 5, White Sox 2
BALTIMORE, May 9 (AP) -- Bob Milacki struggled for five and a third innings before Baltimore's bullpen bailed him out, and the Orioles ended Chicago's six-game winning streak with a 5-2 victory tonight.
Milacki (2-2) gave up two runs on eight hits and a walk.
Alan Mills, Mike Flanagan and Gregg Olson shut out the White Sox the rest of the way, with Olson pitching the ninth for his sixth save.
The Orioles won for the ninth time in 11 games.
They are 13-3 at Camden Yards, and the victory enabled them to avoid losing consecutive games at home for the first time this season.
Frank Thomas got two hits and drove in both Chicago runs.
He is 13 for 29 with 11 runs batted in and 12 walks in his last 9 games.
Alex Fernandez (2-3) gave up five runs on 10 hits in seven and one-third innings.
It was his first appearance since his one-hitter against Milwaukee on Monday.
Red Sox 5, Royals 0
KANSAS CITY, Mo. (AP) -- Roger Clemens, facing only two batters over the minimum, pitched a three-hitter for his 31st career shutout and Boston broke a losing streak at three games by stopping Kansas City.
Clemens (4-3) struck out four and walked one in beating the Royals for the 12th time in 15 career decisions.
He pitched his second shutout of the season, having blanked Cleveland with a three-hitter on April 12.
The first two Royals to reach base, Curtis Wilkerson with a walk in the first inning and George Brett with a single in the second, were thrown out trying to steal by catcher Tony Pena.
After Brett's single, Clemens retired 16 in a row until Bob Melvin and Brett led off the eighth with singles.
Expos 9, Giants 3
MONTREAL (AP) -- Archi Cianfrocco hit his first major league homer and drove in five runs as Montreal routed San Francisco.
Cianfrocco, a rookie making his second consecutive start at third base in place of slumping Bret Barberie, hit a bases-empty homer in the second, a two-run triple in the fourth and a two-run single in the fifth.
The Expos ruined the season debut of Bud Black (0-1).
He lasted only four and two-thirds innings in his first appearance since he sprained his lower back in spring training.
Black was charged with seven earned runs on seven hits.
Chris Nabholz (2-2) worked seven innings, allowing four hits.
He gave up Cory Snyder's two-run homer in the second, which gave the Giants a 2-0 lead.
Reliever John Wetteland allowed a run in the ninth on Willie McGee's pinch-single.
Black retired the first five batters before Cianfrocco homered over the left-field wall.
Cubs 3, Reds 1
CHICAGO (AP) -- Frank Castillo pitched seven strong innings, helping Chicago break Cincinnati's winning streak at three games.
It was the first victory for Castillo (1-3) since defeating San Francisco 3-2 on Sept. 8.
He gave up one run on five hits, walked two and struck out four in seven-plus innings.
He left in the eighth when he walked leadoff batter Bip Roberts.
Paul Assenmacher relieved, and Roberts scored on a groundout by Paul O'Neill.
Assenmacher pitched one and two-thirds innings for his first save.
Padres 5, Phillies 1
PHILADELPHIA (AP) -- Craig Lefferts stopped Philadelphia for seven innings and Fred McGriff had three hits, including a two-run triple, in San Diego's victory.
Lefferts (3-2), who became a starter this season after eight years as a reliever, struck out two and walked one.
He gave up five hits, among them Dale Murphy's 398th career home run with one out in the seventh inning.


Victor Borge Keeps Being Discovered
WHEN Jack Paar asked his 9-year-old grandson to name the most famous men, the youngster gave three names: Spider-Man, Batman and Victor Borge -- a true story, Mr.
Borge and his agent say.
And there lies the essence of the Borge mystique: the uncanny ability of the musical humorist to appeal equally to a youngster and an adult.
On another level, the 83-year-old Mr.
Borge can tickle the funny bones of the musically trained and the musically ignorant -- simultaneously,
"If I knew what the secret was, it wouldn't be a secret," mused Mr.
Borge, improvising at a concert grand in the music room of his home in Greenwich, where he lives with his wife, Sanna.


Corrections
The crossword puzzle in The Times Magazine last Sunday included an incorrect answer for 42 Down, "Well-knit femme of fiction?" The character, in "A Tale of Two Cities," was Madame Defarge, not Madame Lafarge.


Out Front at the White House
The only thing that looked like a firm work offer was an idea for an American Express commercial.
This would focus on me-as-the-President's-daughter, and I just couldn't do it, no matter how poor I was.
Besides, I couldn't imagine how they would make it seem plausible.
Put me in front of the White House and have me say, 'You don't know me -- and they don't either?' "
-- Patti Davis, "The Way I See It" (G. P. Putnam's Sons, $22.95), page 301.


Disco Vault
You park your car next to Hermann Goering's old Air Ministry and walk down toward Hitler's wrecked bunker.
You are about a block from a scar of a landscape where, up until two years ago, the Berlin Wall stood.
Running from the K.G.B.?
On the trail of George Smiley?
No, just looking for a good time in Berlin.


Slogging Up PC Hill at I.B.M.
It's crunch time for I.B.M., time to go head-to-head and toe-to-toe with the competition, and James Cannavino, for one, is pumped up for action.
Consider the broken-glass caper.
A few months ago, Steven Ballmer, a cocky top executive of I.B.M.'s archrival in software, the Microsoft Corporation, paraded before thousands of employees in the Seattle Kingdome in a red Corvette.
On the car's doors, in bold letters, was the word "Windows," the name of Microsoft's hugely successful software program, a product that has helped undermine the International Business Machines Corporation's supremacy in personal computers.


After L.A., How to Revive Hope In the Inner City
IRA D. HALL Treasurer, I.B.M. United States, Purchase, N.Y.
For many black executives and business owners, the brutality of life in the ghettos commanded their attention long before the Rodney King verdict ignited the worst riots in recent history.
Asking them how to bring those inner cities back to life called forth personal recollections melded with practical measures, anger shadowed by despair.


Unbalanced
What's wrong with the proposed constitutional amendment to make Congress balance the budget each year?
Only that it's wrong in principle and destructive in practice.
It may sound like a direct remedy for Washington's toying with trillions in deficit spending.
In fact, such an amendment would threaten precisely the long-term investments society needs most and risk pushing a soft economy into icy recession.
These risks aren't warranted.
Congress has to get control over spending on medical care and other entitlements.
But that can be done without perilous grandstanding.
The amendment is no solution; it's an unbalanced problem.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball National League  CINCINNATI REDS -- Recalled Milton Hill, pitcher, from Nashville of the American Association.
Optioned Steve Foster, pitcher, to Nashville.
Hockey  National Hockey League  NEW YORK RANGERS -- Recalled Rob Zamuner, center, from Binghamton of the American Hockey League.
Football  Canadian Football League  HAMILTON TIGER-CATS -- Signed Damon Allen, quarterback, to a two-year contract.
FRIDAY Basketball  United States Basketball League  PHILADELPHIA SPIRIT -- Extended the contract of Bill Lang, head coach, and Ron Dick and Joe Betteridge, assistant coaches, through the 1992 season.
Released Henri Abrams, center; Jeff Herdman and Richard Lucas, forwards; Ron Lacey, guard, and Mat Miller, guard.
World Basketball League  ERIE WAVE -- Assigned Rodney Glassnor, guard, to the taxi squad.
Activated Darelle Porter, guard, from the taxi squad.
Football  National Football League  GREEN BAY PACKERS -- Released Mark Murphy, safety, and Kurt Larson, linebacker.
INDIANAPOLIS COLTS -- Signed Derrick Franklin, Stacy Danley and Brian Lattimore, running backs; Eddie Britton, Mike Bellamy and Reggie Thornton, wide receivers; Mark Garalczyk, defensive lineman; Frank Gianetti, John Davis and Chad Thorson, linebackers; Rob Luedeke and Michael Heldt, centers; Mark Tucker ann John Ray, offensive linemen; Charles Arbuckle, tight end; Error McCorvey, Alex Thomas, James Williams and Isaac Morehouse, defensive backs, and Edward Toner, fullback.
SAN FRANCISCO 49ERS -- Signed Steve Bates, Scott Curtis and Leroy Smith, linebackers; Clarence Siler, defensive end; Mark Seay, wide receiver.; Derrick Deese, guard.
World League  OHIO GLORY -- Signed Calvin Nicholson, cornerback.
SACRAMENTO SURGE -- Activated Michael Jones, linebacker, from injured reserve.
Released Herb Welch, safety.
Hockey  National Hockey League  NHL -- Suspended Adam Graves, New York Rangers forward, for four games for a blatant slash in a game on May 5.
VANCOUVER CANUCKS -- Signed Jason Fitzsimmons, goaltender, and Dan Kesa, forward, to multiyear contracts.
College  GEORGIA SOUTHERN -- Named Eddie Garfinkle assistant football coach.
HARTFORD -- Named Paul Brazeau men's basketball coach and signed him to a five-year contract.
TEXAS -- Announced the resignation of Jamie Ciampaglio, men's assistant basketball coach.
VANDERBILT -- Announced the resignation of Fred Jackson, quarterbacks coach, to become running backs coach at Michigan.


This Week's Numbers
Consensus
Last Period
Estimates*
Tuesday
Producer prices, percent change
0.2
0.2
Wednesday
Consumer prices, percent change
0.5
0.3
Retail sales, percent change
-0.4
0.3
Thursday
Jobless claims,in thousands
415
430
Friday
Industrial production, change
0.2
0.3
Capacity utilization, percent
78.1
78.3
Monday: Canadian premiers conference  Tuesday: Presidential primaries Wednesday: The House of Representatives considers the small-business credit crunch relief act and the budget resolution *
Mikhail S. Gorbachev addresses the Economic Club of New York  (Source: I.D.E.A.)


Leaving Father Behind
A MAN'S PLACE
By Annie Ernaux.
Translated by Tanya Leslie. 99 pp.
New York: Four Walls Eight Windows. $15.95.


Too Many Jokes About Lebanon
It is unfortunate that even while Mark Fox is enjoying a taste of one of Lebanon's treasured wines, Chateau Musar, he has to make an insensitive statement about Lebanon  [ "A la Carte: Where Wine Choices Are as Varied as Unusual," March 29 ] .
This war-torn country has suffered enough such jokes.
Maybe it's time to look at Lebanon's qualities and appreciate them for what they are.
Moreover, the wine Mr.
Fox is referring to, Chateau Musar '82, was bottled nine years prior to the gulf war and many miles away.
DORIS MARKSOHN Mill Neck


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
MUSICAL MEMORIES
Ruth and Skitch Henderson will share breakfast and anecdotes of their musical and culinary careers, and they will give a cooking demonstration for people attending the fund-raising event for the Jansen Memorial Hospice on Tuesday.
Two sittings, at 9 or 10:30 A.M., are scheduled in the Zodiac Restaurant of Neiman-Marcus in White Plains.
The cost is $65 a person.
In addition to their individual pursuits -- Mr.
Henderson as a musician and conductor for 50 years; Mrs.
Henderson as a lecturer and teacher of art, retailing and food preparation -- the couple manage a multifaceted art and kitchen-ware emporium and a cooking school at their New Milford, Conn., farm called the Silo.
They have also written a cookbook together, called "Seasons in the Country," published by Viking-Penguin in 1990.
Mrs.
Henderson is working on a second book for Viking-Penguin, "Christmas in the Country," expected to be released before Christmas in 1993.


Our Bad Guys
INSTRUMENTS OF STATECRAFT
U.S.
Guerrilla Warfare, Counterinsurgency, and Counterterrorism, 1940-1990.
By Michael McClintock. 604 pp.
New York:  Pantheon Books.


Women Cautioned on Heart Disease
WHEN Rosalie Friedman of Lido Beach had a heart attack last year at the age of 44, it took more than a week to make the diagnosis.
"No one paid much attention when I complained that I didn't feel well," said Mrs.
Friedman, the mother of three children.
"When I told my husband that I had chest pains and thought that maybe I'd had a heart attack, he said I was the 'girl who cried wolf.'


Distribution of The Times Is Disrupted
Delivery of the New York Times was disrupted again yesterday when a Times truck was burned and another was heavily damaged early yesterday as sporadic violence continued in a labor dispute between the newspaper truck drivers union and a wholesale newspaper distributor and The New York Times.
A spokeswoman for The Times, Nancy Nielsen, said that two trucks were unable to deliver 108,000 papers from The Times to a wholesale distribution center in New Rochelle, N.Y.
The papers were to have been taken by the wholesaler to newsstands and other outlets in Westchester County, N.Y., and Fairfield County, Conn.


A Sampler of Light Lunches on the Road
COUNTRY drives and sightseeing trips often raise the question, or lament, of where to find a light lunch in pleasant surroundings in an unfamiliar town.
The following threesome may extend a helping hand (or palate) to anyone driving through northwest Connecticut.
All do take-out and catering.
EPICUREAN CAFE is a small room inside the Mattatuck Museum in Waterbury, to the left through the hallway into the exhibits' area.
The room has a black-and-white checkerboard floor, high ceiling, peach walls and plastic-topped tables.
A cupboard on one side is full of fancily packaged house-made cookies and candies.


Aggression Pays Off In Cavendish Pairs
ALTHOUGH the famous Cavendish Club died almost a year ago, the name lives on.
The 18th Cavendish Invitational Charity Pairs was played a week ago in New York City and attracted many of the country's best players.
A few were missing, unfortunately, because of clashes with major events in other parts of the country.
The winners in a field of 36 pairs were Sam Lev of Forest Hills, Queens, and Amos Kaminski of Manhattan.
There is usually a small European contingent at the Cavendish, and this year it was even smaller than usual -- just 7 players out of 72 participants.
The visitors have done particularly well in the past five years, with three victories and two runner-up positions.
Lev, who learned his bridge in Israel, has a theory to explain this.
He believes that American players, reared on match-point play, are too cautious, and that players who learned their bridge elsewhere gain by aggression.


Minus Eye Cream
To the Editor: Reading Joan Gelman's delightful article about her safari experience ("Africa Without Eye Cream," April 12) brought back many memories of my own safari in Kenya in the mid-80's.
I, too, was forewarned about the many problems I might encounter.
A pharmacist's daughter, I was (as always) equipped with medication for any possible emergency.
These were by and large unnecessary.
Perhaps readers would do well to heed one additional bit of advice given to visitors in the Mara Serena Lodge guest information booklet concerning shoe cleaning (a far less life-threatening concern):


Mothers, Flowers and Death
On Friday the north lawn of the United Nations was ablaze with 500,000 carnations placed there by the International Planned Parenthood Federation.
The flowers weren't celebratory.
They were grave markers -- for the 500,000 women who die each year around the globe from the complications of pregnancy and childbirth.
Most of these women come from the slums and villages of the third world, and when they die, most of their newborns die with them.
So, eventually, do two million of their other children.
Yet almost all of these deaths can been prevented -- if these women have the choice to avoid pregnancy, and have a chance for medical care.


A Cultural Ambassador More French Than the French
The story of William Christie is a late-20th-century version of a Henry James novel.
The most influential conductor of early music this country has yet produced, Mr.
Christie has lived most of his professional life in France, and has embraced French culture as ardently as any Frenchman, without losing the plucky, enterprising spirit of his native land.
But while Mr.
Christie's performing career has centered in his adopted country, he does not altogether neglect the United States.
This afternoon, he and his performing group, Les Arts Florissants, will perform Purcell's masque "The Fairy Queen" in a concert version at Alice Tully Hall, repeating a program presented on Thursday.
These performances come just two months after a triumphant revival of Lully's tragic opera "Atys" at the Brooklyn Academy of Music.


Cuomo Seeks Genetic Data Of Offenders
Trying to make DNA testing the kind of investigative weapon that fingerprints have long been, the Cuomo administration wants to create a genetic database by compelling convicted murderers and sex offenders to provide blood samples.
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo calls the DNA system "a revolutionary, powerful and necessary criminal-justice tool" that will help track down criminal suspects and exonerate innocent people.


A Quarter Century Of Wave Hill
MADELEINE KEEVE was digging Campanula rapunculus out of the herb garden at Wave Hill.
That herb's delicious spring greens are what first got Rapunzel in trouble with the evil witch.
"When she was pregnant Rapunzel's mother hungered for the greens, so the father stole into the witch's garden to get them," said Miss Keeve, who has worked for the garden for three years.
"The witch caught him and said, 'You can have the greens, but I'll take the child.' "


An Opera of Few Words


Double Image
International Center of Photography May 5, 7 P.M.


Freedom Fighter
Early this April, six weeks before its most notorious citizen was scheduled to die by electrocution, the Appalachian coal-mining town of Grundy, Va., was raw with conflicting emotions.
An ad in The Virginia Mountaineer urged residents to plead with the Governor not to intervene.
At the same time, the rugged hillsides and deep hollows were full of rumors questioning the official version of the 1981 crime, the rape and murder of a 19-year-old housewife.
Jim McCloskey had come to Grundy to chase down the rumors, because he believed that 286 miles away, in the state penitentiary at Boydton, the wrong man was ticking down the days on death row.
McCloskey is the Presbyterian lay minister and self-taught private eye who heads Centurion Ministries, a kind of charity-supported detective agency and advocacy group whose only clients are prisoners claiming they were wrongfully convicted.
In the past 12 years, he and a handful of colleagues have conducted tenacious, shoestring investigations that have freed 12 men and women awaiting execution or serving life terms.
The group had just scored its most recent victory -- a double play -- in March, with the much publicized release of two men falsely imprisoned for 17 years for killing an off-duty deputy sheriff in Los Angeles.


The Jury Said, 'I'm White, and You're Wrong'; Victim Stands Accused
To the Editor:
It has been more than a year since I watched Attorney General Dick Thornburgh on "Meet the Press" discussing the Rodney King beating.
Mr.
Thornburgh had just announced his office was investigating possible systematic brutality in the Los Angeles Police Department.
He said his office would be looking for a "pattern in these cases."


The Perks of Power, Staff, Stamps and Lulus
Along the corridors of government in Albany, Trenton and Hartford, there are many ways to measure privilege and power.
Salaries are one.
Postage stamps are another.
In the New York Legislature (base salary: $57,500), the Assembly gives rank-and-file members $2,500 a year for postage, enough for 8,620 first-class stamps.
The Senate gives its members 100,000 stamps.
Leaders get more.


Ivana The Survivor
IVANA ZELNICKOVA TRUMP never objected to personifying the salient maxim of the 1980's, which was that everything worth anything could be bought.
Her faith in this dainty precept was even more unwavering than that of the man who underwrote her participation in the decade's excess.
"I want to keep going higher and higher," Donald Trump once told a bookseller's convention in Las Vegas, Nev.
"And then we die, and nobody gives a damn. It's all pretty futile, really." But for Mrs.
Trump, there would be no unseemly public wallows in existential angst.


Perspectives: Development in Bayside; At 32, a Shopping Center Will Grow Again
THE Meyer family goes back a long time as a Queens property owner.
In 1896, Cord Meyer Jr. bought a farm in what was then called Newtown from the estate of Samuel Lord, a co-founder of Lord &amp; Taylor.
He laid out streets, installed sewers, renamed the land Elmhurst and sold off subdivisions to home builders.
The founder was the great-grandfather of the brothers who run Cord Meyer Development Company today, Charles G. Meyer Jr. and George S. Meyer.
They manage the company's properties -- mainly stores, offices and Mitchell-Lama middle-income apartments -- from an office in Forest Hills.


More Sanctions May Be the Way To Push Libya, Mideast Aides Say
Western diplomats and Arab officials now say that additional sanctions may be the only way to force Libya to accede to United Nations demands to hand over two suspects in the bombing of a Pan Am jumbo jet.
Western diplomats say the new sanctions under consideration include an embargo on Libyan oil, the mainstay of the country's economy.
But Arab nations are reluctant to impose an oil embargo.


Making a Difference; From Olives to Software
RIDGELY C. EVERS's passion is his olive orchard in the Sonoma Valley of California.
He and his wife, Sunnie, spend "every waking hour on the weekends" tending the 2,500 trees they imported from Italy with the goal of making "the best olive oil in California."
Like most entrepreneurs, Mr.
Evers views bookkeeping as the downside of owning a business.
Now he has figured out a way to cut the paperwork to a minimum: Quickbooks, a new accounting program for small businesses that he developed for Intuit Inc., a software maker in Menlo Park, Calif., where he works fulltime.


Anti-Government Demonstrations Continue in Bangkok


After L.A., How to Revive Hope In the Inner City
JUANDA A. HONORE Los Angeles School District police officer; owner, T. J. Cinnamons Bakery at Baldwin Hills Crenshaw Plaza, Los Angeles
For many black executives and business owners, the brutality of life in the ghettos commanded their attention long before the Rodney King verdict ignited the worst riots in recent history.
Asking them how to bring those inner cities back to life called forth personal recollections melded with practical measures, anger shadowed by despair.


FACING UP TO INDUSTRIAL POLICY
Kuttner points to the success of Japan and Germany as evidence of the virtue of industrial policy.
He fails to mention that the economy that has consistently grown the fastest in the last 20 years is that of Hong Kong.
Nonetheless, Hong Kong has the most laissez-faire Government in the world.
BRETT D. BYERS
New Haven


Bulls Take the Dare Out Of Knicks
It made no difference to the Chicago Bulls that the Knicks battered and bruised them yesterday afternoon at Madison Square Garden.
The Bulls were too focused and too determined to allow themselves to be beaten.
For the first time in the playoff series, Michael Jordan (32 points) and Scottie Pippen (26 points) combined to dominate offensively.
For the first time in the series, the Bulls got more crucial offensive rebounds and claimed more loose balls.
And for the first time in the series, Chicago took the upper hand.


'Death and the Maiden' Becomes a Tale of Two Cities
Talk about tall oaks growing from tiny acorns.
Few plays have had humbler origins than "Death and the Maiden," and none casts a longer shadow across international theaterland.
Too late to catch it in Seoul, where it has just finished its run; but go to London, New York or Vienna, and there it still is; plan a trip to Vilnius or Johannesburg, Buenos Aires or Tokyo, and there it will soon be.
Before long, 40 countries will have staged Ariel Dorfman's case study of the aftereffects of political torture.
Each version will have its national biases; but it would be a foolish director who did not ponder the starkly contrasting performances now on Broadway and in the West End.
Both are equally popular.
Mike Nichols's production at the Brooks Atkinson continues to do near-capacity business.
So does Lindsay Posner's version at the Duke of York's, even though Juliet Stevenson has just handed over to Geraldine James the role of Paulina, the woman who captures and puts on private trial the doctor she thinks abused her body and wrecked her psyche 15 years before.


Making a Difference; Winning Over the Community for a Mall
After a four-year struggle that included jousting over zoning and the complaints of abutting neighbors, ground was finally broken earlier this month for a large new shopping mall on Long Island.
The opportunity for newly created jobs in a recession-weakened economy was one reason opposition crumbled.
Another was the personal diplomacy of Alan Fortunoff.
Mr.
Fortunoff, the 59-year-old president of the chain of houseware and jewelry stores that bears the family name, is the force behind the new mall, and he said last week in a telephone interview that he realized early in the planning that he needed to win over the community.


59 Are Chosen for National Academy of Sciences
The National Academy of Sciences, the 129-year-old private organization that advises the Federal Government on science and technology, has elected 59 new members.
The election brings the academy's active membership to 1,651 scientists and engineers.
Fourteen nonvoting foreign associates were also elected; their number is now 289.


Meg Lyons, Geoffrey Little
Margaret Hurley Lyons, a daughter of Mrs.
Robert D. Lyons of Stonington, Conn., and the late Mr.
Lyons, was married yesterday to Geoffrey Stevenson Little, a son of Mrs.
Harold d'O.
Baker of New York.
The Rev.
Timothy Raasch performed the Episcopal ceremony at Calvary Church in Stonington.
Mrs.
Little, 34 years old, is known Meg.
She is an architect in private practice in New York.
She graduated magna cum laude from Wesleyan University and received a master's degree in architecture from Harvard University.
Her father was the owner of the New London (Conn.) Marine Supply Company.
Her mother, Sheila Lyons, is a financial adviser in Stonington.


Making a Difference; Matchmaker for Matchbox
Harry J. Pearce once had a collection of 30 Matchbox miniature cars.
Now he is going after the whole lot.
Tyco Toys Inc., where Mr.
Pearce is executive vice president and chief financial officer, reached a tentative agreement last Wednesday to acquire the Hong Kong-based Universal Matchbox Group, a deal he initiated in February.


Sally Lu Lake, William Crawford
Sally Lu Lake and William Redpath Crawford were married yesterday at St.
Peter's Church in Millbrook, N.Y.
The Rev.
Brewster Y. Beach performed the Episcopalian ceremony.
Ms.
Lake, who is 39 years old and is keeping her name, is a senior counsel to the International Business Machines Corporation in White Plains.
She graduated and received a law degree from the University of California at Davis.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph E. Lake of Sacramento, Calif.


Marcella Wainwright, Jeffrey Sohm
Mr. and Mrs.
Stuyvesant Wainwright 3d of New York have announced the engagement of their daughter, Marcella Heron Wainwright, to Jeffrey Shepard Sohm, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Jacques Sohm of Scarsdale, N.Y.
An August wedding is planned.
Miss Wainwright, 24 years old, graduated from the University of Colorado and is a graduate student at the Bank Street College of Education.
Her father is a financial planner with the E. T. Dayton Agency in East Hampton, L.I.
Her mother, Marcella Wainwright, is the director of the Park Avenue Christian Church Day School in New York.


More Offices Are Shedding the Suit
WHEN the air-conditioning at L &amp; F Products broke down last summer and the company was told it would take three weeks to fix it, Michael R. Gallagher started a small revolution.
Contemplating visions of middle managers sweating in the company's sealed office building in Montvale, N.J., Mr.
Gallagher, the president, suggested that everyone come to work in chinos and polo shirts.


Report from New York
Maybe it takes tough times to get the sparks flying.
The Seventh Avenue fall '92 collections showed that big names were in tip-top form, bread-and-butter manufacturers were solid and the up-and-comers were almost all on an up.
This was one of the best seasons to come along in some time.
In general, the clothes exuded a bit of wit and a lot of wisdom.
Most silhouettes were lean, molded and longer of hemline, though Isaac Mizrahi, in what was perhaps a prophetic move, loosened up the shape, evoking memories of 50's chemises.
Overall, men's wear was the big influence, and, surprisingly, the trappings of 60's hippie troubadours were also inspirational.
Mixed in with all this were such staples as classic sweater sets and good cloth coats.
In a strong season, these eight were particularly stellar.


Moonie U. in Bridgeport?
The University of Bridgeport's decision to accept $50 million from an offshoot of the Unification Church was not easy, but the trustees were desperate.
Having exhausted all other bailout prospects, they could take the Rev.
Sun Myung Moon's money or shut down.
Their reluctance to associate with his controversial theology was finally outweighed by their laudable desire to survive.
The money will come from a group called Professors World Peace Academy, which claims a membership of some 10,000 academics, including 800 Americans.
They function mainly as sponsors of conferences and journals focused on peace and prosperity; they aim eventually to have campuses on four continents.


Quotation of the Day
"I'm not sure America wants to go on a blind date with this man that lasts for four years. He's on the front porch with 1,000 roses, and it's time to ask some questions." -- JIM OBERWETTER, Texas chairman of the Bush campaign, on Ross Perot.  [ 18:1. ]


Kasparov Finds It Rough at Dortmund
WHILE the semifinals in the series of candidate matches to pick the next challenger for the world title were going on in Linares, Spain, Gary Kasparov of Russia had a tough struggle of his own in the Dortmund International Tournament at the end of April.
The world champion lost two games before achieving the 6-3 score that tied him for first place with the Ukrainian grandmaster Vasily Ivanchuk.
FINAL STANDINGS
Player
W
L
D
Pts
Kasparov
5
2
2
6
Ivanchuk
4
1
4
6
Bareyev
4
2
3
5 1/2
Anand
2
1
6
5
Kamsky
2
2
5
4 1/2
Salov
3
3
3
4 1/2
Huebner
2
3
4
4
Adams
1
3
5
3 1/2
Shirov
1
3
5
3 1/2
Piket
0
4
5
2 1/2
Kasparov won both his penultimate and last games; Ivanchuk won only his eighth and drew the ninth.
Against the English grandmaster Michael Adams in round 8, Kasparov ruthlessly refuted a new gambit.


Hospitals Are Warned Not to Rewrite Records
The organization that accredits a vast majority of the nation's hospitals voted today to prohibit any rewriting of important hospital quality-control records.
The action came in the wake of accusations that some institutions altered the records to pass inspections and qualify for millions of dollars in Federal Medicare and Medicaid reimbursements.
The group, the Joint Commission on Accreditation of Healthcare Organizations, an industry organization supported by the American Medical Association, the American Hospital Association and other leading medical societies, took the action at a quarterly meeting after receiving two dozen complaints about the rewriting of records in the past year.


Suzanne Bohan, Shawn Mulligan
Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas E. Bohan of Stuart, Fla., and Greenwich, Conn., have announced August wedding plans for their daughter Suzanne Jane Bohan and Shawn Patrick Mulligan, the son of Patrick and Catherine Mulligan of Fargo, N.D.
Ms.
Bohan, 30 years old, graduated from Connecticut College and the University of Colorado School of Law.
She is an assistant regional counsel for the Rocky Mountain region of the Federal Environmental Protection Agency in Denver.
Her father, a former executive vice president of Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Advertising in New York, is the chief executive officer of Bohan Enterprises, a marketing and investment company in Stuart.


Robin Hancock, Burton Lippa
Robin Elizabeth Hancock, a daughter of Robert W. and Elizabeth Hancock of Naples, Fla., and Burton William Lippa, a son of Priscilla Lippa of Tamarac, Fla., and the late Leo P. Lippa, were married yesterday.
William J. Bauer, the Chief Judge of the United States Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit in Chicago, performed the ceremony at the Racquet Club of Chicago.


Modern Shepherd Saving the Flock
STANDING in an emerald pasture holding a Jacob lamb, Susanna Davy said, "It took hundreds of years to develop this breed, so once it's gone it's gone forever." The 46-year-old Ms.
Davy is the shepherd for a flock of 150 or so sheep from rare or endangered breeds on Fieldwood Farm, a 300-acre estate in Briarcliff Manor.
Working as a shepherd in the 20th century may seem anachronistic, but it is nonetheless a rewarding, and challenging, job.


Mutual Funds; Where Is the Manager's Money?
Investors who are evaluating mutual funds can sift through mounds of data, but one crucial piece of information is nearly always missing: How much of their own money do fund managers invest their funds?
The industry says the information is irrelevant.
"It hits me as not material," says Matthew P. Fink, president of the Investment Company Institute, the mutual fund trade group, in Washington.


May 3-9: Supreme Court; Another Gate Slams Shut For State Prisoners' Appeals
It was in the aftermath of the Civil War that Congress first enlisted the Federal judiciary in the crucial job of monitoring the quality of justice being delivered by the state courts.
For the first time, Federal judges could hear state prisoners' petitions for writs of habeas corpus -- challenges to the constitutionality of a conviction or sentence, which remain today the only route to Federal court for most state prison inmates.
Lately, that route has become a daunting obstacle course -- due not to a change of heart by Congress, but to a sustained attack on habeas corpus by Chief Justice William H. Rehnquist and the current majority of the Supreme Court.
Last week, the Court took the latest, although almost certainly not the last, step toward shutting off meaningful Federal court review for state prisoners.


Cheryl Gruetzmacher, Edward Gordon
Cheryl K. Gruetzmacher and Edward S. Gordon, executives in New York, were married last Tuesday.
Rabbi David M. Posner performed the ceremony at Temple Emanu-El in New York.
Mrs.
Gordon, 36 years old, is the executive vice president of Jacobs Investors, an investment partnership.
She graduated from Iowa State University.
She is the daughter of James H. Gruetzmacher of Marshaltown, Iowa, and Gloria P. Gruetzmacher of Des Moines.


Guide to Parks For Disabled
Wendy Roth and Michael Tompane drove 32,000 miles and visited 41 states to research "Easy Access to National Parks: The Sierra Club Guide for People With Disabilities," being published this month by Sierra Club Books.
The authors went to 37 national parks, plus assorted national historical parks, national monuments and national parkways, to research the book, which is designed primarily for people with disabilities, but which may also be useful for the elderly and families with small children.
Ms.
Roth is a writer and television producer who has multiple sclerosis and uses a wheelchair; Mr.
Tompane is a film and video editor and photographer.
The book contains specific information about the accessibility of individual facilities within the parks -- whether a trail is paved, for example, or a restroom can be reached by a visitor using a wheelchair.
Among the 15 parks that merit full descriptions because of their accessibility, regional significance and scenic beauty are Acadia National Park in Maine, Bryce Canyon National Park in Utah, the Everglades National Park in Florida, the Grand Teton National Park in Wyoming, Mesa Verde National Park in Colorado, Olympic National Park in Washington, Rocky Mountain National Park in Colorado and Yosemite National Park in California.
There are shorter sections on 50 parks.


In the Region: Long Island; Recent Sales
Bayport 125,000
156 Fairview Avenue  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 61-year-old ranch; sunporch, basement, detached 2-car garage; taxes $3,500.
Bluepoint 150,000
76 Division Avenue  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 122-year-old Victorian; dining room, family room, inground pool, barn; taxes $4,000.
East Meadow 159,000
2592 Arleigh Road  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 30-year-old ranch; eat-in kitchen, family room, dining room, 1-car garage; taxes $5,200.
Freeport 140,000
9 Essex Street  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 35-year-old colonial; dining room, eat-in kitchen, basement, 1-car garage; taxes $4,800.
Massapequa Park 195,000
86 Atlantic Avenue  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 30-year-old split level; dining room, eat-in kitchen, inground pool; taxes $5,400.
Sayville 152,500
34 River Road  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 44-year-old ranch; dining room, eat-in kitchen, basement, water view; taxes $4,200.
OTHER AREAS  Westbrook, Conn. 212,000
404 West Pond Meadow Road  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 18-year-old cape; cathedral ceiling, 3 acres; taxes $2,799.
Armonk, N.Y. 450,000
14 Tallwoods
4-bedroom, 3-bath, 32-year-old contemporary; family room, formal dining room, fireplace, 2.3 acres; taxes $6,798.
Bridgewater, N.J. 275,000
5 Fairway Court
3-bedroom, 2-bath, 25-year-old ranch; inground pool, patio, professionally landscaped; taxes $4,430.


Ofelia Acosta Marchetti, Gil Silva
Mr. and Mrs.
Manuel Acosta Bonilla of Tegucigalpa, Honduras, have announced the engagement of their daughter Ofelia Acosta Marchetti to Gil Todd Silva, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Gil V. Silva of White Plains.
An August wedding is planned.
Miss Acosta Marchetti, 25 years old, graduated magna cum laude from Texas A &amp; M University.
She is a candidate for an M.B.A. at Columbia University, as is her fiance.
Her father, an attorney in Tegucigalpa and a deputy to the Central American Parliament, is a former Minister of the Treasury and Minister of Economics of the Honduran government.
Her mother, Anna Lucia Marchetti de Acosta, is the chairman of HIASA, a capital-equipment importing company in Tegucigalpa.


For Stains and Other Painting Flaws
SPRING is the best time to inspect exterior house paint, not only because paint problems benefit from prompt repair, but also because severe problems may require professional treatment.
Most paint failures like blisters, peeling, flaking and similar deterioration stem from improper application of the paint or moisture penetration.
It is important to know that paint will inevitably wear out and develop flaws, including over wide areas.
When that occurs, completely stripping and repainting a house, rather than making numerous spot repairs, is usually necessary.


Room Checkout
To the Editor: I recently spent my vacation in San Juan at the Caribe Hilton, a beautiful, expensive hotel in the Condado area.


Helping the Poor: Some Suggestions
The New York Times asked people who live in the inner city, work there or study it, how to help blighted neighborhoods.
Here are some of their answers:
SHAROD BAKER


A STITCH IN TIME
I appreciate Perri Klass's desire to stay awake during an important talk, but she should know that, to some, her knitting reduces the significance of the lecture to that of a TV program.
It's a matter of showing simple courtesy to a colleague.
How would she like it if I pulled out a Game Boy at her next talk?


After L.A., How to Revive Hope In the Inner City
CAROLINE R. JONES President, Caroline R. Jones Advertising Inc., New York
For many black executives and business owners, the brutality of life in the ghettos commanded their attention long before the Rodney King verdict ignited the worst riots in recent history.
Asking them how to bring those inner cities back to life called forth personal recollections melded with practical measures, anger shadowed by despair.


America   Defeats Il Moro In Cup
Italy's greatest fear in challenging for the America's Cup that its United States opponent might have a truly faster boat looked like a vision come true today in this first match of the cup defense.
America3 defeated Il Moro de Venezia by 30 seconds.
After losing the start, Il Moro was unable to rally in the ensuing 20 miles of racing.
The victory by America3 gave Bill Koch's team a 1-0 record in the best-four-of-seven race series.
America3 is defending the 141-year-old America's Cup on behalf of the San Diego Yacht Club.


Minus Eye Cream
To the Editor: I just read the entertaining article by Joan Gelman about the imagined fears of going on a Kenyan safari.
I agree wholeheartedly with her conclusion that "our worst fears were unfounded." On a well-planned safari the trip runs as smoothly, as any good tour should.
However, I do take exception to her recommendation of staying dehydrated.
That advice can be catastrophic.
I do not require much liquid (thanks to World War II training) -- or at least so I thought until our safari.
I drank little and finally I came down with my first and only kidney stone attack.
Fortunately, a local doctor diagnosed my trouble and with medication my wife and I were able to rejoin our tour three days later.
Abercrombie &amp; Kent, our tour operator, saw to it that we would have had proper transportation to Nairobi and hospital care, if necessary.


The New Struggle for Afghanistan: On All Sides, Nations Seek Influence
Less than 24 hours after Islamic rebels took control of Kabul two weeks ago, Pakistan's Prime Minister, Nawaz Sharif, hurriedto the Afghan capital to express his support for the new Government.
But he went also to remind the country's new rulers of who had provided the bulk of support in their war against the Soviet Army and the Government it had backed, a broad hint that Pakistan intended to wield a heavy hand.


Why House Investigator Is Joining the Exodus
An announcement by Representative Matthew F. McHugh, Democrat of New York and chairman of the House Ethics Committee, last week was a surprise even bigger than his election 18 years ago in an upstate New York bastion of Republicanism.
The 53-year-old legislator from Ithaca said he would not seek re-election.
Mr.
McHugh, who was the chief investigator of the House banking scandal, is one of almost 60 members who are voluntarily leaving Congress, the biggest exodus since World War II.
Against the backdrop of the bank scandal, the retirements reflect the growing frustration many members now express about the divisive tone dominating politics and the public's negative view of lawmakers.


A Fisherman Who Turned Crusader
RAIN clouds hovered over the horizon as the Polly and Ruth chugged slowly out of Napeague Harbor.
The gray dawn turned the sea gray, and the raw damp air made even a seasoned seafarer turn up his collar.
"Weather laid right down," Capt.
Stuart B. Vorpahl Jr. said as he steered the Polly and Ruth out into the bay.
On such a doubtful day, those fishing for sport might think twice about leaving harbor.
But Mr.
Vorpahl makes his living from the sea.
Like his father before him and generations of other East End commercial fishermen, he traps fish.
The "set" that he built is in the waters just off Hither Hills State Park.


Ivana The Survivor
IVANA ZELNICKOVA TRUMP never objected to personifying the salient maxim of the 1980's, which was that everything worth anything could be bought.
Her faith in this dainty precept was even more unwavering than that of the man who underwrote her participation in the decade's excess.
"I want to keep going higher and higher," Donald Trump once told a bookseller's convention in Las Vegas, Nev.
"And then we die, and nobody gives a damn. It's all pretty futile, really." But for Mrs.
Trump, there would be no unseemly public wallows in existential angst.


Americana Via England


Abandonment
To the Editor:
Your "Taking Steps to Head Off Abandonment" on March 29 describes a bureaucratic shellgame that attempts to repeal the laws of economics.
As long as there is an inadequate housing stock in New York City to meet demand, landlords will be able to force poor service on captive tenants or charge high rents.
A simpler and more straightforward solution to the problem is to stimulate more low-cost housing.


POSTINGS: Staten Island Project; For the Aging, an 1890's School
Built between 1891 and 1898, Public School 50 in Port Richmond, Staten Island, with its bell and clock towers, is a sealed-up, four-story landmark.
But by the end of 1993 it is expected to help revitalize the community and provide housing for the low-income elderly as the 43-unit Parkside Senior Apartments.
The ecletic-style building at 160 Heberton Avenue, last used in 1984 as an annex for its nearby successor, may also help bridge generations.
"Students and seniors will make good neighbors," said Joan Catalano, executive director of Northfield Community Local Development Corporation of Staten Island, which took on the $4.6 million project in 1987.
"We're thinking of good neighbor programs including gardening, searching for students' roots and reading and tutoring."


The Jury Said, 'I'm White, and You're Wrong'; Inciting to Riot
To the Editor:
Nothing spreads disorder faster than the realization that the police will stand by and do nothing.
That's what happened in Los Angeles the afternoon of April 29, when a local television crew showed a few disgruntled blacks looting a liquor store at the corner of Normandie and Seventh Street shortly after the not guilty verdict for the police officers tried for beating Rodney King.
"This drink's on the L.A.P.D." a woman yelled at the crew as she walked off with a fifth of Chivas.


Ban on Land Mines Is Urgently Needed


Dinkins's Vote-Puller Gears Up to Help Clinton
In 1988, Bill Lynch was an important adviser in the New York Presidential primary campaign of the Rev.
Jesse Jackson, which registered thousands of new voters who helped elect Mayor David N. Dinkins a year later.
Now, Mr.
Lynch, a deputy mayor and Mr.
Dinkins's most trusted political aide, may play a similar role in Gov.
Bill Clinton's campaign this fall.
"That might happen," Mr.
Lynch said last week.
"We're looking at that. The Mayor hasn't made a decision about that yet."


POSTINGS: Landmark Dispute; Brady's Broadway Studio
Is 359 Broadway a landmark?
Yes, said the Landmarks Preservation Commission, noting that every one of the five floors in the 140-year-old structure has a different kind of window ornamentation, making it "an important and usual example of the Italianate style." The commission also cited the fact that the celebrated photographer Mathew B. Brady had his studios there in the 1850's.


Votes in Congress
Tally Last Week in Connecticut, New Jersey and New York
Senate
1.
Seawolf Submarine: Vote on an amendment to a package of budget cuts that would kill two Seawolf nuclear submarines.
Rejected 52 to 46, May 5.
2.
Budget Cuts: Vote on passage of a bill that calls for cutting this year's budget by $8.3 billion.
Approved 61 to 38, May 6.
1
2
Connecticut
Dodd (D) . . .
N
Y
Lieberman (D) . . .
N
Y
New Jersey
Bradley (D) . . .
Y
Y
Lautenberg (D) . . .
N
Y
New York
D'Amato (R) . . .
N
Y
Moynihan (D) . . .
N
Y
House
1.
Budget Cuts: Vote on passage of a substitute measure that included all of President Bush's recommendations for cuts in this year's budget.
Rejected 266 to 150, May 7.
1
Connecticut
1. Kennelly (D) . . .
N
2. Gejdenson (D) . . .
N
3. DeLauro (D) . . .
N
4. Shays (R) . . .
N
5. Franks (R) . . .
N
6. Johnson (R) . . .
N
New Jersey
1. Andrews (D) . . .
N
2. Hughes (D) . . .
N
3. Pallone (D) . . .
N
4. Smith (R) . . .
N
5. Roukema (R) . . .
Y
6. Dwyer (D) . . .
N
7. Rinaldo (R) . . .
N
8. Roe (D) . . .
N
9. Torricelli (D) . . .
N
10. Payne (D) . . .
N
11. Gallo (R) . . .
Y
12. Zimmer (R) . . .
Y
13. Saxton (R) . . .
Y
14. Guarini (D) . . .
N
New York
1. Hochbrueckner (D) . . .
N
2. Downey (D) . . .
N
3. Mrazek (D) . . .
N
4. Lent (R) . . .
Y
5. McGrath (R) . . .
Y
6. Flake (D) . . .
N
7. Ackerman (D) . . .
N
8. Scheuer (D) . . .
N
9. Manton (D) . . .
N
10. Schumer (D) . . .
N
11. Towns (D) . . .
N
12. Owens (D) . . .
N
13. Solarz (D) . . .
N
14. Molinari (R) . . .
Y
15. Green (R) . . .
N
16. Rangel (D) . . .
N
17. Weiss (D) . . .
N
18. Serrano (D) . . .
N
19. Engel (D) . . .
N
20. Lowey (D) . . .
N
21. Fish (R) . . .
Y
22. Gilman (R) . . .
N
23. McNulty (D) . . .
N
24. Solomon (R) . . .
Y
25. Boehlert (R) . . .
N
26. Martin (R) . . .
Y
27. Walsh (R) . . .
N
28. McHugh (D) . . .
N
29. Horton (R) . . .
N
30. Slaughter (D) . . .
N
31. Paxon (R) . . .
Y
32. LaFalce (D) . . .
N
33. Nowak (D) . . .
N
34. Houghton (R) . . .
Y
KEY: Y Yea; N Nay; (A) Absent or did not vote; (P) Present.


Love and the Loft Dwellers on MTV Soap
The producers of MTV's ballyhooed new series "The Real World," -- a documentary about life in a SoHo loft -- have finally filmed some romantic footage.
But it was not what they expected.
The producers had been hoping for some romantic involvement among the loft's residents -- seven men and women ages 19 to 26 who agreed to live together and be filmed for 12 weeks.
Alas, no sparks ignited among the inhabitants.


Charged and Condemned, a Man Is Exonerated
With 27 convictions by the age of 25 and a crack addiction he could not shake, Christopher Lewis did not claim to be a model citizen.
But he did claim not to be a policeman's murderer, a message he kept repeating in an interview yesterday, a day after he was released from a four-month prison stay after prosecutors said they no longer believed that he shot and killed an off-duty sergeant after a botched robbery attempt in mid-Manhattan last December.


Who's That Neat Kayaker in a Zoot Suit?
David Lee Roth, a rock star whose name was once synonymous with big hair and spandex, pulled up his California roots last fall, moved to New York, tamed his hair and restyled himself.
Recently, he made a zoot-suited appearance in Women's Wear Daily.


May 3-9: The Economy; Unemployment Down, Payrolls Up - But Not by Much
For months the question among economic policymakers was whether the occasional signs of recovery were robins that portended a new spring.
While last week's economic reports added further evidence that the season has indeed arrived, the problem is that it does not appear nearly as sunny as economists or Bush Administration officials would like.
Most economists forecast growth of a moderate 2 to 3 percent this year; the average growth rate in the first year after other postwar recessions was a robust 6 percent.


Out Front at the White House
The only thing that looked like a firm work offer was an idea for an American Express commercial.
This would focus on me-as-the-President's-daughter, and I just couldn't do it, no matter how poor I was.
Besides, I couldn't imagine how they would make it seem plausible.
Put me in front of the White House and have me say, 'You don't know me -- and they don't either?' "
-- Patti Davis, "The Way I See It" (G. P. Putnam's Sons, $22.95), page 301.


Fresh Air Child Discovers Beach in Old Greenwich
WHEN Jamaal Pinckney first came to John and Lisa Grunow's beachfront home in Old Greenwich three years ago, he cautiously ventured out to the back lawn, took off his tennis shoes and tiptoed gingerly onto the sand.
The 8-year-old, who lives in the Red Hook section of Brooklyn, had never been to a beach or learned to swim.
Two weeks later he not only could swim laps in a pool but also had moved on to master diving.


2 Weeks in Bedford for Fresh Air Girls
WHEN 9-year-old Renee Curtis arrived in this bucolic village last summer, she brought along hopscotch skills honed on Manhattan asphalt.
Four-year-old Jennifer Pura has not regarded country lanes in the same way since, thanks to Renee's tender, careful instruction.
This summer, Renee, now 10, will be back to share another two weeks with Nicole and Thomas Pura and his daughter, Jennifer.
Leaving behind the homeless shelter in Manhattan where she lives with her parents and brother, Renee will be accompanied by her 10-year-old cousin, Resha Miles.


Marco Month
May is Marco Month at Wave Hill, so try to get to Riverdale in the Bronx for some of the events: children's workshops and guided tours every Sunday afternoon; a gala ball on May 28 with a preview of "Images of the Cotswold Gardens," an exhibition of paintings and drawings by Simon Dorrell on view through the summer.
Wave Hill's entrance is at 249th Street and Riverdale Avenue.
Hours and admission vary, so call (212) 549-3200 for details.
Deadhead narcissus and tulips as the blooms fade.
Remove the entire flower stem so that nutrients will not be wasted traveling up the stalk.


There Is No Will To Clean Up Water
It is a delusion that establishing Peconic Bay as an estuary to be studied with Federal funds will assure saving the bay from dying biologically  [ "Estuary Designation for Peconic Bays Questioned," April 19 ] .
After the proposed five years of study, during which ongoing real-estate development of lands adjacent to the bay will increase the pollution which is killing the bay, there is no guarantee whatsoever that either Federal or state funds will be forthcoming for the facilities required to clean up the bay.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: California; CLINTON 'OBSESSED' WITH U.S. TROUBLES
Bill Clinton said today he wakes up every day obsessed with America's social and economic problems, and he suggested that President Bush had been so isolated that he took an interest in such problems only in an election year or after a crisis, like the riots in Los Angeles.
Mr.
Clinton made the comments in an outdoor amphitheater in this suburb of San Diego as he began introducing himself to the voters of California, where he is not well known.
California holds a Presidential primary on June 2.


Agnes Rossi, Daniel Conaway
Agnes Bridget Rossi, a daughter of Maura Rossi of Ridgewood, N.J., and Frank Rossi of Suffern, N.Y., was married yesterday in New York to Daniel James Conaway, a son of Idell Conaway of New York and Frank Conaway of Unionville, N.Y.
The Rev.
Robert Gentile, a Unitarian minister, performed the ceremony at the home of Richard Hoyt.
Ms.
Rossi, 32 years old, who is keeping her name, graduated from Rutgers University and received a master's degree in English from New York University.
She is the author of a collection of short stories and a novel.
Her father is an editor at The Daily News in New York.
Her mother is a reporter for The Beacon, a weekly newspaper in Clifton, N.J.


Rambo, Rimbaud, Which Is Best?
THE GATES OF IVORY
By Margaret Drabble. 464 pp. New York: Viking. $22.


The Executive Life; The 90's Chain Gang, A la Mother Teresa
Here's the pitch: A tough, cool James Dean character -- perhaps played by Luke Perry -- is convicted of insider trading and sentenced to work in a Bronx soup kitchen.
The greedy, selfish 80's fade into the socially conscious, politically correct 90's.
The plot is a metaphor for our times.
Rather than warehousing people in an overburdened prison, society punishes the guilty by having them serve the community.
Judges across the country hear this pitch by a rogues' gallery of savings-and-loan culprits, tax evaders and insider traders every day.
Charles H. Keating Jr.'s legal team, for example, recently argued that he be punished for his swindling ways by taking a truly grueling job at an eye clinic for five years.


Data Update
*4*VALUE OF CONSTRUCTION CONTRACTS
(Residential in millions of dollars)
Mar. 92
Mar. 91
Change
New York
206.7
193.1
+ 7%
New Jersey
84.1
62.8
+34%
Connecticut
56.0
35.4
+58%
*4*Source: F.W. Dodge Division, McGraw-Hill Information
*4*MORTGAGE INTEREST RATES (Averages)
Last Week
Previous Week
Year Ago
New York
Conventional (30-yr)
9.03
9.05
9.71
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
6.14
6.18
7.40
New Jersey
Conventional (30-yr)
8.89
8.91
9.55
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.88
5.94
7.33
Connecticut
Conventional (30-yr)
8.93
8.99
9.57
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.94
6.02
7.17
Co-ops (N.Y.)
Conventional (30-yr)
9.15
9.15
9.90
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
6.51
6.61
7.73
*4*Indexes for Adjustable-Rate Mortgages*
1-yr. Treasury security
4.34
4.32
6.11
National Mortgage Contract Rate
8.14
8.15
9.26
*Rates on most adjustable mortgages are set 1 to 3 percentage points above these indexes.  (Source: HSH Associates)


The Iceman Returns From the Penalty Box
HOCKEY is my life.
The last two weeks, spent mostly in Kentucky and Florida among people who believe ice is for drinks and sprains, has been pure penalty box.
Trying to describe to them what I have found in The Game is as diminishing as trying to explain love or faith -- heated words only melt the mystery.
Do I really want the answers to the Questions?


Tribal Art From Africa, Indonesia and Points East
At the peak of the art boom of the 1980's, the American interior designer William A. McCartyCooper bought many highly expressive African, American and Oceanian tribal carvings at auction, sometimes for record prices.
Now the 180 items in the McCarty-Cooper collection, valued at $3 million to $4 million, are at Christie's in New York, where they will be sold on May 19.
The auction, the most important of such material in years in New York, has increased activity in the tribal-art market.
Sotheby's has a sale scheduled for the previous day, and several Manhattan galleries are opening exhibitions that week.


143 Lands Adopt Treaty To Cut Emission of Gases
Representatives of 143 countries adopted a treaty today that commits the nations of the world to limit emissions of carbon dioxide, methane and other heat-trapping gases that scientists fear could cause a catastrophic global warming in the next century.
The treaty, its key provisions hammered out in intensive talks over the last few days, is to be signed early next month at the Earth Summit meeting in Rio de Janeiro.


The New Menu Says It All in Italian
TO diners, a menu is simply a list of dishes available at a restaurant.
But to Nando Reali and Filippo Bologna, owners of Orlando's in Huntington, a menu is much more.
Four years ago, Mr.
Reali and Mr.
Bologna took over a 25-year-old restaurant that had seen better days and turned it into a sparkling gem.
But only now have the owners changed their menu.


EAST GERMANS FACE THEIR ACCUSERS
Stephen Kinzer's article on the Stasi files may be painting too bleak a picture when it implies that all contributions to the files were a form of betrayal ("East Germans Face Their Accusers," April 12).
One way to subvert a system like the Stasi is to flood it with benign information.
Might this have been the motive behind the sausage report on the writer Lutz Rathenow?
Other than to invade his privacy, it did nothing to damage him, helped to keep the Stasi off the informer's back and, most important, perhaps gave the Stasi the false impression that Rathenow was better observed than he actually was.


Moonie U. in Bridgeport?
The University of Bridgeport's decision to accept $50 million from an offshoot of the Unification Church was not easy, but the trustees were desperate.
Having exhausted all other bailout prospects, they could take the Rev.
Sun Myung Moon's money or shut down.
Their reluctance to associate with his controversial theology was finally outweighed by their laudable desire to survive.
The money will come from a group called Professors World Peace Academy, which claims a membership of some 10,000 academics, including 800 Americans.
They function mainly as sponsors of conferences and journals focused on peace and prosperity; they aim eventually to have campuses on four continents.


Rosia Blackwell, Steve Lawrence
James Blackwell of Newburgh, N.Y., and Frances Blackwell-Matthews of New York have announced the engagement of their daughter Rosia Mary Blackwell to Steve Aaron Lawrence, a son of Ruth Lawrence of New York and the late Wilton F. Lawrence.
An October wedding is planned.
Miss Blackwell, 28 years old, graduated from Northeastern University.
She is the executive assistant to the president of Local 420 of the New York City Municipal Hospital Workers Union.
Her father is a supervisor at General Motors in Tarrytown, N.Y.


Corrections
Because of a network schedule change, pictures and captions on pages 3 and 16 of the Television section today are outdated, as are program listings for Monday at 8:30 P.M. and 9 P.M.
The film to be shown on NBC (Channel 4 in New York) is "Kindergarten Cop"; it will start at 8:30.
The network plans to reschedule "In the Line of Duty: Street War."


Elizabeth Chace, Brandt Gould
Elizabeth Edwards Chace, a daughter of Malcolm G. Chace 3d of Providence, R.I., and Barbara Kemp of New York was married yesterday to Brandt Chamberlin Gould, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John C. Gould of West Redding, Conn.
Rev.
C.
Hugh Hildesley performed the Episcopal ceremony at the Church of the Heavenly Rest in Manhattan.
Mrs.
Gould, 26 years old, is an editorial assistant at the Institute of Children's Literature, a correspondence school in West Redding for writers of children's books.
She graduated from Trinity College in Hartford.
Her father is the chairman of Mossberg Industries, a parts supplier in Providence for the wire industry.
Her mother is a real-estate agent with Douglas Elliman in New York.


Council Eases Anti-Bias Law on Mardi Gras
In the latest compromise in this city's bitter debate over discrimination in Mardi Gras clubs, the City Council voted Thursday to water down once again a new law forbidding the clubs from excluding blacks and other groups.
The Council's unanimous vote came after leaders of six prominent, mostly white parade clubs had pledged to begin trying to integrate "racially and ethnically" by 1993.


Family's Weekend Trips Inspire a Guide to Parks
ON Saturday mornings over the last three years, when the weather was fine, Michael P. Brown, his wife, Nurit, and their two children, Maoz, 7 years old, and Noam, 4, often set forth from their Kendall Park home in search of a new outdoors place to visit.
"Almost before I knew it," said Mr.
Brown, 35, a reference librarian at the New Brunswick Free Public Library, "I'd amassed an extensive list of recreational areas in the state, and a book took shape."


Melissa Burtt, Allan Smith Jr.
Carleton D. Burtt of Walterboro, S.C., and Kent MacKay of Darien, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter Melissa Davis Burtt to Allan Wesley Smith Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Smith of Richmond.
A December wedding is planned.
Ms.
Burtt and her fiance are both 24 years old and graduates of the University of Virginia.
She is an account manager for Miller Freeman Inc., a trade magazine publisher in New York.
Her father is an executive director at Private Corporate Advisors Inc., a New York investment firm.
Her mother is a sales associate at Tibbetts Real Estate in Darien.
Ms.
Burtt's stepfather, Paul MacKay, is a vice president at the Chase Manhattan Bank of Connecticut in Bridgeport.


INSIDE
Non-Serbs Are Evicted
In a process called 'purification,' Serbian militias have been expelling non-Serbs whose families have lived for centuries in eastern Croatia.
Page 3.
Changed Look of War Chests
The latest reflection of anti-incumbent sentiment is in fund raising by strong House challengers, which is running above past levels.
Page 18.
New Curb on Hospitals
The organization that accredits most of the nation's hospitals voted to prohibit rewriting the minutes of quality-control meetings.
Page 16.


Kasparov Finds It Rough at Dortmund
WHILE the semifinals in the series of candidate matches to pick the next challenger for the world title were going on in Linares, Spain, Gary Kasparov of Russia had a tough struggle of his own in the Dortmund International Tournament at the end of April.
The world champion lost two games before achieving the 6-3 score that tied him for first place with the Ukrainian grandmaster Vasily Ivanchuk.
FINAL STANDINGS
Player
W
L
D
Pts
Kasparov
5
2
2
6
Ivanchuk
4
1
4
6
Bareyev
4
2
3
5 1/2
Anand
2
1
6
5
Kamsky
2
2
5
4 1/2
Salov
3
3
3
4 1/2
Huebner
2
3
4
4
Adams
1
3
5
3 1/2
Shirov
1
3
5
3 1/2
Piket
0
4
5
2 1/2
Kasparov won both his penultimate and last games; Ivanchuk won only his eighth and drew the ninth.
Against the English grandmaster Michael Adams in round 8, Kasparov ruthlessly refuted a new gambit.


Black History in St. Louis
A new guide published by the St.
Louis Public Library lists 46 sites that illustrate the role of African-Americans in the history of St.
Louis.
Among them are the Scott Joplin House, where the ragtime composer lived in 1900; the Old Courthouse, where Dred Scott's first two trials were held, beginning in 1847; Sumner High School, the first school west of the Mississippi for blacks, established in 1875 (among graduates are Grace Bumbry, Arthur Ashe and Tina Turner), and Clamorgan Alley in Laclede's Landing on the Mississippi.
That street, named for Jacques Clamorgan, a West Indian who followed the fur trade to St.
Louis in 1780 and whose descendants settled much of the area, is part of Laclede's Landing, an area of shops and restaurants.


J.F.K. and Vietnam
To the Editor:
As special assistant in 1963-64 to John T. McNaughton, the general counsel of the Defense Department, I would like to respond to Arthur Schlesinger Jr.'s review of "JFK and Vietnam" (March 29), John M. Newman's book on whether President John F. Kennedy would have committed American combat troops to Vietnam.
Mr.
Schlesinger certainly brings up some relevant historical information.
There are two factors, however, that undercut its significance.


Magadan Homer Sinks Dodgers
Dave Magadan did not want to swing at one of Roger McDowell's nasty sinkers.
That is what he told himself with two out in the ninth inning, with the score tied and runners on first and third yesterday at Shea Stadium.
Just stay away from anything too low.
It would be difficult because McDowell earns his paychecks by tossing late-inning sinkers for the Dodgers and inducing grounders.
Sometimes it is the only pitch he throws.
McDowell threw a sinker and it was high.
Then he tried another and it was outside for ball two.
Eddie Murray roamed the on-deck circle as a possible pinch-hitter for the Mets.
McDowell peered over at him.


Corrections
An article last Sunday about products bearing the name of New Jersey misidentified the president of a food distribution company and misstated the company name.
He is Robert Bildner of R.L.B.
Food Distributors.


A Classy Crowd-Pleasing Pasta Cafe
ON a recent Wednesday, a night when most restaurants are dying, Sotto Luna in Roslyn Heights was bursting with a steady stream of diners.
Was the popularity the result of market research?
Certainly this new pasta cafe is giving the public what it wants.
Its atmosphere puts jeans-clad diners at ease, yet is classy enough to qualify as special.
Sotto Luna scores with classic good looks, plus the excitement of an open kitchen complete with a brick pizza oven.
Carpeting and tablecloths are upscale touches.


So Long To Johnny, America's Sandman
Like nearly everyone else in America, I have tuned in Johnny Carson after the following events:
A phone does not ring.
The person you were hoping to hear from doesn't call, so you turn to the reliable voice in Burbank instead.


Gymnastics In Baltimore
The United States Olympic Gymnastics Trials are being held at the Baltimore Arena in Baltimore on June 6 and 7, and June 11 to 13.
The top seven women and top seven men will represent the United States in the Summer Games in Barcelona.
Forty-two gymnasts are expected to compete, including Kim Zmeskal, who last month won the World Championships in Paris and is the first American woman to be ranked No. 1 worldwide.
Tickets are available for the following events: the Women's rhythmic preliminaries on June 6 at 2 P.M. and rhythmic finals on June 7; the opening ceremony and women's artistic compulsories on the vault, uneven parallel bars, the balance beam and the floor exercises at 7 P.M. on June 11; the men's artistic compulsories on the pommel horse, parallel bars, vault, horizontal bars, rings, and floor at 7:30 on June 12, and the women's and men's finals at 2:30 and 8 P.M. respectively on June 13.
Ticket prices range from $10 to $75, depending seating and event.
The women's finals are almost sold out, according to the local organizing committee for the trials.


Andrea Marx, James Simon
Andrea M. Marx and E. James Simon were married in New York on Friday at the home of Mr. and Mrs.
William C. Scott.
Justice Burton B. Roberts, the administrative judge for the New York State Supreme Court in the Bronx, performed the ceremony.
Mrs.
Simon is the senior vice president and sales director of Fox Residential Group, a New York real-estate firm.
She is a daughter of the late Mr. and Mrs.
Rudolph T. Miller.


Promenade Amid Blossoms
A promenade of spring fashion was much in evidence last Wednesday at the Central Park Conservancy luncheon, held in the spectacular sunken gardens near East 104th Street.
Alleys of exploding apple and cherry blossoms and beds of pink and white tulips circled with purple pansies were some of the delights for the 1,100 guests, who added their own fashion color.


Barbara Mullin, Robert Rosiello
Barbara A. Mullin, a daughter of Mrs.
Samuel S. Mullin of Osterville, Mass., and the late Mr.
Mullin, was married yesterday in Osterville to Robert L. Rosiello, a son of the late Mr. and Mrs.
Nicholas Rosiello.
The Rev.
Thomas Powers officiated at Our Lady of the Assumption Church.
The bride, 35 years old, is a partner in the management consulting firm of McKinsey &amp; Company in New York, as is her husband.
She graduated from Harvard University and received a master's degree in management from Yale University.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS Top 2 in Italian Final Monica Seles and Gabriela Sabatini, the two top-seeded players, reached the final of the Italian Open in Rome yesterday.
Seles, the No. 1 ranked women's player in the world, needed 1 hour 20 minutes to beat Amanda Coetzer of South Africa, 6-0, 6-4.
Sabatini, the defending champion, defeated fourth-seeded Mary Joe Fernandez of the United States, 6-2, 6-3.
Coetzer, the 16th-seeded player and a surprise third-round winner over Jennifer Capriati, was no match for Seles's pounding ground strokes and deadly drop shots in a first set, which lasted just 26 minutes.
But the South African began changing speeds and tried to keep Seles far back at the baseline.
The tactic paid off, allowing her to move out to a 4-3 lead and a break point to make it 5-3.
But she hit the ball out, and Seles kept her serve. (AP)


Tech Notes; A Nose for Pollution
A nondescript ceramic-encased tube, just 32 inches long and 2 1/2 inches in diameter, could become a key component in the battle against water pollution, its designers believe.
Battelle Memorial Institute, a nonprofit research company in Columbus, Ohio, and Ocean Sensors Inc., a San Diego maker of ocean sensors and measuring systems, have built the tube to measure a host of underwater conditions.
John Downing, manager of the Oceanography Group at the Battelle Marine Sciences Laboratory in Sequim, Wash., said the device can be used as "an environmental sentinel," tracking pollution and other water characteristics, including temperature and conductivity.
It is modeled after Navy antisubmarine warfare probes, which are attached to ships by a pair of copper wires and dangle in the water.
The key difference, Mr.
Downing said, is that his sensor is dropped into the water from a ship or airplane.
The sensor is equipped with battery-operated data-gathering microprocessors.


Poll and Scandal Heat Up Irish Abortion Debate
Ireland's national debate over abortion intensified today.
Results of a new poll showed strong sentiment in favor of liberalized abortion laws while the Roman Catholic hierarchy issued its first statement about a scandal involving a bishop's reported relationship with an American woman; the scandal has led commentators here to speculate on possible damage to the church's authority in matters of sexual morality.


Data Bank/May 10, 1992


Martha Keily, Timothy Vaum
Mr. and Mrs.
T.
L.
Keily of Pawling, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter Martha Jane Keily to Timothy Scott Vaum, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Howard T. Vaum of Tuscaloosa, Ala.
A September wedding is planned.
Miss Keily, 25 years old, is the controller of Shepard's Garden Seeds in Torrington, Conn.
She graduated from the College of the Holy Cross and received a master's degree in accounting from Northeastern University.
Her father, who is retired, was a senior systems analyst for I.B.M. in Purchase, N.Y.


City-Bashing Through the Ages
THE SPHINX IN THE CITY
Urban Life, the Control of Disorder, and Women.
By Elizabeth Wilson.
Illustrated. 191 pp.
Berkeley:  University of California Press.
Cloth, $35.
Paper, $14.


AN APPETITE FOR SPRING
Shad still runs when it will on the Hudson.
Blue crab requires a spring temperature, salinity and, apparently, a self-selected hiding place for shedding its shell.
Aquaculturists have yet to produce consistent crops of the soft-shell crab that appears in mid-May in the Chesapeake Bay.
Morels still confound cultivators and poke through the Michigan underbrush in May.
Despite wide-scale cultivation, there is still something brave and hopeful about the wild asparagus that pushes through the dark New England soil like so many miners clawing toward the light of day.
Nevertheless, seasonal cooking is greeted with a growing chorus of "bah-hum-bug" these days.
After all, farmed salmon is available any time of the year; Chilean asparagus doesn't wait for a thaw; and soft-shell crab from the Gulf of Mexico have stretched the season to nearly eight months.
Cooking with the biological clock, the modern epicurean rationalists chime, is a quaint notion.
When it comes to ingredients, the clock ticks not.


A New Face for American Labor
Dennis Rivera is in a hurry. sporting his distinctive Indiana Jones-style fedora with a tiny hole in the crease and lugging a bulging, battered leather satchel, he charges into a Capitol Hill hotel late for the first formal session of a national Hispanic political fund-raising committee.
He pauses briefly in the hotel lobby to greet friends from New York, then tries to slip unnoticed into the basement ballroom where the meeting of nearly three dozen political figures has already begun.
Instead, to a rousing ovation, he is ushered to the only vacant seat at the head of a U-shaped table, next to Gloria Molina, the newly elected Los Angeles County supervisor.
Later that day, his attempt to duck out of a Georgetown cocktail party is thwarted by another ovation.
In between, in a series of meetings and meals, a self-conscious Rivera is lionized by speaker after speaker.
At lunch, Bill Richardson, the Democratic Representative from New Mexico, who heads Hispanic PAC U.S.A., limits his introductions to elected officials, with one exception.
"Dennis may not be an elected official," Richardson says, "but he controls about nine million votes."


In the Region: Connecticut and Westchester; Recent Sales
Southington, Conn. 115,000
18 Lawncrest Drive  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 38-year-old ranch; 782 square feet, new windows, sunken dining room, 60- by 145-foot lot; taxes $1,310.
Torrington, Conn. 112,500
167 College Avenue  3-bedrooms, 1 1/2-bath, 22-year-old raised ranch; remodeled kitchen, h/w floors, wraparound deck, 0.33 acre; taxes $2,059.
Westbrook, Conn. 212,000
404 West Pond Meadow Road  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 18-year-old Cape Cod; cathedral ceiling, 3 acres; taxes $2,799.
Armonk, N.Y. 450,000
14 Tallwoods
4-bedroom, 3-bath, 32-year-old contemporary; family room, formal dining room, fireplace, 2.3 acres; taxes $6,798.
New Rochelle, N.Y. 280,600
52 Mulberry Lane
3-bedroom, 2-bath, 65-year-old English stucco; entry hall, fireplace, dining room, terrace, eat-in kitchen, den; taxes $4,605.
Scarsdale, N.Y. 550,000
19 Innis Road
5-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 55-year-old colonial; 2 fireplaces, eat-in kitchen, butler's pantry, family room, 2 playrooms; taxes $12,477.
OTHER AREAS Bridgewater, N.J. 275,000
5 Fairway Court
3-bedroom, 2-bath, 25-year-old ranch; inground pool, patio, professionally landscaped; taxes $4,430.
Glen Rock, N.J. 315,000  11 Glendale Road
4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, over-50-year-old colonial; fireplace, new kitchen and roof, deck; taxes $4,245.
Bayport, L.I. 125,000
156 Fairview Avenue  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 61-year-old ranch; sunporch, basement, detached 2-car garage; taxes $3,500.


Mardonna
DIETRICH is dead.
Long live her style.
She was a radiant self-creation, the original movie-star cross-dresser and the ultimate narcissist.
Like Madonna, in whose "Vogue" video she is reincarnated, Dietrich was more than a performer of songs and an actress in films.
She was a stylist.
Plucked and painted eyebrows.
The pants suit.
Fabulous gartered legs.
The backlighted blond hair, tips illuminated to create a halo effect.
The planes of her face gleaming with light, shadow and liquid halftones.


Paris Vassilas, George Zaferiou
Mr. and Mrs.
Kimon Vassilas of Brooklyn have announced the engagement of their daughter Paraskevy Paris Vassilas to George Constantine Zaferiou, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Constantine Zaferiou of Garden City, L.I.
A June wedding is planned.
Dr.
Vassilas, who is known as Paris, graduated from New York University and received a medical degree from the Autonomous University of Guadalajara, Mexico.
Her father is a restaurateur in New York.
Her mother, now retired, was a manager with Alexander's, the department store, in New York.


Miss Goodhue, Daniel J. Lacey
Amanda Warren Goodhue, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John T. Goodhue of Hancock, N.H., was married yesterday in Lancaster, Mass., to Daniel James Lacey, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Neil Lacey of Framingham, Mass.
The Rev.
Thomas Wintle performed the Unitarian ceremony at the First Church of Christ.
Mrs.
Lacey, 28 years old, is a preschool teacher at the Arlington Children's Center in Arlington, Mass.
She graduated from Hillsdale College.
Her father, who is retired, was a director of the Sealift Command of the United States Navy in Washington.
Her mother, Charlotte Goodhue, who is retired, was a first-grade teacher at the Rippowam School in Bedford, N.Y.
Mrs.
Lacey is the granddaughter of the late Edward Streeter, the author of "The Father of the Bride."


Minus Eye Cream
To the Editor: I went through three tissues wiping the tears of laughter reading Joan Gelman's essay.
She is a traveling woman after my own heart, someone to whom I can certainly relate.


You Wish It Didn't Exist
You can never be underdressed when you wear a message T-shirt.
The scene was a dinner party at Cafe Luxembourg last week in honor of Afrika, a 25-year-old Russian conceptual artist.
Among the usual basic black was a certain T-shirt worn by Diego Cortez, an art critic.


May 3-9; The Gorbachev Road Show
Reviled as he is at home, Mikhail S. Gorbachev may have finally come up with a way to demonstrate leadership to fellow Muscovites stuck in the post-Communist rut and looking for ways to raise some real money -- dollars, not rubles.
In the midst of his two-week tour of America, including a speech at Westminister College in Fulton, Mo., the place Churchill had given his "Iron Curtain" speech 46 years earlier, Mr.
Gorbachev is showing that he retains his knack for stirring Gorbomania the farther abroad he journeys.
He drew 4,000 enthusiastic Californians at $40 a head for openers, with more substantial pledges to come and with tour organizers saying they expect to raise the initial $3 million they need to stock offices with thinkers and fax machines for the Gorbachev Foundation, his new think-tank survival vessel in which he aims to maintain a global profile.


Why Some Love L.I. Anyway
JAMES L. LAROCCA, president of the Long Island Association, conceded that when a company decided to relocate "solely on numbers," the Island had difficulty being competitive.
Instead, such business and civic organizations try to convey quality-of-life factors, Mr.
Larocca said, adding: "We have a highly educated and motivated work force here. Such a work force expects a higher quality of life.


A STITCH IN TIME
Officially, I am the director of special events for the New York City Department of Correction.
However, I am also known as the Madame Defarge of Rikers Island.
My knitting basket and wooden needles (not considered weapons) are a familiar sight to the correction officers assigned to the gates that open the front doors of the jails.
Along with my yarn is my appointment book, a piece of seasonal fruit and whatever else I need to get me through my working day with inmates.


Double Vinyl
At large in SoHo, May 2, 6:10 P.M.


Drug Laws and Attitudes in Closer Harmony
CONSIDERING the public's shift in attitude over the last 10 years, the possibility of legalizing drugs in the United States as a way to diminish illegal profiteering is unlikely, according to Dr.
David F. Musto, a professor of psychiatry and of the history of medicine at Yale University.
He added that contrary to what many who favor legalization believe, allowing open access to cocaine or other substances will not eliminate the street market for drugs or lessen their destructive effects on society.
Dr.
Musto said that the nation's second drug epidemic is in the declining stage, though he estimated that it would last for 10 to 15 more years.


Dana S. Cole, Robert J. A. Zito
Mr. and Mrs.
David H. Cole of Savannah, Ga., have announced the engagement of their daughter Dana Sabin Cole to Robert John Amadeus Zito, a son of Dr.
Joseph J. Zito of Huntington, L.I., and Phyllis Zito of Manhasset, L.I.
A July wedding is planned.
Ms.
Cole, who is 36 years old and is keeping her name, is the production manager at Abbeville Press, a publisher of art books in New York.
She graduated from St.
Lawrence University.
Her father, who is retired, was a vice president of the Lindenmeyr Paper Company in New York.


Jordan Delivers a Debunked Dunk
Air Jordan, ahead of the field, fire in his eyes, at the height of his leap.
What are the odds that he doesn't score?
He didn't.


Nina Sankovitch, Jack Menz
Nina Sankovitch, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Anatol Sankovitch of Evanston, Ill., and Jack Menz, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert Menz of Webster, N.Y., were married yesterday in New York.
Judge John M. Walker Jr. of the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit performed the ceremony at the Lotos Club.
Ms.
Sankovitch, 29 years old, who will keep her name, is a senior project attorney with the Natural Resources Defense Council, a national nonprofit environmental organization, in New York.
She graduated from Tufts University and received a law degree from Harvard University.
Her father is a general surgeon in private practice in Chicago.
Her mother, Tilde Sankovitch, is a professor of French literature at Northwestern University.


Hundreds Arrested in San Francisco Protest


Marco Month
May is Marco Month at Wave Hill, so try to get to Riverdale in the Bronx for some of the events: children's workshops and guided tours every Sunday afternoon; a gala ball on May 28 with a preview of "Images of the Cotswold Gardens," an exhibition of paintings and drawings by Simon Dorrell on view through the summer.
Wave Hill's entrance is at 249th Street and Riverdale Avenue.
Hours and admission vary, so call (212) 549-3200 for details.
Deadhead narcissus and tulips as the blooms fade.
Remove the entire flower stem so that nutrients will not be wasted traveling up the stalk.


Editorial Notebook; A Very American Mother
She always disliked Mother's Day, which she derided as a florists' promotion.
Besides, her own birthday was in mid-May and she thought a single tribute from her son and daughter was enough, thank you.
In other respects, hers was a very American story, beginning with her name, Dvora Narefsky.
It was changed to "Dorothy" by an immigration officer when she arrived from Russia at age 7 in 1907.
Her parents, Bertha and Mordecai, were among the millions who sought jobs and dignity in the promised land.


Academy's Choices Don't Reflect the Number of Women in Science
When the National Academy of Sciences was sharply criticized last year for including only 5 female scientists among its 60 new members, officials of the group that is the nation's most prominent scientific organization said they were striving mightily to change the overwhelmingly male complexion of their institution.
Now this year's new members have been announced, and of the 59 scientists and engineers voted into the academy, once again only five are women.


Tamara Steere, Michael Sload
Tamara Edith Steere, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Allan W. Steere of Avon, Conn., was married yesterday in Weston, Mass., to Michael Townsend Sload, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Jay H. Sload of Shaker Heights, Ohio.
The Revs.
Judith and Harry Hoehler performed the Unitarian ceremony at First Parish Church.
Mrs.
Sload, 30 years old, is an associate at Merrill Lynch &amp; Company in New York.
She graduated from Amherst College and received an M.B.A. from Dartmouth College.
Her father is a senior vice president of the Laux Company, a magazine publisher in Maynard, Mass.


Adirondack Park Turns 100 on May 20
The Adirondack Park turns 100 on May 20, and special events are marking the occasion throughout the year.
Ceremonies on May 21 will include boat rides on Raquette Lake, tea at Great Camp Sagamore south of Raquette Lake and the opening of an exhibit of paintings at the Adirondack Museum in Blue Mountain Lake, called "A Wild Sort of Beauty: Public Places and Private Visions," which will be on view until Oct. 13.
The museum will also display concurrently an exhibit of maps and documents on the park.
Over the next few months, exhibits of quilts, watercolors, photographs and posters will travel to various locations in the region. (The quilts will be at the Adirondack Lakes Center for the Arts in Raquette Lake from May 21 to June 20.)


Technology; Smoothing the Flow of Electricity in Bulk
As the nation's use of electricity grows, so does the number of producers, from giant Canadian hydroelectric plants and coal stations in remote areas to smaller independent generators scattered in hundreds of locations around the United States.
This expansion increases the demands on the electricity transmission system.
But the technology of the transmission system, mechanical and slow, is barely up to the challenge.
Operated conservatively by utilities and utility consortiums whose primary goal is reliability, the electric grid often cannot call on the cheapest available generator, because that plant is situated in the wrong place and it would overload a circuit somewhere, which could set off a cascade of failures that could end in widespread blackout.


New &amp; Noteworthy
A SOLDIER OF THE GREAT WAR, by Mark Helprin. (Avon, $5.99.) Alessandro Giuliani, a one-time World War I deserter and veteran of the battles in Northern Italy, relates his history to a traveling companion in a journey that becomes a kind of spiritual quest.
Last year our reviewer, Thomas Keneally, praised Mr.
Helprin as a brilliant iconoclast, calling this novel a "mischievous, idiosyncratic and powerful book."
ON THE LAW OF NATIONS, by Daniel Patrick Moynihan. (Harvard University, $10.95.) This book was first published only weeks after the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait.
Subsequent United Nations sanctions against Iraq were an example of what the author, a United States Senator from New York, sees as the positive force of international law -- a means for nations to seek justice without bloodshed.
It is Mr.
Moynihan's thesis that this remedy is rarely understood and seldom applied.
"On the Law of Nations" is "an elegant and persuasive history-cum-argument," Roger Rosenblatt said here in 1990.
He added: "Mr. Moynihan is calling for patience on the part of power. . . . Not that such conduct on our part will ever rid the world of scoundrels. But it will make it easier to tell them from us."


The 'Baby Boom Echo' Reverberates Throughout the County
BABIES are back.
As clues multiply around the county -- from crowded delivery rooms to noisy playgrounds and even noisier real estate offices -- newly released census data have confirmed that Westchester is in the throes of a baby boomlet.
"The greatest gain between censuses was registered by the under-5 population," Westchester County planners said in a recent report, the first of a series analyzing the 1990 census.
Noting that the birth rate has steadily risen in the county since 1983, planners said the number of county pre-schoolers increased 22.7 percent over 1980 figures, a phenomenon planners have dubbed "the Baby Boom Echo."


Update; Captain of Exxon Valdez To Take Cadets on Cruise
Acting on the suggestion of several cadets, the admiral in charge of the State University of New York's Maritime College in the Bronx has hired a seemingly unlikely candidate as a watch officer for the cadets' trans-Atlantic training cruise: Capt.
Joseph Hazelwood of the Exxon Valdez.
"I hired him, I guess I'm the one who should take the flak," Adm.
Floyd Miller said last week of some people's reaction to the appointment of the man who commanded the infamous Exxon tanker when it struck a charted reef in Alaska's Prince William Sound on March 24, 1989, dumping 11 million gallons of crude oil in the nation's worst oil spill.


The Demographics of Exile: Victorious Serbs Repopulate Croatian Villages
It is pitch dark as the bus pulls up at the no man's land, its driver fearful of the deadly surface mines on the road ahead.
Dozens of people, many of them old men and women and small children, are herded from the bus at gunpoint and told to walk forward.
With a pathetic jumble of belongings gathered hastily from their homes, they stumble into the darkness.
Suddenly, automatic rifle-fire bursts from troops in the opposing lines, unaware that those advancing are civilians, possibly even members of their families.


Once a Rotter . . .
DEBT OF DISHONOUR
By Robert Goddard. 463 pp. New York: Poseidon Press. $21.


Vanity Labels: Good Business Or an Ego Boost?
When pop stars want to flex their muscles, they often do so by setting up their own record companies.
Although generally viewed with skepticism -- such companies are widely referred to within the music business as vanity labels -- personal imprints remain a powerful and seemingly irresistible status symbol: a confirmation that the artist-proprietor is a superstar.
"It's a lube job for the ego," says Peter Grant, a pop manager whose clients included Led Zeppelin and who managed its Swan Song label.
Although there are no real estimates as to how many artist-owned labels exist, their scope and financing vary greatly.
Some are simply vehicles for releasing the star's own recordings.
Others are attempts to find and nurture new artists.
But at the core of such labels is an often complex partnership between the superstar and an established record company.
Artist labels give stars a larger portion of the sale price of their own recordings and offers them a stake in the career of other artists the stars may sign.


Trading a Spot on the Stoop For a Spot by a Country Lake
When they are not in school, Steve and Ramon Estevez do not move far beyond the stoop of their apartment building in Washington Heights without their mother, Francia.
All three are scared of the street violence in their neighborhood.
But for two weeks each summer, at the invitation of families who volunteer with the Fresh Air Fund, the boys get out of the city and go to the lake country in central New York State, where they can bicycle, swim and fish without fear..


Focus: Adelanto, Calif.; Marketing the Credible Shrinking House
THE three-bedroom house that Jim and Lisa Richter bought in this high-desert city 80 miles northeast of Los Angeles is smaller than the house in which Mrs.
Richter grew up.
The lot also is smaller, as are the living room and the bedrooms.
With a price of $95,000, however, the Richters say they were happy to compromise on space.
And they said they are pleased by the traditional look of the house, a two-story structure with a gabled roof, a front porch and a tree in the front yard.


If You're Thinking of Living in: Parkchester
RISING like a fortress of brick and steel in the south-central Bronx, the 171-building Parkchester complex was once one of the most populous planned communities in the world.
Built by the Metropolitan Life Insurance Company at the end of the Depression, it has 12,271 apartments in 7- to 13-story buildings, 100 stores and 35 offices.
The 129-acre site was bought from the New York Catholic Protectory, an orphanage and reformatory, for $4 million.


143 Lands Adopt Treaty To Cut Emission of Gases
Representatives of 143 countries adopted a treaty today that commits the nations of the world to limit emissions of carbon dioxide, methane and other heat-trapping gases that scientists fear could cause a catastrophic global warming in the next century.
The treaty, its key provisions hammered out in intensive talks over the last few days, is to be signed early next month at the Earth Summit meeting in Rio de Janeiro.


IN SHORT: FICTION
THE MELANCHOLY OF DEPARTURE Stories. By Alfred DePew. University of Georgia, $19.95.


Aggression Pays Off In Cavendish Pairs
ALTHOUGH the famous Cavendish Club died almost a year ago, the name lives on.
The 18th Cavendish Invitational Charity Pairs was played a week ago in New York City and attracted many of the country's best players.
A few were missing, unfortunately, because of clashes with major events in other parts of the country.
The winners in a field of 36 pairs were Sam Lev of Forest Hills, Queens, and Amos Kaminski of Manhattan.
There is usually a small European contingent at the Cavendish, and this year it was even smaller than usual -- just 7 players out of 72 participants.
The visitors have done particularly well in the past five years, with three victories and two runner-up positions.
Lev, who learned his bridge in Israel, has a theory to explain this.
He believes that American players, reared on match-point play, are too cautious, and that players who learned their bridge elsewhere gain by aggression.


Take a Plank to Plate Against Pirates
For the last couple of years, talk about the Pittsburgh Pirates has centered on the exploits and the contract status of Barry Bonds and Bobby Bonilla.
Maybe this season the talk will switch deservedly to the pitching staff.
The Pirates' pitchers lead the National League in earned run average with a sizzlingly low 2.62, having pitched six shutouts in the first 22 games of the season and limited opponents to one run on three occasions and two runs seven times.
Only the Atlanta Braves' staff has pitched more shutouts, seven, but Tom Glavine has three of those.


Canada's Dollar Takes a Dive
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen
132.53
132.58
138.70
per Dollar
German Mark
1.6440
1.6405
1.7225
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar
1.2031
1.1888
1.1514
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound
1.7985
1.6405
1.7232
U.S. Dollar per British Pound
Gold
$335.40
$338.25
$356.75
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


Esiason Unfazed About Newcomer
Cincinnati Bengals quarterback Boomer Esiason said he wasn't surprised or upset that Cincinnati drafted quarterback David Klingler in the first round of the National Football League college draft last month.
That was Esiason's first response to questions about Klinger.


Heather Taylor, David Bumsted
Mrs.
Russell A. Taylor of Syracuse, N.Y., has announced the engagement of her daughter Heather Ann Taylor to David Wentz Bumsted, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
William J. Bumsted of Vero Beach, Fla.
A November wedding is planned.
Miss Taylor, 26 years old, is an affiliate marketing representative of the Disney Channel in New York.
She graduated from Cornell University.
Her late father was a partner in the Syracuse law firm of Hancock and Estabrook.


Disco Vault
You park your car next to Hermann Goering's old Air Ministry and walk down toward Hitler's wrecked bunker.
You are about a block from a scar of a landscape where, up until two years ago, the Berlin Wall stood.
Running from the K.G.B.?
On the trail of George Smiley?
No, just looking for a good time in Berlin.


To Our Readers
Because of electrical problems in The Time's computer center, late news developments were omitted from some editions.


Anxiety Is Only Certainty As Cup Crews Take to Sea
America's Cup yachtsmen don't think of their sport in terms of a season the way basketball players do.
But four months of trial racing here has driven cup sailors into the same kind of end-of-season zeal that accompanies the current National Basketball Association playoffs.
"Oh God, please let us at it," Andreas Josenhans, the mainsail trimmer on America , said Thursday.
He and other crew members of America  , as well as the crewmen from Italy's Il Moro di Venezia syndicate, had disposed of the defender and challenger fields and gotten to where they were today -- in the first match of the 1992 America's Cup series.


Double Image
International Center of Photography May 5, 7 P.M.


Feminists Wonder If It Was Progress To Become 'Victims'
FIFTEEN years ago, Elizabeth Schneider helped develop the legal argument that battered women who killed husbands who had abused them for years were the victims, not the aggressors.
Now she worries battered women are victims of their victim status.


Mardonna
DIETRICH is dead.
Long live her style.
She was a radiant self-creation, the original movie-star cross-dresser and the ultimate narcissist.
Like Madonna, in whose "Vogue" video she is reincarnated, Dietrich was more than a performer of songs and an actress in films.
She was a stylist.
Plucked and painted eyebrows.
The pants suit.
Fabulous gartered legs.
The backlighted blond hair, tips illuminated to create a halo effect.
The planes of her face gleaming with light, shadow and liquid halftones.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, the Arts/Artifacts column on April 26 misstated the date of the demolition of Carlton House in London.
George IV had it razed in 1827.


A Quarter Century Of Wave Hill
MADELEINE KEEVE was digging Campanula rapunculus out of the herb garden at Wave Hill.
That herb's delicious spring greens are what first got Rapunzel in trouble with the evil witch.
"When she was pregnant Rapunzel's mother hungered for the greens, so the father stole into the witch's garden to get them," said Miss Keeve, who has worked for the garden for three years.
"The witch caught him and said, 'You can have the greens, but I'll take the child.' "


In Chicago, 'Terrific' Bargains for Renters
The good news, says Christine Williams, is that Chicago's residential developers appear to be holding their fire.
None of the projected market-rate high-rise developments are moving into construction for the moment.
The market neeeds time to absorb what is already built, she says.
Ms.
Williams, vice president of the Real Estate Research Corporation, a consulting firm based here, has figures that show that new "luxury" residential construction has marched along at an average rate of 1,600 units a year over the last four years, recession notwithstanding.
Five new projects with a total of 2,600 apartments have come on the market since the start of last year alone.


Jennifer Baker, Christopher Warren
John Milnes Baker of Katonah, N.Y., and Evind Rynning of Weston, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Jennifer Lea Baker, to Christopher Denis Warren, a son of Mrs.
Hamilton Warren of Sedona, Ariz., and the late Mr.
Warren.
A June wedding is planned.
Ms.
Baker, 30 years old, is a teacher and college counselor at the Verde Valley School in Sedona.
She graduated from Middlebury College and received a master's in education from Sacred Heart University.
Her father is an architect in private practice in Katonah.


Mothers, Flowers and Death
On Friday the north lawn of the United Nations was ablaze with 500,000 carnations placed there by the International Planned Parenthood Federation.
The flowers weren't celebratory.
They were grave markers -- for the 500,000 women who die each year around the globe from the complications of pregnancy and childbirth.
Most of these women come from the slums and villages of the third world, and when they die, most of their newborns die with them.
So, eventually, do two million of their other children.
Yet almost all of these deaths can been prevented -- if these women have the choice to avoid pregnancy, and have a chance for medical care.


Wall Street; Totting Up Diversity Among Money Managers
While still no rainbow of diversity, the world of Wall Street has attracted enough minority and women money-management entrepreneurs to warrant a directory of their own.
The National Investment Managers Association, a Washington group that promotes opportunities for women and minorities, has teamed with Nelson Publications of Port Chester, N.Y., to produce the new guide.
It profiles 150 firms that are at least half-owned by women or minority managers.
New York leads the list with 41 firms or branch offices, but California is a close second with 37.


Salem Remembers, 300 Years Later
"I petition to your Honours, not for my own life, for I know I must die . . . but . . . that no more Innocent Blood be shed . . . ." So wrote Mary Esty from her prison cell on behalf of her fellow prisoners who were to be hanged -- as she herself was on Sept. 22, 1692 -- as witches.
It is in documents such as these, written on fragile-looking paper in ink now faded to the color of dried blood, that the history of the Salem, Mass., witch trials was written.
To look upon these documents, even from a distance of 300 years, is a moving experience.
It is, to borrow from the title of a recent 300th anniversary seminar, a process of "facing history and ourselves."


Yankees Continue Downward Slide
On the 30th day of their season, the Yankees fell back to earth.
A distressing road trip continued growing worse today when they failed fundamentally and lost to the Oakland Athletics, 5-3, their record falling to 15-15 and their losing streak reaching five games.


J.F.K. and Vietnam
To the Editor:
In his review of John M. Newman's "JFK and Vietnam," Arthur Schlesinger Jr. implicitly blames The New York Times for encouraging the "overwhelmingly hawkish" American mood in 1963.


Corrections
An article on page 24 of the Travel section today, about caves in Pennsylvania, misstates their ownership.
Many are operated by individual families; they are not run by the same family.


When Rumor Mixes With Racial Rage
The gunfire rang out at dusk.
A 14-year-old black youth lay bleeding next to his bicycle.
Word spread fast: The cops did it -- white cops.
Hostilities boiled to a rage.
Hundreds of people chased up and down the street.
The time had come for vengeance.
A house was firebombed.
Two television journalists were pelted with bricks.


Big-City Visitor Confronts the Surf
IN the four summers he has stayed with Sandy and Matthew Mozdierz and their four children here, 12-year-old Felix Santiago of the Bronx has mastered bicycling, swimming, camping and riding the roller coaster at the Great Adventure amusement park.
But the surf in the Atlantic Ocean is still an obstacle.


Jill Peklo, Philip Lawrence
Jill Ashley Peklo, a daughter of Douglas A. Peklo of Bethesda, Md., and Jaye C. Peklo of Atlanta, was married yesterday in Mount Kisco, N.Y., to Philip Starr Lawrence, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard H. Lawrence of Mt.
Kisco.
The Rev.
Richard Anderson performed the Episcopal ceremony at St.
Mark's Church.
Mrs.
Lawrence, 26 years old, is an associate at J. P. Morgan Securities in New York.
She graduated from Duke University.
Her father operates his own management consultancy in Bethesda.
Her mother is a technical librarian at the Kimberly-Clark Corporation in Roswell, Ga.


Cynthia Long, Christopher Willis
Mr. and Mrs.
Everett G. Long of Old Greenwich, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Cynthia Ann Long, to Christopher Hammond Willis, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
William H. Willis of Greenwich, Conn.
An October wedding is planned.
Ms.
Long, 28 years old, is an associate designer at the Echo Design Group in New York.
She graduated from Barnard College and the Fashion Institute of Technology.
Her father, who is retired, was an executive at the General Electric Credit Corporation in New York.
Her mother, Pamela S. Long, is a manager at the Chrysler Capital Corporation in Stamford.


MOBS CHALLENGE MALAWI PRESIDENT
The first significant anti-Government demonstrations in three decades shook the African nation of Malawi this week, giving vent to the frustrations of people who have lived since 1964 under one of the continent's most durable and idiosyncratic dictators.
Official reports say several dozen people have been killed in Malawi's capital, Lilongwe, and the city of Blantyre.
Hundreds were arrested over several days as mobs called for the resignation of the President, set fire to buildings belonging to the ruling party and looted shops and offices.


Spring Is a Good Time to Discover Fava Beans
AMERICANS have been slow to discover fava beans, which are in their peak season in the spring.
But more and more the beans are showing up on the menus of restaurants and in the produce departments of supermarkets.
Italians, French, Spanish and the British -- who call them broad beans -- love them.
When fava beans come into season in Italy, they are eaten raw with a sharp cheese like pecorino or sardo and accompanied by a chilled young Frascati wine.
In Sicily, favas are cooked with artichokes and new peas in a dish called frittedda, which is often flavored with wild fennel.
Fava beans are also good in risotto, to which I like to add chopped up crispy slices of grilled prosciutto.
The prosciutto is much less fatty than bacon, which is traditionally used.
As a side dish, favas can be steamed and sprinkled with fresh tarragon or sauteed with new potatoes and thyme.
They go especially well with chicken, veal or fish.
One thing that may account for the lack of popularity of favas in the United States is the fact that they are time consuming to peel.
They are best if you remove not only the pods but also the skin that envelops each bean -- something to keep you busy over the evening news.
When the beans are very young and tender, I often don't bother to peel them (we never did in England).
But when they get bigger, the skin can become tough and bitter.
Inside, the bean is usually bright green, similar in appearance to a lima bean.


Business Diary/May 3-8
COMPANIES Figuring the Odds on Rebuilding South-Central


Corrections
A picture caption in some copies on April 26 about private ownership of land in Russia misidentified a member of a farm family living near Koltsovo.
She is Aliks Batyrov, not Filaret Batyrov.


World Markets; When a Name Outweighs a Market
Jerrold Mitchell, the portfolio manager of First Investors Global Fund, has not liked the outlook for the Swiss stock market all year.
Yet the two biggest holdings in his worldwide mutual fund are Swiss stocks: Ciba-Geigy and Nestle.
Mr.
Mitchell, who is also a money manager at Wellington Management in Boston, has picked Ciba-Geigy, the chemical and pharmaceutical producer, and Nestle, the giant food company, for their international character.
Just 2 percent of Nestle's business is in Switzerland.
It is about the same for Ciba-Geigy.
Unlike most other stocks, they depend very little on the overall performance of the economy of their home country.


You Know It When You See It, and You're Seeing It More
Twelve signs that pornography is becoming more mainstream:
1.
April 1990: Traci Lords, a former star of X-rated films, appears in John Waters's film "Crybaby."


Bushwick, Recalling '77, Kept Its Cool This Time
Up and down the most forlorn stretches of Broadway, once the shopping boulevard of Brooklyn's Bushwick neighborhood, the scars of riots 15 years ago still dominates the landscape, along with the gloomy elevated train tracks that cast the street in a dark shadow and give easy breezes an edge.
Those who walk the blocks of empty lots and burned-out buildings are usually alone and often move at a near hustle, usually on their way elsewhere.
Many remember the stores that once flourished along Broadway.
Nearly everyone recalls precisely where they were at 9:35 P.M. on July 13, 1977, the moment a huge power failure began in New York City and life in the slumping, nondescript neighborhood collapsed in a crash of rioting, looting, and arson.
No neighborhood in New York was as devastated during the blackout.


Fueling A Frenzy: Swatch
"I AM a grown woman," June Berliner often says to herself.
She was muttering it on a Friday night last month while driving from Beverly Hills to Sherman Oaks, Calif., in hot pursuit of a Chicchirichi packed in an egg carton.
The night before, like a human hyena cunningly circling, she stalked the store entrance closest to the Swatch counter.
Like many so afflicted, Ms.
Berliner lives in a constant state of dread, knowing that at a critical moment her sandal could get stuck in the escalator, slowing her down.
"They make you want it so badly," she said.


Update; Leads Have Run Out In Youth Bias Attacks
Investigators have reached a dead end in their search for the white teen-agers who are said to have attacked three black and Hispanic youngsters in the Bronx and smeared their faces with a white substance earlier this year, the police say.
Despite an extensive police canvass of the area, hundreds of interviews and a $20,000 reward, the police have not found any witnesses to the bias attacks, and the hot line for anonymous tips has long grown cold.


Bush Tries to Shift to Active Style on Domestic Policy
In the aftermath of the Los Angeles riots, influential Republicans are arguing that President Bush has reached the limit of the detached style of governing he has favored and must for the first time personally seize control of a broad range of domestic issues, Administration officials said today.
The President recognizes that he has committed himself to such a course in his response to the violence, the officials said.


At Work; Get a Life, They Said. And Did.
John Barnum-Goodfriend gazes across the table, serenity in his eyes, calm in his voice, as he describes his encounter only minutes earlier with a Manhattan tow-truck driver.
"They had just hoisted it up when I got there," he said.
"The agent said, 'You had exactly 30 minutes. I observed you parking at 9:15.' " Mr.
Barnum-Goodfriend looked at his watch: 9:46.
"I was calm. I even waved when my car went by on 42d Street."


Reviving Participation in North Salem
ALTHOUGH the North Salem Town Hall annex where the Town Council meets twice each month can hold only 35 people, that is rarely a problem because only a handful of residents show up.
But the lack of public participation does not mean this is a contented town.
For more than a decade, the once tranquil community has fought bruising battles against development, paid a million dollars in litigation fees and suffered a number of setbacks in its court battles.
Residents have watched their taxes increase 500 percent in five years while roads have cracked and Town Hall has crumbled.


Elizabeth Semans, Michael Hubbard
Elizabeth Gotham Semans, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
James H. Semans of Durham, N.C., was married there yesterday to Michael Walter Hubbard, a son of Patti M. Rayner of Studio City, Calif., and Joseph A. Hubbard Jr. of Los Angeles.
The Rev.
Dr.
John R. Hinkins and the Rev.
Dr.
Thomas A. Langford performed the Methodist ceremony at the Duke University Chapel.
Mrs.
Hubbard, 29 years old, and her husband, 30, own Gotham Entertainment, a television and film production company in Los Angeles.
She graduated from Duke University.
Her father, a professor emeritus of urology at Duke, is the chairman of the Mary Duke Biddle Foundation.
Her mother, Mary D.B.T.
Semans, is the chairwoman of the Duke Endowment and vice chairwoman of the Mary Duke Biddle Foundation.


Mutual Funds; Where Is the Manager's Money?
Investors who are evaluating mutual funds can sift through mounds of data, but one crucial piece of information is nearly always missing: How much of their own money do fund managers invest their funds?
The industry says the information is irrelevant.
"It hits me as not material," says Matthew P. Fink, president of the Investment Company Institute, the mutual fund trade group, in Washington.


Greenwich Choral Society Remembers Mother
THE Greenwich Choral Society is not only a large ensemble but also one whose long tradition of excellence draws large audiences.
Once again, the 140-member choir, its orchestra and soloists, and its music director, Richard Vogt, are going on the road to present back-to-back concerts at the State University of New York at Purchase.
Designed as a Mother's Day tribute, the program will be presented at 5 and 8 P.M. today.
It includes Beethoven's Choral Fantasy, a group of Gershwin songs, "Rhapsody in Blue," and the "Liebeslieder" waltzes of Johannes Brahms.
Lucille Beer is the guest mezzo-soprano, David Buechner the solo pianist (914 251-6200).


All About/Art Sales; The Market's Blue Period
The art market is still in the doldrums, judging from the results of last week's evening sales of contemporary art in New York at Christie's and Sotheby's, the world's largest auction houses.
Sales next week of Impressionist and modern art will either confirm or confound that trend.
Just $23.5 million worth of contemporary art was sold, well below the pre-sale estimates of about $35 million.


May 3-9; Injuries Stop A Top Jockey
Doctors' orders and his wife's pleas have ended the riding days of the super-competitive Angel Cordero Jr., three-time winner of the Kentucky Derby.
He last rode Jan. 12 at Aqueduct where a four-horse collision left him with a broken arm, three broken ribs and a damaged kidney and spleen, which was removed in surgery.
At the same track in 1986, he lacerated his liver and fractured an arm.
His internist, Gary Wadler of Manhasset, L.I., said if Mr.
Cordero sustained any further injury to his abdomen, "we wouldn't be as lucky."


Ms. Reynolds, Anibal Puente
Mary Alice Reynolds, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Benedict M. Reynolds of Bronxville, N.Y., was married there yesterday to Dr.
Anibal Oscar Puente, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Oscar Puente of Elortondo, Argentina.
The Rev.
Joseph Fitzpatrick performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Joseph's Church.
Mrs.
Puente, 30 years old, is a graduate of the University of Hartford.
She is a senior project director at Behavioral Analysis Inc., a marketing research and consulting concern in Tarrytown, N.Y.
Her father is a professor of surgery at the New York Medical College and practices surgery in the Bronx.


Sports of The Times; Another Milestone For Eddie Murray
SOME baseball players need to pass a milestone to be recognized, to be fully appreciated.
Until then, they seem to blend into the scenery, if not the shadows.
It was like that for Billy Williams, who finished with 426 homers while Ernie Banks, his Cubs teammate, hit 512.
It was even like that for Eddie Mathews, the Braves third baseman who hit 512 homers while Henry Aaron was hitting 755.


In the Region: New Jersey; Recent Sales
Bridgewater 275,000
5 Fairway Court
3-bedroom, 2-bath, 25-year-old ranch; inground pool, patio, professionally landscaped; taxes $4,430.
Glen Rock 315,000
11 Glendale Road
4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, over-50-year-old colonial; fireplace, new kitchen and roof, deck; taxes $4,245.
Mendham 400,000
6 Jane Terrace
4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 25-year-old colonial; sunroom, library, custom cabinets; taxes $5,140.
Ramsey 199,900
65 West Oak Street
2-bedroom, 1-bath, 45-year-old colonial; fireplace, patio, fenced rear yard; taxes $3,250.
Ridgewood 148,000
433 VanBuren Avenue
3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, over-50-year-old colonial; smoke and fire alarm, front porch, h/w floors; taxes $4,214.
Upper Saddle River 349,000
33 Overbrook Drive
3-bedroom, 3-bath, 26-year-old bilevel; Jacuzzi, deck, fireplace; taxes $5,562.
OTHER AREAS Westbrook, Conn. 212,000
404 West Pond Meadow Road  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 18-year-old Cape Cod; cathedral ceiling in living room, skylights, 3 acres; taxes $2,799.
Armonk, N.Y. 450,000
14 Tallwoods
4-bedroom, 3-bath, 32-year-old contemporary; family room, formal dining room, fireplace, 2.3 acres; taxes $6,798.
Bayport, L.I. 125,000
156 Fairview Avenue  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 61-year-old ranch; sunporch, basement, detached 2-car garage; taxes $3,500.


Miss Santisario, Gerald Borovick
Mr. and Mrs.
Daniel Santisario of New Rochelle, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter Lucinda Santisario and Gerald David Borovick, a son of Morey Borovick of Durham, N.H., and Frances Johnston of Dallas.
An August wedding is planned.
Miss Santisario, 26 years old, is a senior analyst at the International Data Corporation in Framingham, Mass.
She graduated from the University of New Hampshire, as did her fiance.
Her father is a partner and the chief executive officer of Certified Moving and Storage in New York.


POSTINGS: Lawrence and Stribling; Manager-Broker Accord
Traditionally, residential real estate companies in Manhattan earned their bread and butter managing co-ops and the cream in their profits by brokering apartment sales.
Managing a building gave them an inside track on its sales until the 80's, when rising apartment prices drew many independent brokers into the trade, and they began skimming the cream.
That led some old-line companies to give up management as an unprofitable sideline, but now some firms are rethinking the pre-80's relationships.
A brokerage, Stribling &amp; Associates, and its affiliate, Wells &amp; Gay-Stribling, have formed a tie with Lawrence Properties, which manages 70 buildings with 5,000 tenant-owners.
Now, when owners in those buildings want to sell, Lawrence will introduce them to Stribling brokers, and both firms will share in the commissions if Stribling finds the buyers.
Asher Bernstein, president of Lawrence, said owners will not have to use the services of Stribling, but he thinks many will want to.


Lisa Dixon, Mark Bugos
Mr. and Mrs.
Bruce D. Dixon of Greenwich, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter Lisa Dixon to Mark Roy Bugos, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Paul E. Bugos of Monroeville, Pa.
A July wedding is planned.
Miss Dixon, 31 years old, graduated from the University of Vermont.
She is the director of investment management and administration of Grove Investment Group, a real-estate and asset-management company in Hartford.
Her father retired as the executive director of the New York law firm of Shearman &amp; Sterling.


In Defense Of Adam Graves
To the Sports Editor:
Re George Vecsey's column "The League Will Now Go to the Tapes" (The Times, May 6): Adam Graves's slash on Mario Lemieux in Game 2 of the Patrick Division finals was just that: a slash, no more and no less.
Graves (not known as a dirty player) received a two-minute penalty.
For Vecsey to spend a column deriding Graves and the Rangers and their coach and their management is absurd.


A Sharp Tongue Propels A Philippine Candidate
If Miriam Defensor Santiago is not the next President of the Philippines, many Filipinos will likely argue that Monday's election was stolen from her.
Few others, it seems, will doubt the possibility.
The sharp-tongued candidate -- she once called a Philippine congressman "fungus face" and publicly urged him to stick his finger in a light socket -- says there is only one way she can lose.


Double Vinyl
At large in SoHo, May 2, 6:10 P.M.


After L.A., How to Revive Hope In the Inner City
EDWARD G. GARDNER Chairman and chief executive, Soft Sheen Products Inc., Chicago
For many black executives and business owners, the brutality of life in the ghettos commanded their attention long before the Rodney King verdict ignited the worst riots in recent history.
Asking them how to bring those inner cities back to life called forth personal recollections melded with practical measures, anger shadowed by despair.


Iran's Leader Gets Support in a Runoff
Results of parliamentary runoff elections held on Friday confirm that President Hashemi Rafsanjani will have enough support to counter political rivals and carry out his policies of an opening to the West and liberalizing Iran's economy.
Supporters of Mr.
Rafsanjani repeated their success in the first round of voting with a landslide victory in Teheran and a comfortable majority across the country.


Gail Charnley, Jeffrey Humber
Dr.
Gail Charnley, a daughter of Patricia W. Brown of Mount Vernon, N.Y., and the late Louis E. Charnley Jr., was married last evening to Jeffrey Lee Humber, a son of John N. Humber of Ludlow, Mass., and the late Clara Green Humber.
The Rev.
Deborah Elder, an Episcopal minister, performed the ceremony aboard the Cherry Blossom in Alexandria, Va.
Dr.
Charnley, 35 years old, who will keep her name, graduated from Wellesley College and received a Ph.D. in toxicology from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
She is a consultant in toxicology in the Washington area.
She is the stepdaughter of Bailey W. Brown of Mount Vernon.


Remember the Maine!
To the Editor:
David Wallace and his pals at the Joint Corporate Committee on Cuban Claims (Letters, May 3) need to review a little Cuban history beyond the past 30 years.


Rulings Jar France Into Reliving Its Anti-Jewish Role in Nazi Era
For 47 years, France has celebrated the anniversary of V-E Day as a public holiday with wreath-laying ceremonies at the Tomb of the Unknown Soldier below the Arc de Triomphe to emphasize this country's contribution to the allied victory over Nazi Germany.
But while the usual rituals were followed in the celebration on Friday, the occasion has been overshadowed by intense debate about France's less glorious wartime role, with more and more citizens demanding to know the truth about French support for German occupation forces in their campaign against the Jews.


Miss Rizzo, Mr. Cuvelier
Andrea Nichols Rizzo, a daughter of Joan N. Rizzo of New York and the late Dr.
Peter C. Rizzo 3d, was married yesterday in New York to Guillaume Cuvelier Mr. and Mrs.
Dominique Cuvelier of Paris.
The Rev.
Eugene J. O'Brien performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Church of St.
Ignatius Loyola.
Mrs.
Cuvelier, 26 years old, graduated from Georgetown University.
Her father was the director of orthopedic surgery at St.
Vincent's Hospital in New York.


Corrections
A report in the "Making a Difference" column last Sunday about Mayfield Software Partners, a new venture capital fund devoted exclusively to software ventures, referred incorrectly to the size of the field.
Mayfield is not alone; Hummer Winblad Venture Partners of Emeryville, Calif., has invested exclusively in software ventures since its founding in 1989.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Campaign Finances; Anti-Incumbent Mood Puts More Money in Coffers of Top House Challengers
The anti-incumbent spirit of this year's Congressional elections is showing new depth, as fund raising by the strongest challengers to members of the House is running well ahead of past levels.
A Federal Election Commission report issued today showed that though House incumbents had raised 15 percent more this year than incumbents did two years ago, the top 50 challengers had raised 42 percent more than their counterparts had at a comparable time in 1990.


Charlene Ottman, Alain J.-P. Rigal
Charlene Dee Ottman, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John A. Ottman of New York, was married yesterday in Bronxville, N.Y., to Alain Jean-Pierre Rigal, a son of Annette Bilsby Rigal of Neuilly-sur-Seine, France, and the late Francois Rigal.
Judge Domenick Porco, a municipal judge in Eastchester, N.Y., performed the ceremony at the Siwanoy Country Club.
Mrs.
Rigal, 37 years old, is a senior vice president of Holsted Marketing Inc., a New York management company.
She graduated from Finch College.
Her father retired as the president and chief executive of Ottman &amp; Company, a meat seller in New York.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Constitution; And if Perot Produces a Deadlock? The House Will Decide
Should Ross Perot do well enough in the November election to prevent either President Bush or the Democratic nominee from winning a majority in the Electoral College, the election would be decided by the newly elected House of Representatives with each state delegation casting one vote.
The Constitution's 12th Amendment provides that the House choose among the three Presidential candidates with the most electoral votes.
Since each state has one vote, the one Representative from Vermont would have the same power as all 52 House members from California.


Take a Deep Breath. Ahhh, It's Spring!
THERE is a dandy fragrance in the springtime air, but too many are so intrigued by the beautiful flowers, they may forget what their noses tell them.
Inhale.
It's wonderful.
There are the obvious good scents like the rather heavy fragrance of hyacinths, spring's formal bulbs with the tidy collars of bloom.
Just a few hyacinths in the border are enough to make the whole garden smell good.
Although most of the daffodils have gone by, the later ones add their scents to the spring air, too.


For Better Living Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 28


Serving Software reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Equity Issues This Week
The following equity offerings are expected this week:
Alco Health Distribution Corp., seven million common shares, with six million in the United States.
Smith Barney, Harris Upham &amp; Co.


Vintage Petroleum reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Under Marcos's Shadow, Filipinos Vote in Close Race
Millions of Filipinos voted for a new President today in an election seen as a referendum on the legacy of the late President Ferdinand E. Marcos and of the woman who ousted him, Corazon C. Aquino.
One of the leading candidates, Eduardo Cojuangco, was so close to Mr.
Marcos that he fled with the former President into exile.
Another candidate, former Defense Minister Fidel V. Ramos, is the army general who turned on Mr.
Marcos and became a hero of the 1986 "People Power" revolution.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Television; Rite of Spring: Handicapping the Next Season's Hopefuls
WHEN ABC announces its fall television schedule tomorrow in a presentation to advertising executives in Manhattan, it will signal the start of the speculation season -- and the end of the blind-speculation season.
The speculation season, during which ad agency executives and others in the network television business prognosticate on the chances of success for prime-time shows and the networks as a whole, lasts from May to September, when the fall television wars crank up again.


Windmere Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Braves Again Are Victims Of Cardinals' Comeback
Cardinals 6, Braves 5
ST.
LOUIS, May 10 (AP) -- The Atlanta Braves blew a lead for the second straight game as Tom Pagnozzi delivered a two-run single with two outs in the ninth inning to give the St.
Louis Cardinals a 6-5 victory today.
In one of the greatest comebacks in their history, the Cardinals rallied from a 9-0 deficit to beat the defending National League champions, 12-11, Saturday night.


Astronauts Fail to Capture Wayward Satellite


Dance in Review
American Ballet Theater  Metropolitan Opera House
Debuts in American Ballet Theater's latest mixed bill brought in an all-new cast on Friday night in "The Firebird" and Laurent Hilaire, partnering Susan Jaffe in "Other Dances."
Mr.
Hilaire, a guest from the Paris Opera Ballet, is at his best in pure-dance ballets, and he and Miss Jaffe gave Jerome Robbins's pas de deux to Chopin's music a straightforward and vibrant rendering.
Neither dancer played up the choreography's affectations and while in close rapport, each allowed the solos to bring out their respective strong points.


INSIDE
Filipinos Go to Polls
Millions of citizens cast ballots in the Philippines in a close presidential race that pitted the heirs to the Marcos legacy against the supporters of the forces who ousted him.
Page A6.
Fujimori's Show of Force
The shots continued and the death toll rose a day after the President of Peru ordered the police to storm a prison occupied by Shining Path guerrillas, forcing them to surrender.
Page A3.
Gorbachev in New York City
On a three-day visit, the former Soviet leader will dabble in diplomacy and visit some of capitalism's most glittering monuments.
Page B1.
Economics and the Election
Administration officials hope a reviving economy will bolster the President's chances.
But obstacles remain in California and elsewhere.
Page D1.
Sylvia Syms Dies at 74
The cabaret singer, one of the most admired of her generation, collapsed during a standing ovation.
Page D10.


Just Call It a Power Trip With Norris in Charge
The crucial element was power.
Never mind the intricate strategy Meldrick Taylor's corner had conceived to defuse it.
Once Terry Norris, the World Boxing Council superwelterweight champion, began unloading his right hand on Taylor at the Mirage on Saturday night, those pre-fight plans became irrelevant.
Lou Duva, Taylor's co-manager, explained the X's and O's in the corridor outside the arena where the 24-year-old Norris had just knocked out Taylor at 2 minutes 55 seconds of the fourth round to retain his title.


Los Angeles Riots Are a Warning, Americans Fear
Most Americans view the riots in Los Angeles as a "warning" about the state of race relations, and say it is time for a new emphasis on the problems of minorities and the cities, according to the latest New York Times/CBS News Poll.
The new survey, conducted Wednesday through Friday, found the public in a shaken, worried mood, more likely to see the unrest as a symptom of festering social needs than as a simple issue of law and order.
Majorities of both whites and blacks said investing in jobs and job training programs was a better way of preventing future turmoil than strengthening the police forces.
More Money Needed
A strong majority of the respondents, 61 percent, said the nation was spending "too little" on improving the conditions of black Americans, up from 35 percent who expressed that view in 1988.
And 63 percent said the Federal Government was not paying enough attention to the needs and problems of minorities, a striking increase from the 34 percent who felt that way four years ago.


CCL Industries reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Bel Fuse Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Mutual Risk Management reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Corrections
An article in Business Day on May 2 about the severance package for N. J. Nicholas Jr. from Time Warner Inc. referred imprecisely to his departure from the company.
Mr.
Nicholas resigned last February at the board's request.
He and Time Warner blamed "strategic differences." According to colleagues, he also clashed in temperament with Steven J. Ross, Time Warner's chairman and other co-chief executive.


Discovering Justice: Russia and the Law -- A special report.; Two Novelties in Russian Courts: Defense Lawyers and Jury Trials
In one courtroom of the Moscow City Court, the hammer-and-sickle emblems, carved long ago into the wooden chairs of the three judges, have been chiseled off.
In a second courtroom, just down the hall, a hammer-and-sickle hangs on the wall above the chief judge's head and two still adorn the chairs.
The great transition in Russian life, after the collapse of the Soviet Union and Communist ideology, is also taking place in the courtroom.


A Long Journey Home, and Not a Moment Too Soon
The agony of a long trip finally ended today.
Seven games, six losses, three cities, countless mistakes and too few hits.
The Yankees couldn't pack quickly enough.
If they also couldn't remember their last victory, over the Seattle Mariners last Monday, it was only because they were trying to forget everything that has happened since.
They split two games in Seattle but then lost two straight in Anaheim to the California Angels and three more here to the Oakland Athletics, including a 5-2 setback today that sent them home with a 15-16 record and losses in eight of nine games.


Mutual Assurance Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


McDaniel's Playoff Resurgence Buoys Knicks
Asked to describe Xavier McDaniel's recent play, his teammate Anthony Mason had a quick response.
"I'd describe X as a clutch player," Mason said after watching McDaniel's 24-point, 7-rebound performance in the Knicks' 93-86 victory in Game 4.
"Since Day One of the playoffs, he has been doing everything -- scoring, rebounding, playing real aggressive. He has been great."


S.E.C. to Propose New Rules
The Securities and Exchange Commission plans to propose rules next month to make it easier for stockholders to understand how much corporate executives are being paid.
The chairman of the S.E.C., Richard C. Breeden, told a group of corporate executives attending a weekend meeting here of the Business Council, a private association, that shareholders should have more information on how much executives were being paid in comparison with how well their companies were performing.


Tajik Police Fire on Demonstrators, Shaking Hope for Coalition
Security troops opened fire on a crowd of demonstrators today, breaking a tenuous peace in this poor Central Asian republic and raising doubts about a reported agreement to form a coalition government.
Officials said at least 6 people had been killed and 11 wounded, while the Tajik television said 8 people had been killed in the shooting outside the offices of the secret police.


World Economies


Duffers of the World Unite! Take Aim!
"Take dead aim!"
That simple bit of advice from HARVEY PENICK is his most favored gift to golfers, one of many in the 87-year-old teacher's long association with the game.
He elaborates: "For golfers who might not understand Texas talk, let me put the advice in a different way. Once you address the golf ball, hitting it has got to be the most important thing in your life at that moment. Shut out all thoughts -- other than picking out a target and taking dead aim."


The Richest Getting Richer: Now It's a Top Political Issue
When Bill Clinton wants to galvanize his audience, he thunders from the podium that the top 1 percent of families got 60 percent of the gains from economic growth during the 1980's and owns more wealth than the bottom 90 percent.
Governor Clinton, the likely Democratic Presidential nominee, had been searching for months for facts to illustrate his claim that America's middle class benefited little from 12 years of Republican rule.
The explosion of riches at the top struck him as a perfect vehicle.
Not only did the widening gap between the rich and the rest of Americans conflict with traditional notions of democracy, but it also went right to the pocketbook sources of middle-class discontent.


New TV Spots For Wal-Mart
Wal-Mart Stores Inc. is giving a personal touch to a new television advertising campaign by featuring actual employees for the first time in its commercials.
In the series of spots created by GSD&amp;M Advertising, Austin, Tex., the workers "communicate the human element of Wal-Mart," said Henry Corra, director of Maysles Films Inc. in New York, which produced the commercials.


Breaking the Mold at Nissan Design
In the clubby world of the auto industry, where many executives are said to have gasoline in their veins, Gerald P. Hirshberg seems driven by an alternative fuel.
As the top American at Nissan's design studio in California, Mr.
Hirshberg is responsible for the shapes of three models this year, including two sedans that buck the current popular "wedge" theme of low-slung hoods and high trunk lids.


U.S. Cellular Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


International Semi-Tech reports earnings for Year to Jan 31


Devon Group reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


A MIDEAST PUZZLE: TALKS THAT AREN'T
The six-month-old Middle East peace process enters a new phase over the next week with international meetings in five capitals on a wide range of practical issues.
The talks among Israel and its neighbors will cover arms control, economic development, refugees, water resources and the environment.
Israeli officials repeated today that they will boycott two of the sessions -- the economic development conference in Brussels on Monday and Tuesday and the the refugee talks in Ottawa Wednesday through Friday -- because Palestinians from outside the occupied territories are included in delegations.
Jerusalem objects to such participation because it raises issues of Palestinians' right to return to the West Bank and Gaza Strip..


Air Canada reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Action Auto Rental Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


As Relief Rolls Grew, Where Was G.O.P.? In Office
IN the Bush Administration's version, the Los Angeles riot was the grim harvest of Great Society programs epitomized by the failed welfare state in New York.
Revisionists may have forgotten who was in charge when New York's relief rolls exploded 25 years ago: the Governor and the Mayor were Republicans.
Between 1965 and 1970, under Gov.
Nelson A. Rockefeller and Mayor John V. Lindsay, the average number of people receiving public assistance in New York City more than doubled -- from 510,000 to 1.1 million.
Even Ross Perot was a beneficiary of New York State's welfare expansion, but more on that later.


Consolidated Natural Gas reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Kleer-Vu Industries reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Not Fitting the Profile
Would you have hired Jerry Krause?
When Jerry Reinsdorf, the chairman of the Chicago Bulls, did just that in 1985, shortly after he bought the Bulls and chose Krause as his vice president in charge of basketball operations, or general manager, he received a phone call from one of the top executives in the National Basketball Association.


Columbia Real Estate Investments Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


PMC Capital Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Prenor Financial reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Rules Sought To Monitor Use of Force
A task force that has spent more than a year examining the use of force by police officers in New Jersey is recommending a series of steps intended to strengthen civilian oversight of police operations and insure officers and citizens alike that charges of excessive force will be uniformly and fairly investigated.
The panel's report, expected to be formally released on Monday, recommends broader training and psychological testing of officers, uniform reporting standards for accusations of brutality, and training for municipal officials to improve oversight of police operations.
The panel also urges clarification of the laws governing the use of force and re-examination of officers' duty to pursue suspects who resist or flee.


Columbia Gas System reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


For College Kids, Cops and Crime
The flames in Los Angeles cast an embarrassing light on Congressional paralysis about crime.
Democrats and Republicans continue to maneuver endlessly for partisan appearances.
Perhaps now the obvious urgency of the need for progress can permit real action on two proposals that share bipartisan agreement.
Last fall a House-Senate conference committee reported an omnibus crime bill that expanded the death penalty, limited prisoners' habeas corpus appeals and imposed a waiting period for handgun purchases.
It also set up a Police Corps that would offer college scholarships for students willing to serve with city police after graduation, and it called for $3.2 billion in Federal aid to local law enforcement.


Now Bush Can Really Help Unions; And Corporate Dues?
To the Editor:
"Bush Fires a Shot at Union Political Spending" (The Week in Review, April 19) misses an important and obvious point.
Your accompanying pie charts show that the total contributions by unions to both parties ($1.24 million) is dwarfed by the contributions by business ($17.1 million).
Approximately 75 percent of business contributions ($12.8 million) go to the Republican Party.
Your article should have pointed this out and raised the question of how do management and corporation boards justify these expenditures to the stockholders, who are never consulted.
As a stockholder, I am outraged that this largess goes overwhelmingly to a party I do not support.
BERNARD B. RUSSELL Boca Raton, Fla., April 26, 1992


Critic's Notebook; Perverse as Ever, Cannes Loves Altman's Mockery of Filmdom
There were posturing and schmooozing and power-breakfasting to be seen here over the weekend, and some of those things actually took place off the screen.
The rest were on view in "The Player," which thoroughly enchanted the Cannes audience even as it lacerated much of what that audience holds dear.
Shown only three days into the Cannes International Film Festival, "The Player" was cheered for its dead-on satire and its irreverence, both of which give it the earmarks of a possible winner.
The fact that the director, Robert Altman, publicly expressed his disapproval of organized competitions among artists probably only heightened his chances of winding up with a major prize at this one.
Although "The Player" speaks a universal language, some of it was inevitably lost in translation.
The film's running gag about brands of bottled water seldom turned up in the subtitles.
And of course Mr.
Altman's famous fondness for overlapping dialogue could not be adequately conveyed.
However, the festival audience had its own eye for interesting details, buzzing more about minor players like the director Sydney Pollack than about movie-star walk-ons like Cher.
The audience was particularly startled by the film's jokes about newspaper headlines like the one about a mud slide in Chile that is described by Peter Gallagher, playing an ambitious movie executive, as good material for the director John Boorman. (Mr. Boorman happens to be on the Cannes jury this year.)


Sylvia Syms, Singer, Dead at 74; Cabaret Artist With Saloon Style
Sylvia Syms, one of the most admired pop-jazz singers of her generation, died of a heart attack in Manhattan early yesterday morning after a performance in the Oak Room of the Algonquin Hotel.
Moments after she had finished singing a program of songs associated with her longtime friend Frank Sinatra, the 74-year-old singer and actress collapsed and was taken to St.
Clare's Hospital, where she was pronounced dead on arrival.
"It was at the very end of the second show, and she was getting a standing ovation," said Steve La Spina, her bass player.
"She put her right hand up, and the next thing we knew she fell back and hit the ground."


Shelter for the Rural Homeless: Trees and Sky
Millions of Americans will spend at least a night inside a national forest campground this year, but only a handful will ever call one home.
This week, a half-dozen families, most of them from this logging community, started setting up their shelters in the first campground in a national forest set aside exclusively for the homeless.


Ben &amp; Jerry's Homemade reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Big Bird and Other Subversives
What's big, yellow and has a radical agenda?
Now it can be told: It's Big Bird.
Grown fat and happy off your tax dollars, he's the one to blame for a wide variety of urban ills.
Laurence Jarvik, a scholar at the conservative Heritage Foundation, was the first to see the vulture in that mass of feathers.
In an interview in this newspaper last month, he charged that " 'Sesame Street' is just another kid's show, no better than 'Underdog' or 'The Flintstones.' " No better certainly, and potentially a serious threat, as Mr.
Jarvik goes on to prove.
"What did the taxpayers get for their investment in 'Sesame Street?' A generation of kids who spray graffiti on the walls of New York City. If 'Sesame Street' was so effective, why do we have such a literacy problem?"


Going to Market for a Little Shopping and Bonding
IT would not be hard to imagine the birth of a political party in the checkout line of Hastings Prime Meats.
The food shop has bustled its way into one of the best public forums in this river town of 8,000.
"It's a definite nerve center for the town," said Timothy Barnes, a 53-year-old physics teacher who has lived here for 40 years.
"If you feel like you want to meet somebody, it's the perfect place to go. There's no McDonald's, no movie theaters. This is the center of low-key social life in Hastings."


Regency Cruises Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Right-Handed World Imperils Lefties
To the Editor:
"America Lurches to the Left," your April 23 editorial on left-handedness, mentions my book "The Left-Hander Syndrome," saying: "The statistics are in dispute but even if true, they don't prove the inferiority of left-handers or their bumbling inability to avoid accidents, as Coren seems to believe. Instead, they show the need to make life for southpaws safer and fairer."
My book's last four chapters point out that left-handers are not clumsier in any way, but are placed in jeopardy of accidents by a world designed for right-handers.
I also recommend ways to make life safer and fairer for left-handers.
STANLEY COREN Professor of Psychology University of British Columbia Vancouver, Canada, April 24, 1992


Afghans Want U.S. To Urge Moderation
To the Editor:
Afghanistan, like one drowning, has been waving at the United States trying to get its attention.
When I visited Kabul last November, the aides of President Najibullah told me they were desperate, not for recognition of their government, but for simple attention through a fact-finding mission.
The president of the Afghan Senate, Mahmoud Habibi, asked me to take a letter to that effect to Senator Christopher Dodd.
No interest.
The Afghan desk of the State Department told me our country was leaving it all to the United Nations.
It was in the 1950's that Gulbaddin Hekmatyar, the violently fundamentalist leader, threw acid on the legs of Afghan Airline hostesses for displaying themselves in Western-style uniforms.
It should not surprise our State Department that conquest by Mr.
Hekmatyar looms in Afghan eyes as worse even than rule by Najibullah, whom they hate and call "the cow." A rule that out-Khomeinied Khomeini would have tragic consequences, spreading through Central Asia, now that the Muslim formerly Soviet republics are cut loose.


Pyongyang Journal; For the Great Leader at 80, a Great Birthday Bash
These have been a busy few weeks in Paradise.
Every day for weeks now, thousands of North Koreans have poured into the national stadium here to watch the "mass games" in honor of the 80th birthday of Kim Il Sung, the country's perpetually lauded "Great Leader." With endless waves of students streaming onto the field in regimented rows, this is not your ordinary half-time show.
Teaching came to a halt in many Pyongyang schools months ago so that 100,000 children could practice for the daily gymnastic extravaganza, learning the somersaults and synchronized wrist flips needed to create an ever-changing tableau of the Great Leader with thousands of hand-held placards.


Shuttle Fails Twice to Capture Satellite
In a tense drama some 230 miles above Earth, astronauts in spacesuits tried and failed tonight to pluck a wayward satellite from orbit and move it into the payload bay of the space shuttle Endeavour.
The aim was to latch the satellite onto an engine that would have hurled the $150 million communications relay into its rightful place high above Earth.


The Richest Getting Richer: Now It's a Top Political Issue
When Bill Clinton wants to galvanize his audience, he thunders from the podium that the top 1 percent of families got 60 percent of the gains from economic growth during the 1980's and owns more wealth than the bottom 90 percent.
Governor Clinton, the likely Democratic Presidential nominee, had been searching for months for facts to illustrate his claim that America's middle class benefited little from 12 years of Republican rule.
The explosion of riches at the top struck him as a perfect vehicle.
Not only did the widening gap between the rich and the rest of Americans conflict with traditional notions of democracy, but it also went right to the pocketbook sources of middle-class discontent.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Economy; Despite Recession's End, Bush May Face Unusually Harsh Public Judgment
Bush Administration officials are hoping that the President's sagging approval ratings will surge if the nation's economic recovery continues through November.
Economists note that whenever the economy has grown in the six to nine months before an election, voters historically have tended to ignore earlier economic worries and focus on the recent good news.
But some political experts, including many Democrats, predict that voters will judge President Bush harshly because of the unusually weak economic growth during his Administration.
And with the Northeast and California hit hardest by the recession, many of these experts say Mr.
Bush and other Republican candidates will have a tough battle in those areas.


American Water Works reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Further Cut In Rates Is Possible
Even though recent economic data point to a recovery, a number of credit market analysts continue to assert that the Federal Reserve Board may cut short-term interest rates again by early June.
The prospects for another Fed easing seemed to dim last week after the Labor Department reported that nonfarm payroll employment rose by 126,000 jobs last month and that the unemployment rate slipped a notch, to 7.2 percent.


Sports of The Times; One Look by Jordan Tells the Bulls' Tale
ON two straight days, for two very different reasons, Michael Jordan had the same extraordinary look on his very famous face.
It was not the look of radiant confidence you see on the Wheaties box, or the brimming confidence portrayed in one of his soft-drink commercials, or even the cool superiority witnessed at the ends of most games.
This was none of those.
This was a look of utter disbelief.
On Saturday afternoon in the second period, Jordan, the flying man, broke away and was all alone from half-court on and went up to slam in the mother of all slam dunks, and missed!
Unheard of!
The ball rebounded past half court.
It was like Nureyev doing a twirl and landing in the orchestra.
Like Houdini not being able to pick the locks on the box that contained him underwater.
Like the genie finding he was all out of magic carpets.
It was a look of shock.
The poor man was stunned.


Archive Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to April 3


Tellus Industries reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Europa Cruises Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


New Jersey Ready to Go to the Birders
Don't call them bird watchers, O.K.?
They're birders, thank you, and not just because close to half their finds are identified by song, not sight.
Bird watching also suggests a passive activity, and birding, as any birder will tell you, is anything but.
It is, in fact, a grueling, cut-throat sport, and anyone who doubts it is welcome to join the best of the binoculared breed next Saturday in the ninth b9th annual World Series of Birding, an exhausting midnight-to-midnight competition to identify the most species in New Jersey.


McDowell Isn't Great, but He's Perfect
White Sox 5, Orioles 2
BALTIMORE, May 10 (AP) -- Mechanically, Jack McDowell wasn't perfect, but his record still is.
The right-hander became baseball's first seven-game winner this season, stopping the Baltimore Orioles on four hits in eight innings today and leading the Chicago White Sox to a 5-2 victory.


Moore Products reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


National Gypsum Co. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Corrections
An article last Monday about the dumping of radioactive waste in the Arctic by the Soviet Navy misstated the dollar equivalent of 100 million rubles, which is the estimated cost of scrapping a nuclear submarine.
It is about $1 million, not $10 million.


Universal Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Gulfmark International reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Benefits Are Refused More Often To Disabled Blacks, Study Finds
For 30 years, blacks with serious ailments have been much more likely than whites to be rejected for benefits under Social Security disability programs, a Congressional investigative agency has found.
From the initial claim through the appeals process, blacks have had a more difficult time obtaining benefits from the two largest Federal programs for people with severe disabilities, which together now provide $43.2 billion in disability checks annually to millions of workers and their families, the study by the General Accounting Office concludes.


Books of The Times; Viewing the Bible as Truth and Tale
The Unauthorized Version  Truth and Fiction in the Bible  By Robin Lane Fox  478 pages.
Alfred A. Knopf. $27.50.
"The Bible is a book of faith, and a book of doctrine, and a book of morals, and a book of religion, of especial revelation from God," Daniel Webster declared more than a century ago.
But is the Bible true?
This is what Robin Lane Fox asks in his erudite and stimulating new study, "The Unauthorized Version: Truth and Fiction in the Bible."
The question of truth may seem naive.
After all, we have recently had further dramatic proof that the Creation took more than seven days.
And, as Mr.
Fox himself points out, the Bible contradicts itself in its opening pages, by declaring in Genesis 1:12 that on the third day "the earth produced growing things: plants bearing their own kind of seed and trees bearing fruit," according to the Revised English edition; and then stating in 2:4 and 2:5, "When the Lord God made the earth and the heavens, there was neither shrub nor plant growing on the earth, because the Lord God had sent no rain."


Insolvencies Up in Britain
Company insolvencies in Britain rose 5 percent, to 5,835, in the first quarter from the quarter before and 17 percent from the first quarter of 1991, the British Chambers of Commerce said Friday.
Individual insolvencies also rose sharply in the first quarter, climbing 11 percent from the fourth quarter, to 8,604, and up 67 percent from the period a year earlier.


Review/Theater; Outwitting a Variety of Demons
The setting for Laurence Yep's two one-act plays at the Pan Asian Repertory Theater is the fictional California town of Fidele, named after the river steamer in Herman Melville's novel "The Confidence Man." As in the sign above the ship's barbershop in that book, there is "no trust" here.
There are only people trying to outwit one another and to withstand oppressive white demons in what they call the "Land of the Golden Mountain."
The characters in Mr.
Yep's "Pay the Chinaman" have no sense of loyalty to one another or to their Chinese-American heritage.
They are crafty, even cutthroat gamblers.
In this, the more rewarding of the one-acts, a con man is conned.
Or is he?
The contest begins playfully, as the con man (Raul Aranas) wheedles a young barber (Keenan Shimizu) into games of chance, with increasingly higher stakes.
Gradually, intensity accrues in the play and the performances as the younger man's wiliness is revealed.
But the older man is never to be underestimated.


Science Management reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
Some credit market analysts assert that the Federal Reserve may cut short-term interest rates again by early June, even though recent data point to a recovery.
Some, however, are skeptical that a cut will stimulate loan demand.  [ Page D1. ]
Politicians and Government officials have joined the debate over whether the wealthy are indeed getting richer at the expense of the poor.  [ D1. ]


CBS Promotion to Match TV and Cookies
Why is an Oreo cookie like "Murphy Brown?" As CBS sees it, both are "core brands."
And both will be at the heart of CBS's most ambitious promotional campaign yet for a new television season.
This fall, after three years with Kmart, CBS's main partner will be Nabisco (although Kmart stores will also participate).


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Primaries; Ignoring Brown, Clinton Focuses on Fall
Over the next three weeks, Bill Clinton can reasonably expect to win approval from Democratic voters in all the remaining Presidential primaries except possibly the one in California, where he runs as the underdog against a former Governor whose family has been involved in state politics for more than three decades.
Aides to Mr.
Clinton say that in most of the remaining primaries he will ignore the former Governor of California, Edmund G. Brown Jr., and will try to give voters a clearer sense of his own personality and his positions on major issues, in preparation for a general election campaign against President Bush.


First Mercantile Fund reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Scotsman Industries reports earnings for Qtr to March 29


A Postcard That's Close to the Edge
The United States Postal Service and SHIRLEY BABASHOFF are going right along with the United States Olympic Committee's declaration that this be Olympic Spirit Week.
The Postal Service is starting a project aimed at assembling the world's largest postcard, a composite of 28,000 individual cards that is 2 feet by 2 1/2 feet and available in postal lobbies this week.


A Capitalist Itinerary for a Superpower Lecturer; Gorbachev Arrives in New York for 3 Days of Meetings, Speeches and Fund-Raising
Gone are the days when Communist propaganda posters showed American financiers with pig snouts and Vladimir I. Lenin railed against the "bloodsucking leeches" of capitalism.
Now, with the Marxist Soviet state defunct, Mikhail S. Gorbachev, its last leader, has been traveling the United States preaching that the world is evolving beyond capitalism and Communism.
But as he arrives here today, for the New York City portion of a fund-raising tour, Mr.
Gorbachev seems intent on seeing all of the most glittering monuments of capitalism.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Costco Wholesale Inc., Kirkland, Wash., plans to file with the Securities and Exchange Commission for a public offering of $200 million in convertible subordinated debentures due in 2002.
The company operates a chain of wholesale merchandise membership warehouses in 13 states and Canada.


Western Gas Resources reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Now Bush Can Really Help Unions
To the Editor:
The Bush Administration has signed an executive order requiring the National Labor Relations Board to be more expeditious and diligent in enforcing the law on campaign expenditures from union dues (news article, April 14).
As a union organizer, I am pleased to see the President take an interest in the sorry state of our labor laws.
But I am dismayed by the law Mr.
Bush has chosen to highlight, a law with which unions are already in compliance.
His strategy is designed to diminish what little influence working men and women have in the political process.


Canada Malting reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Valspar Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to April 24


SI Handling Systems reports earnings for Year to March 1


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.


South Africa Government Still Backs Violence
To the Editor:
"South African Rivals Call for Halt to the Violence" (news article, April 20) fails to inform us about the cause of the violence in South Africa.
You tell us that Nelson Mandela "has repeatedly accused the Government's security forces of abetting violence in the townships." Such wording leaves the reader with the impression of a partisan political actor who is only speculating, without proof, about who is causing the bloodbath in South Africa's townships.
But you quote President F. W. de Klerk saying: "Pointing accusing fingers is not going to bring peace." And "Only if all the leaders make sure that all their followers refrain from violence will we have peace." This statement, without context, makes Mr. de Klerk seem a peacemaker, caught between rival groups and accusers (the African National Congress and Inkatha), and concerned for all South African lives.
Evidence to the contrary is voluminous.


Klan Leader Allowed to Speak in Alabama
A Ku Klux Klan leader who had been denied a permit for a parade instead delivered a 45-minute speech Saturday afternoon from the steps of the Limestone County Courthouse.
The national director of the Knights of the Ku Klux Klan, Thomas Arthur Robb, spoke to a crowd of about 300.


Quotation of the Day
"I don't like the music they play in those old folks' homes. I'm a rock 'n' roller myself. And out here, at least I can play my Huey Lewis tapes." -- FRANCES DAVIS, 72-year-old resident of a National Forest campsite for homeless people.  [ A12:5. ]


Looking for Clues To Jaguar Account
Advertising executives are wondering whether the reassignment of Jaguar's account in Britain offers any clues to the auto maker's pending review in the United States.
J.
Walter Thompson in London has been named to handle the estimated $9 million account of Jaguar Ltd., which was at F. John French in London for nine years.
Thompson is a major agency of Jaguar's parent, the Ford Motor Company, in the United States.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-9  NEW ORDER IN THE COURT?
As the gavel falls in today's Russia, it is difficult to determine which laws will prevail and which traditions of Communism will survive.
A1
A glimpse of Courtroom 10 of the Moscow People's Court.  A8  CLOSE RACE IN MANILA
Filipinos cast their ballots in a close presidential race that has been marked by bloodshed and flamboyant campaigning.
A6  SOLDIERS' SURVIVORS WANT FACTS
Grieving parents of British soldiers killed by allies in the Persian Gulf war want to know how and why, and they want Americans summoned to Britain to do the explaining.
A3  RESCUERS FIND 11 DEAD MINERS
Miners in Nova Scotia searched the Westray Mine for fellow workers buried by an explosion.
They found the bodies of 11 of 26 workers trapped by the blast.
A6  AID ESCORT WEIGHED FOR BOSNIA
In an effort to carry food and medicine into Bosnia and Herzegovina, a United Nations security force is being considered to escort aid convoys, Western diplomats said.
A2  ISRAEL REPEATS BOYCOTT PLEDGE
Israeli officials will boycott two of five sessions of Mideast peace talks as the next phase begins.
A9  VIOLENT VICTORY FOR FUJIMORI
President Fujimori toured a prison after commandos overpowered Shining Path inmates in a violent siege that ended with dozens of casualties and a political victory.
A3  ANOTHER KIND OF WARFARE
They want money and property, and they use guns to get them in Nicaragua.
Many of them are former members of the Sandinista Army.
A6  TAJIKISTAN AGENTS ATTACK
Reports of the creation of a coalition government were thrown into doubt after security forces fired on demonstrators, killing at least six people and injuring several.
A9  Pyongyang Journal: An elaborate birthday for the Great Leader.
A4  National A10-13, B6-8  REGULATING HEALTH CARE, AGAIN
State and local officials around the country are returning to the kind of health-care planning denounced by the Reagan Administration as heavy-handed regulation.
A1  HOW AMERICANS VIEW RIOTS
Most Americans saw the riots in Los Angeles as a "warning" about the state of race relations and said it was time for a new emphasis on the problems of minorities and the cities, according to the latest New York Times/CBS News Poll.
A1
Respondents in the poll expressed sympathy and animosity.
B7  SCORNED WITHIN AND WITHOUT
The Los Angeles Police Department has hit a low point in morale, its officers castigated as brutes with badges or, after their hesitant response to rioting, cowards and incompetents.
And some of the worst criticism comes from the officers themselves.
A1  THE HISPANIC FACE OF LOS ANGELES
Hispanic officials in Los Angeles said the riots there opened their eyes to the huge influx of Hispanic immigrants to the South-Central area.
While those residents were particularly hard-hit in the riots, the area has few agencies that cater to Spanish speakers.
B6  FOREST HOME FOR HOMELESS
A half-dozen families have begun setting up shelters in the first campground in a national forest set aside exclusively for the homeless.
A1  FEWER BENEFITS FOR BLACKS
Blacks with serious ailments have for decades been much more likely than whites to be rejected for benefits under Social Security disability programs, a Congressional investigative agency has found.
A1  ECONOMIC RECKONING FOR BUSH
Bush Administration officials hope a revived economy will bolster the President's chances.
But some political experts predict voters will judge Mr.
Bush harshly because of the weak economic growth during his Administration.
B8
What Clinton hopes to do as the primary season winds to a close.
B8  SATELLITE EVADES ASTRONAUTS
Astronauts failed to pluck a wayward satellite from orbit, bringing frustration to a nearly flawless inaugural flight of the shuttle Endeavour.
A10  Americans and Germans remembered the sinking of a sub.
A13  Metropolitan Digest, B1 Business Digest, D1  Sports C1-8  Auto Racing: Cheever zips but misses pole.
C2  Baseball: Mets complete sweep of Dodgers.
C5  Yanks lose 6th in row.
C5  Cards rally to top Braves again.
C5  No. 7 for White Sox's McDowell.
C5  Basketball: Knicks pull even with Bulls.
C1  The builder of the Bulls.C2  Physical play spurs Knicks.
C3  Cavaliers and Celtics at 2-2.
C3  Boats: Italy evens America's Cup series.
C1  Boxing: Power trip for Norris.
C7  Column: Berkow on Knicks-Bulls C3  Cycling: Germany's Aldag excels.
C7  Football: U.S.C. linebacker gets shot with Jets.
C6  Hockey: Ranger goalies not super now.
C6  Sweep for Bruins.
C6  Horse Racing: Pistols and Roses out of Preakness.
C6  Obituaries D10  Willard L. Thorp, economist who helped draft Marshall Plan  Sylvia Syms, singer  Arts/Entertainment C9-14  Theater: A collection at risk.
C9  "Fairy Bones." C11  Film: "The Player" at Cannes.
C9  "Locked-Up Time." C10  Music: Gran Scena Opera.
C9  Soundgarden at Roseland.
C9  Adrian Legg, guitarist.
C11  Dance: In Review.
C10  Word and Image: "Murphy Brown" and the ratings sweep.
C12  "Tribal Wisdom and the Modern World." C13  The Bible as truth and tale.
C13  Editorials/Op-Ed A14-15  Editorials A14  The unsung new world army.
College kids, cops and crime.
A timely trumpet.
Topics: Sound the alarm.
Letters A14  Leslie H. Gelb: To be father and bride.
A15  William Safire: Foiling the computappers.
A15  Patricia Kean: Big Bird and other subversives.
A15  Charles C. Mann and Mark L. Plummer: The Noah principle.
A15  T. H. Watkins: The Peggy syndrome.
A15


A Timely Trumpet
It could easily have been just another march on Washington, important but unlikely to attract more than a day or two of publicity.
Now, however, next Saturday's march to "Save Our Cities/Save Our Children" could well shake the nation's capital and move elected officials to address the sufferings of the cities.
What lifts this march above the routine is the verdict rendered in the Rodney King trial, its violent aftermath in Los Angeles and other cities, and the White House's offensive effort last week to blame the riots on the Great Society's anti-poverty programs of the 1960's and 1970's.


Home Oil Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Canadian Tire reports earnings for Qtr to March 28


Pratt &amp; Lambert reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Peru Routs Rebels in 4-Day Prison Fight
A four-day siege of a prison that housed more than 500 Shining Path guerrillas ended Saturday night when police commandos stormed their cellblock and most surrendered.
The retaking of the prison is a major gain for President Alberto K. Fujimori in his new crackdown onSouth America's strongest and most dangerous revolutionary movement, which many experts here say could bring down the Government.
In an intense four-hour final assault on cellblock 4B, which housed male Shining Path members at the Miguel Castro Castro maximum-security prison in the shantytown of Canto Grande, the police set off scores of explosions, fired thousands of rounds from machine guns and filled the building with tear gas.
Early this morning shots and explosions could still be heard as the police apparently completed their mopping-up operation.
President Tours Prison
President Fujimori, who toured the prison this afternoon, said that in four days of fighing 28 rebels had been killed and 20 wounded.
But police officials acknowledged a death count exceeding 40, with more than 50 wounded.
There was some uncertainty whether a number of rebels were still hiding in the web of tunnels that inmates had dug under the prison.
Major victories over the Shining Path are crucial for Mr.
Fujimori, who justified his seizure of near-dictatorial power on April 5 by saying that Congress and the courts were making it impossible to fight the insurgency effectively.
He has issued a decree mandating life imprisonment for many terrorist offenses and is talking about bringing back the death penalty for terrorist acts.
The Peruvian public, which widely rejects the Shining Path because of its brutal tactics, is clearly ambivalent.
Many people fear that a crackdown on terrorism might signal a crackdown on human rights in general.
Though it took the police four days to take control of the prison, the outcome is almost certain to be seen as a major victory against the Shining Path, which used the prison for indoctrinating and training its members.
After a massacre of almost 300 Shining Path members in June 1986, the Government of Alan Garcia, then the President, decided to house the guerrillas in the Castro Castro prison.
Poor administration there resulted in the guerrillas' having remarkable autonomy in their cellblocks.
Models of Organization
For the last five years they refused prison fare and had friends and sympathizers bring in food for them.
Unlike the filthy cellblocks that housed 1,400 common criminals, those of the Shining Path were models of organization and cleanliness.
During the four-day siege, the common criminals remained in their cellblocks and were not involved in the fighting.
The prison was Shining Path's face to the public.
Journalists often visited for talks with guerrillas.
Government officials say the inmates stockpiled weapons that were smuggled into the prison, reportedly with the help of the prison guards.
The battle to take the prison began early on Wednesday when the police tried to enter a cellblock that housed 140 women accused or convicted of terrorism.
Within minutes, several male guerrillas had slipped through tunnels into the women's area and began fighting the police with machine guns, dynamite and acid.
The police said they wanted to move the women to more secure prisons where they would not have control over the cellblocks.
After a relatively quiet standoff on Thursday and Friday, it became apparent on Saturday that a final assault was being prepared.
Early in the morning, explosions and gunfire could be heard from outside the prison.
Around 2 P.M. the fighting intensified after the Interior Ministry ordered the police to step up their attack.
By 6 P.M. the prison was like a slowly exploding arsenal, with huge blasts and repeated gunfire.
The end came when the police blew a giant hole in the southern wall of the men's cellblock, giving the guerrillas little place to hide.


Dance in Review
Kumiko Kimoto  The Kitchen
"Ceases, Still I See," which Kumiko Kimoto presented on Thursday night, was obviously a dance that grew out of a deeply personal vision.
But Miss Kimoto never quite managed to share her experience with the public.
As a result, the hourlong work was always strange and sometimes eerie but seldom emotionally powerful.
Miss Kimoto took her inspiration from Hans Christian Andersen's "Little Mermaid" and Jean Genet's "Querelle." A Danish fairy tale and a French novel about a sailor who is an assassin might seem totally unrelated.
But as recited texts made clear, both authors concerned themselves with with longing and pain.


Knicks' Physical Play Takes Out Bulls' Coach
Xavier McDaniel cannot guard Scottie Pippen, and that's a fact of National Basketball Association life.
He needs help from at least one of two sources, his teammates or the officials.
He got it in abundance last night from both.
That is not to detract from the 24 points, the 7 rebounds, the Patrick Ewing-less stretch in the third quarter when McDaniel simply carried the Knicks on their way to a series-evening 93-86 victory over the Chicago Bulls.
The man known as X was excellent, but he still can't guard Pippen, and this supposed mismatch that wasn't is what drove Bulls Coach Phil Jackson to the edge of the court and over the line, as far as the lead official, Dick Bavetta, was concerned.


Pool Energy Services reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Sun Electric reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


New Friends Wanted for a Bronx Park
Snapping turtles are mating in the marshes of Van Cortlandt Park.
Nearby, people play at an improbable variety of sports: Gaelic football, hurling, golf, cricket, cross-country and even baseball.
Ulrich Naf, a 71-year-old Swiss biologist, happily described a sighting of the prothonotary warbler, its golden head and blue wings a rare find in the northwest Bronx.
"And today the catbirds are here," Mr.
Naf said.
"It's not a very spectacular bird but it has a call a little like a cat. It's a very cute song -- kind of grating but very imaginative."


Il Moro Is Winner Of Closest Cup Race
On Saturday, in its first match against America
in the America's Cup finals, the Il Moro di Venezia team seemed to be wearing two left shoes.
Today, the crew for the Italian yacht was right in step, and the result was the closest victory in America's Cup history, and one of the most dramatic.
Il Moro crossed the finish line three seconds ahead of America  , and the call was so close that a team of on-the-water umpires needed to take several minutes to reach a decision on who had won.


Kenwin Shops Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 29


TRANSACTIONS
SATURDAY Baseball  National League  CINCINNATI REDS -- Recalled Milton Hill, pitcher, from Nashville of the American Association.
Optioned Steve Foster, pitcher, to Nashville.


Jaclyn Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Larry The Legend? Sure, Nance Is the Name.
Cavaliers 114, Celtics 112
BOSTON, May 10 (AP) -- Not even Larry Bird could save this day for the Boston Celtics, and now the Cleveland Cavaliers are even.
Old pro Larry Nance scored 32 points, including 6 on long jumpers in overtime, and Cleveland edged Boston, 114-112, this afternoon, knotting the Eastern Conference semifinal series, 2-2.


Telephone &amp; Data Sys reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Algo Group reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Pepsi Discount Cards
In a summer promotion that starts this week, Pepsi-Cola plans to issue 40 million "Gotta Have It" cards that can be used to get discounts on Reebok shoes, Blockbuster Video rentals, Continental Airlines tickets and other products.
About half of the cards will be distributed in cases of Pepsi.
Consumers can also write Pepsi to obtain a card, if they include proof of purchase.
Pepsi plans to promote the card heavily with national television advertisements, scheduled to start this week.
Doug Kellam, brand director for Pepsi, would say of the budget only that "it's huge.


Dividend Meetings
Following is a partial list of dividend meetings for the week of May 10:


9 Deaths in Gulf: British Ask 'Why?
They were casualties of what is called "friendly fire," nine British infantrymen killed in the closing days of the Persian Gulf war when two United States Air Force jets mistook their armored vehicles for Iraqi tanks and attacked them with missiles.
Nearly 15 months later, the grieving parents of those British soldiers sit inside a high-ceilinged hearing room in Oxford, listening as a parade of witnesses describe how their sons died that day in the desert.
They are hoping to resolve the one question whose answer, they say, will put their hearts at rest: How could such a thing happen?


Hecla Mining reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Right-Handed World Imperils Lefties; Two-Fisted Presidency
To the Editor:
"America Lurches to the Left" (editorial, April 23) notes that Bill Clinton, George Bush and Ross Perot are all left-handers.
I am not prejudiced against southpaws (my sister is a lefty), but given the many problems facing the country, I think we may need an ambidextrous President.
I mean to suggest that what we need is a President who can exercise consensus-building leadership on tough issues without worrying about labels like "left" and "right." WILLIAM C. FREDERICKS New York, April 23, 1992


Shift in Scrutiny of Bank Mergers
Banks that are considering mergers with local rivals should expect the Government to investigate the effects such combinations might have on prices and services offered to small businesses, according to Justice Department officials.
Margaret Guerin-Calvert, a Justice Department lawyer, said on Friday that the department was most concerned about a single bank gaining too much power in the area of small-business services, because small businesses have few options besides local banks for financing.


Lauren Greenfield, Francis Evers
Lauren Greenfield, the daughter of Dr.
Sheldon Greenfield of Auburndale, Mass., and Dr.
Patricia Marks Greenfield of Venice, Calif., was married yesterday to Francis Anthony Evers, a son of Francis Anthony Evers of Vienna and Theresa Evers of Dublin.
Cantor Laura Croen of Leo Baeck Temple in Bel Air, Calif., performed the ceremony at the Lyman Estate in Waltham, Mass.
Ms.
Greenfield, 25 years old, graduated magna cum laude from Harvard University.
She is a freelance photographer.
Her father is a senior scientist at the New England Medical Center in Boston and a professor of medicine at Tufts University and an adjunct professor of public health at Harvard University.
Her mother is a professor of psychology at the University of California at Los Angeles.
The bride's stepmother, Sherrie Kaplan, is a senior scientist at the New England Medical Center.


A U.N. AID ESCORT IN BOSNIA IS URGED
With supplies of food and medicine at dangerously low levels, Western diplomats said today that the idea of a United Nations security force escort for humanitarian-aid convoys was under serious consideration.
They said such a convoy-protection operation could only be undertaken with the agreement of the warring sides in Bosnia and Herzegovina.


Review/Pop; A Guitarist Who Admits To Cheating
Of all the world's instruments, the guitar has had the widest variety of techniques applied to it.
It attracts idiosyncratic players who blend idioms and methods at whim, among them solo guitarists like Adrian Legg, who performed on Thursday night at the Lone Star.
Playing a six-string acoustic guitar with a subtle halo of electronic effects, he rambled through the Celtic diaspora, pulling together Irish waltzes, Scottish airs, country-and-western music, bluegrass, old-timey Appalachian music, Cajun music and whatever else sprang to his mind and fast fingers.
"Everything I do on the guitar is basically cheating," Mr.
Legg said with genial self-deprecation.
Like a classical guitarist, Mr.
Legg can make every string speak individually, bringing out a melody from a swirl of arpeggios; like a country guitarist, he can bend and slide notes in all directions.
Through combinations of manual and electronic effects, he can make the guitar drone like bagpipes or glimmer like a harp.
One of his proprietary techniques is to send notes gliding upward by twisting the tuning pegs, something he does so smoothly his instrument sounds like a pedal steel guitar.
Through his first set, with many selections from his current album, "Guitar for Mortals" (Relativity), he calmly chewed gum as he pulled off one feat after another.


Topics of The Times; Sound the Alarm
Cliches are not fatal but neither is belching at the dinner table, and life would be more pleasant without either.
There seems to be a decline in the overuse of firestorm (to describe everything from the Persian Gulf war to a Medicare dispute in the Senate) and defining moment (whether in Moscow, the State of the Union address or the New Hampshire primary).
Every day, however, brings a new wake-up call,
A report on education for girls, one official says, "is truly a wake-up call" for the nation.
To the treasurer of Massachusetts, it's the recession that sends a wake-up call to state governments.


Review/Television; A Baby Shower Can't Hurt Ratings
Johnny Carson's departure only seems as if it's been going on for nine months as NBC keeps milking the hype and ad-rate machines.
In the end, on May 22, Mr.
Carson will no doubt depart quietly, still nurturing his treasured privacy.
Over on CBS, meanwhile, "Murphy Brown" will be bringing a real -- well, sort of -- nine months to a conclusion with the birth of a baby.
That entails a completely different kind of nurturing.
This, friends, is a sweeps month.
Ratings are crucial to the prices networks can charge advertisers in coming months.
What to do?
The industry calls it stunting; that is, do anything to attract more attention.
Weddings, births and sentimental departures are favorite tactics.


Agencies Are Realigned; Wave of Executive Changes
ADVERTISING agency realignments and executive changes came in a wave last week.
The Ross Roy Group in Bloomfield Hills, Mich., said Friday that it had combined its two New York agencies -- Calet, Hirsch &amp; Spector, which it bought in 1986, and Wergeles &amp; Drazen, bought a year later -- and brought in new leadership.


Standard Brands Paint Co.  reports earnings for Year to Jan 26


Ramsay Health Care Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


American Consumer Products reports earnings for Qtr to March 28


Dance in Review
Dance Theater of Harlem  Brooklyn Academy of Music
It was no thanks to Dance Theater of Harlem that the roof was still intact after the company's performance on Thursday night.
The air reverberated with loud cheers and shouts from the audience, many of whom had risen to their feet in a standing ovation, as the dancers took the last curtain call of the evening.
But then Dance Theater knows how to give balletgoers a good time, without apology or condescension.
The program got off to a stirring start with "John Henry," a ballet by the company director, Arthur Mitchell, danced to a score fashioned by Milton Rosenstock from the folk song of the same name.
A feel-good ballet that is as much sinewy muscle as it is big, generous heart, "John Henry" doesn't make its populist points all that strongly.
It offers a relatively mild dose of uplift.
But the ballet is great fun, a hoedown laced with ballet and jazz that tells the story of the "steel-driving" folk hero.


Pennington's Stores reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 1


Willard L. Thorp, 92, Economist Who Helped Draft Marshall Plan
Willard L. Thorp, an economist who served three Presidents in domestic and foreign affairs, helped draft the Marshall Plan and was also prominent in business and education, died yesterday at his home in Pelham, Mass.
He was 92 years old.
His wife said he collapsed and died.


Dorel Industries reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Pride Cos.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Dance in Review
American Ballet Theater  Metropolitan Opera House
The air was filled with doomed young passion when Marianna Tcherkassky and Wes Chapman took on the title roles in the American Ballet Theater production of Kenneth MacMillan's "Romeo and Juliet" on Tuesday night.
The evening's high point was a balcony-scene pas de deux in which Miss Tcherkassky and Mr.
Chapman seemed to move as one body, and their performances in general were a smooth, exalted outpouring of dance.
Miss Tcherkassky's Juliet was eloquently reserved in a portrayal full of telling dramatic detail.
Mr.
Chapman was an endearingly boyish, very likable Romeo who grew perceptibly into adulthood over the course of the ballet.
But there was little passion in their partnership itself, possibly because Miss Tcherkassky was replacing Mr.
Chapman's scheduled Juliet, Amanda McKerrow, who was injured.


The Unsung New World Army
The army of tomorrow is neither the Red Army nor the U.S.
Army.
With the cold war at an end, neither Moscow nor Washington wishes to patrol a turbulent globe.
If there is to be peace, it will be secured by a multinational force that monitors cease-fires and elections and protects human rights.
Blue-helmeted United Nations peacekeepers are doing just that in a dozen places, including Africa, Central America, Cambodia and what used to be Yugoslavia.
Yet even as they depend on U.N. troops to contain regional conflicts, U.N. members begrudge the costs.
And Washington, which should be leading the way, shuffles for funds and lamely insists that the check is in the mail.


Insituform of North America Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Cubic Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


METRO DIGEST
METRO DIGEST  NEW YORK CITY  A TURNING POINT, PERHAPS, FOR DINKINS
For Mayor David N. Dinkins, who spent the week in Queens as part of his efforts to see more of ordinary New Yorkers, the polite ovation he received from the Queens County Democratic Party was not quite nirvana.
But if the first week of October 1990 was the Mayor's political Pearl Harbor -- when he was attacked for granting teachers a raise, proposing to hire thousands of police officers and then threatening to lay off thousands of city workers -- these first days of May could be the Midway from which he starts fighting his way back to re-election after months of troubles.
B3.
MAFIA TRIAL BEGINS IN BROOKLYN
With grisly details, a prosecutor has described Thomas Pitera as a drug-dealing Mafia member who murdered seven people, dismembered some of the bodies and buried them in a desolate area of Staten Island.
The first victim was a drug trafficker suspected of becoming a police informer, the prosecutor, Elisa Liang, told the jury last week in Federal District Court in Brooklyn in her graphic opening statement in Mr.
Pitera's trial on murder, drug, weapons and racketeering charges.
Mr.
Pitera, in jail since his arrest almost two years ago, could face execution under a new Federal law that calls for the death penalty for intentional murders committed in drug operations.
B3.
WELFARE, RIOTS AND BLAME
In the Bush Administration's version, the Los Angeles riot was the grim harvest of Great Society programs epitomized by the failed welfare state in New York.
But revisionists may have forgotten who was in charge when New York's relief rolls exploded 25 years ago: the Governor and the Mayor were Republicans.
Between 1965 and 1970, under Gov.
Nelson A. Rockefeller and Mayor John V. Lindsay, the average number of people receiving public assistance in New York City more than doubled -- from 510,000 to 1.1 million.
Metro Matters, B3.
SINGER DIES AT THE ALGONQUIN HOTEL
Sylvia Syms, one of the most admired pop-jazz singers of her generation, died of a heart attack early yesterday, moments after she had finished a performance in the Oak Room of the Algonquin Hotel in Manhattan.
D10.
REGION  THE EXECUTIVE WHO VANISHED
In the late 1950's, about a year after Sidney J. Reso graduated from Louisiana State University and got an engineering job with the Humble Oil and Refining Company, he was assigned to a no-longer-productive oil field in an out-of-the-way town called New Iberia, La.
When he got there, though, he found some 7 million untapped gallons.
The discovery helped him begin his climb at Humble, a corporate predecessor of the Exxon Corporation.
After assignments in England and Australia and four years as a senior vice president of Exxon's domestic subsidiary, he was named president of Exxon's international-operations subsidiary in 1987.
And then, on his way to work 12 days ago, he disappeared.
B5.
NEWSPAPER DISPUTE RETURNS TO COURT
After a weekend of scattered violence, several arrests and disrupted deliveries of The New York Times, a complex labor dispute between the drivers' union and a wholesale newspaper distributor and The Times returns to court in Manhattan today for a hearing on a possible contempt citation against the union.
Picket lines were noisy, but mostly nonviolent, though officials of The Times said that hundreds of thousands of papers were delayed or not delivered on Long Island and in Westchester County.
B5. 'ROUND THE SUBURBAN PICKLE BARREL
It would not be hard to imagine the birth of a political party in the checkout line of Hastings Prime Meats in Hastings-on-Hudson, N.Y.
The food shop has bustled its way into one of the best public forums in town.
"It's a definite nerve center for the town," said Timothy Barnes, a physics teacher who has lived here for 40 years.
"If you feel like you want to meet somebody, it's the perfect place to go." In the spread-out suburbs, where the sense of communal bonding can be difficult to achieve, Hastings Prime Meats reminds some of a general store, where anonymous company or a familiar face can always be found.
Hastings-on-Hudson Journal, B5.
A youth worker in New Jersey is charged with murder in the death of her adopted son.
B5.
The Traffic Map B4


Agco Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Former Foes Tearfully Recall a Sinking
The nine mourners returned today for the first time in 50 years to the graveyard: one American and eight Germans marking the anniversary of the sinking of a German submarine off the coast of North Carolina during World War II.
The nine joined about a dozen former Coast Guardmen who had served later on the Icarus, the cutter that sank the submarine, for a wreath-laying ceremony about 20 miles from Morehead City, N.C., out in the Atlantic Ocean.
They laid two wreaths, one on the water above the spot where the submarine, U-352, now lies, and one on the wreckage itself.


American Biltrite reports earnings for Qtr to March 28


Legg Mason Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Digital Microwave reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Ad Campaign Urges Prenatal Care
An advertising campaign encouraging mothers to get their infants off to a healthy start in life is getting off to a healthier start than most such public service efforts.
Beginning today, Johnson &amp; Johnson will sponsor a television commercial selling the concept of prenatal care rather than its baby powders or lotions.
The spot, created by the Lintas New York agency, features scenes of pregnant women drinking alcohol, smoking and taking drugs, during which an announcer urgently warns, "Everything you do to your body you do to your baby."


Mercy Tempers Presumption of Guilt
Courtroom 10 of Moscow People's Court, in the Cheryomushki district of southwest Moscow, belongs to Judge Tatyana V. Gribova.
"Here," she said, in the first of three tiers of courts, "you see the entire circle of life and society. It is depressing, and sometimes you take it close to the heart."
Katerina S. Dainovich, 15 years old; Vyacheslav V. Navrotsky, 16, and Ilya G. Mitechkin, 17, have more particular worries.
They went on trial here recently on charges of theft -- breaking into and entering 11 kindergartens in southwest Moscow, where they were finally caught.


Chinese Diver Captures Gold Medal
A week ago in Canada, 16-year-old Sun Shuwei of China registered the highest total on a single dive in the sport's history -- 102.00 points -- after he got seven 10's for a reverse 3 1/2-somersault tuck.


Fordham Woman Keeps Improving
A prime candidate for the United States Olympic team is LAUREN GUBICZA, Fordham's long distance runner from Norristown, Pa., whose track career began most modestly.
Gubicza's recent victory in the 3,000 meters at the Penn Relays with a time of 9 minutes 12.18 seconds qualified her for the Olympic trials at New Orleans late in June.
At an earlier meet, she had also qualified for the 1,500-meter trials.
But first come the national intercollegiate championships and she is the first Fordham women's runner to qualify for three events: the mile, the 3,000 meters and the 5,000 meters.


Eagle Precision Tech reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29


Foreign Affairs; To Be Father and Bride
One can imagine Germany's future as a power of the first rank, but it is not now.
Germany is trying to fill a huge power vacuum left by a collapsed Soviet Union and a declining America -- and it does not have the means.


OMI Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


The Richest Getting Richer: Now It's a Top Political Issue
When Bill Clinton wants to galvanize his audience, he thunders from the podium that the top 1 percent of families got 60 percent of the gains from economic growth during the 1980's and owns more wealth than the bottom 90 percent.
Governor Clinton, the likely Democratic Presidential nominee, had been searching for months for facts to illustrate his claim that America's middle class benefited little from 12 years of Republican rule.
The explosion of riches at the top struck him as a perfect vehicle.
Not only did the widening gap between the rich and the rest of Americans conflict with traditional notions of democracy, but it also went right to the pocketbook sources of middle-class discontent.


He Preaches Free Markets, Not Mao
For anyone who thinks of Communist Party bosses in China as old ideologues in Mao suits, Liu Shuji comes as a surprise.
A 43-year-old dynamo who favors well-cut business attire, Mr.
Liu uses his tiny Motorola cellular telephone not to mount "political study" campaigns but to recruit foreign investors.
One of his favorite economists is Milton Friedman, the American proponent of free markets, and Mr.
Liu's aim is to spread wealth rather than revolution.


Noise Com Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Cheni Gold reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


RESULTS PLUS
HOCKEY  Sweden Wins Title  Sweden, which barely made the final round, won its second consecutive world championship yesterday with a 5-2 victory over Finland in Prague.
Peter Forsberg, an 18-year-old drafted by the Philadelphia Flyers last year, scored his fourth goal in the tournament to start the Swedes' scoring. (AP) TENNIS  Sabatini Defeats Seles  Gabriela Sabatini tripped up Monica Seles in the final of the Italian Open in Rome yesterday, defeating the world's No. 1-ranked women's player, 7-5, 6-4.
Sabatini saved three set points in the first set and then turned the match around. (AP) Edberg and Stich in Final: Top-seeded Stefan Edberg of Sweden and Germany's Michael Stich advanced to the finals of the ATP Tour's German Open in Hamburg.
Edberg beat unseeded Carlos Costa of Spain, 4-6, 6-4, 6-3, and Stich pounded Boris Becker, 6-1, 6-1, frustrating his rival so much that at one point Becker had a ballgirl take his place.
Because of rain, the final was rescheduled for this morning and officials reduced the match to two of three sets. (AP) GOLF  Kite Is the Birdie Man  Tom Kite birdied six consecutive holes on his way to a seven-under-par 65 to win the Atlanta Classic in Marietta, Ga., yesterday and become the first golfer to surpass $7 million in career earnings.
The 16th victory of Kite's 21-year career ended a 16-month period without a victory and assured him a return trip to the Masters.
The $180,000 first prize gave him career earnings of $7,104,454, far ahead of the No. 2 man, Tom Watson, with $5,914,836. (AP) Archer Beats Aaron in Playoff: George Archer beat Tommy Aaron in a playoff in the Murata Reunion Pro-Am senior tournament in Frisco, Tex.
Archer sank an 8-foot birdie putt on the third hole of a playoff to edge Aaron in a battle of former Masters champions.
Aaron, who was called Mr.
Bridesmaid because of his numerous second-place finishes on the PGA Tour, has never won a Senior Tour event and has lost twice this year in playoffs. (AP)
Wyatt Weathers Winds: Jennifer Wyatt of Canada won the Crestar-Farm Fresh Classic in Chesapeake, Va., gaining her first career victory.
She used a three-under-par 33 on the back nine to shoot a closing-round two-under 70 in windy conditions on Greenbrier Country Club's 6,391-yard layout. (AP) TRACK AND FIELD  St.
John's Beats Rutgers  St.
John's edged Rutgers, 165-161, for the men's team title in the Metropolitan Intercollegiate championships yesterday on the St.
John's campus in Queens.
Manhattan was third with 137, followed by Fairleigh Dickinson with 109.
Manhattan (194 points) won the women's championships on Saturday.
They beat St.
John's (172) and Rutgers (120).
The meet's top performance was by St.
John's Sonja Fitts.
She threw the 4-kilogram (8.8-pound) hammer 185 feet 7 inches, the fourth longest throw ever by an American woman.


Arnold Industries reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Action Auto Rental Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


CHRONICLE
Although the cause that brings them together is serious indeed, the mood at a dinner of the American Suicide Foundation is expected to be anything but morose.
As JONI WEBERMAN, who was a chairwoman of the event on Thursday at the Waldorf-Astoria Hotel, put it: "Humor is the best thing, though it is tough to put humor into this. This party has never been depressing. It is always a celebration of life." Ms.
Weberman's mother killed herself 26 years ago at the age of 30.
Both the honorary committee and the working committee for the affair, which is expected to draw a crowd of 750, have an extraordinary spectrum of well-known names including ISABELLA ROSSELLINI, MARIETTE HARTLEY, PALOMA PICASSO, PETER FONDA, LENA HORNE, WILLIAM STYRON, BILL BLASS, ALAN GREENBERG, and Senators BILL BRADLEY, ALFONSE M. D'AMATO, FRANK R. LAUTENBERG, CARL LEVIN, JOHN McCAIN and DANIEL P. MOYNIHAN.


Micrografx Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Carter-Wallace reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Newspaper Executives Now See a Turnaround
Executives from many leading newspaper companies are cautiously optimistic that the newspaper industry will turn around this year after a first quarter in which tight cost controls, coupled with some revenue increases, produced gains in profits.
Several executives expressed this view Thursday and Friday during the annual John Morton Forum, as newspaper companies made presentations to Wall Street analysts.
The forum is organized by John Morton, a newspaper analyst at Lynch, Jones &amp; Ryan, and is traditionally held following the American Newspaper Publishers Association convention.
Both the convention, which ended last week, and the forum were held at the Waldorf-Astoria Hotel in Manhattan.


Revenue 14,459,000 24,713,000


STATES ARE MOVING TO RE-REGULATION ON HEALTH COSTS
After a decade in which health costs rose rapidly and many people could no longer afford care, state and local health officials around the country are returning to the kind of planning denounced by the Reagan Administration as a tool of heavy-handed government regulation.
State officials are adopting new laws and regulations to slow the construction of hospitals and nursing homes and the purchase of costly medical equipment.
At the same time they are convening groups of doctors, consumers, hospital executives, insurers and employers to negotiate the distribution of health-care resources.


Scorned, Los Angeles Police Find Less Pride in the Badge
Scorned in the streets of many parts of this city, and laughed at by political leaders and comedians alike, the Los Angeles Police Department is a dispirited band in blue.
For the last 14 months, they have been called brutes with badges.
But after their delayed and hesitant response to this city's worst riots, the 8,000 officers have been labeled cowards and incompetents.


Museum's Theater Collection Faces Mice, Water and Budgets
Broadway beckons at the Museum of the City of New York, where a long-running exhibition chronicles more than a century of the city's musical theater.
But at the same time, the museum's theater collection, one of the world's finest, faces an uncertain future.
The financially strapped museum, at Fifth Avenue and 103d Street, has been cutting the staff of its theater collection for five years, and the collection has suffered physical neglect.
Historic costumes are exposed to mice, and hundreds of paintings are stacked in a basement that occasionally floods.


Stylish or Not, Rangers Make Do With a Net That's Built for Two
Goaltending was one of the primary reasons the Rangers were the National Hockey League's supreme team during the 1991-92 regular season.
If Mike Richter wasn't stealing a game here or there on the road, John Vanbiesbrouck was doing such magical work as going undefeated in his last 15 starts at Madison Square Garden.
They undoubtedly made up the best goalie tandem in the league as the Rangers finished atop the standings with 105 points and 50 victories.
Along with the presence of Mark Messier, goaltending was what made the Rangers the favorites before the first game in the Stanley Cup playoffs.


Review/Television; A Sermon on Capturing Tribal People's Wisdom
David Maybury-Lewis is an anthropologist with a mission.
A Harvard professor, he is the founder and president of Cultural Survival, an organization devoted to the defense of indigenous peoples around the globe.
He is also the narrator of "Millennium: Tribal Wisdom and the Modern World," the innovative 10-hour series that begins at 9 tonight on Channel 13 and at 8 on Channel 49, and is scheduled to continue in two-hour segments for four more weeks.
The imposing title refers merely to the approaching end of the 20th century.
The series' effort to explore and celebrate the ways of societies that have been battered by intruding forces can hardly be faulted.
That is more than can be said for "The Shock of the Other," the introductory hour in which Professor Maybury-Lewis explores and celebrates himself.


Stocks Higher in Tokyo
Stock prices rose today in Tokyo.
The Nikkei index of 225 issues was up 232.14 points, or 1.26 percent, to 18,608.09.
At midday, the Nikkei was up 284.53 points.
On Friday, the index lost 34.93 points.


Republican Donation Put in Escrow
The Republican Party has placed in escrow a $400,000 contribution in response to reports that the donor, a California businessman, owes more than $1 million to various former associates.
The money, from Michael Kojima, was removed from party accounts on Friday until party officials or a court decide what to do with it, The Los Angeles Times reported today.
Mr.
Kojima's contribution, in two $200,000 checks, was the largest single contribution at the President's Dinner, a money-raising event on April 28 that collected $9 million for Republican candidates.


Hearst Magazines Names Consultant
Leslie H. Zeifman, formerly the No. 3 executive at Straight Arrow Publishers Inc. in New York, has been named to the new staff position of publishing consultant to Hearst Magazines.
Mr.
Zeifman, who reports to K. Robert Brink, executive vice president, will develop advertising, sales, marketing and promotional programs, a spokesman said.
His first assignment will be a strategic plan for Esquire magazine.


Riots Put Focus on Hispanic Growth and Problems in South-Central Area
Two days after the rioting began here on April 29, several politicians and community organizers huddled in a youth center to forge a strategy for maintaining calm among the city's Hispanic residents, who make up 40 percent of the Los Angeles population.
The meeting was held in East Los Angeles, an enclave of Mexican-Americans that is where most of the city's Hispanic leaders have their political roots.
But they could not think of a single Hispanic leader to invite from South-Central Los Angeles, the area that was hardest hit by rioting and that is home to many recent Hispanic immigrants.


Skinner Urges Service Roles For Graduates
George Washington University conferred 1,290 undergraduate degrees and 1,159 advanced degrees yesterday on the Ellipse in Washington at its 167th commencement exercises.
The White House chief of staff, Samuel K. Skinner, who received an honorary degree, gave the commencement address.
Mr.
Skinner encouraged the students to "cast off the politics of division" so the United States could "build a society in which people respect each other, work with -- not against -- each other."


Market Place; Still No Upturn For Underwriters
FOR years, investors have been asking when good times will return to underwriting in property-casualty insurance, an industry that has lost money on the business of writing policies and paying claims since the mid-1980's.
Although many property-casualty companies have been able to remain profitable in recent years as a result of income from investments, some analysts are saying the outlook for the industry in 1992 is increasingly bleak.
With interest rates down, they say, investment portfolios will no longer provide the same comfort.


Playing Bumper Bikes, Aldag Wins Stage Four
Last Wednesday, on the eve of the Tour Du Pont, Rolf Aldag of Germany told why he was happy he would be riding in America's most important bicycle race.
"I like to ride in the U.S.A.," he said, "because you have big roads."
When long races come down to sprint finishes, the wide roads provide more room to maneuver, especially for a rider as big as the 6-foot-3-inch, 165-pound Aldag.
He took advantage of the wide roads in two sprint finishes this weekend.
He finished second to Uwe Preissler of Germany in a 118.6-mile circuit race in the Poconos on Saturday and was first in a 140.3-mile road race from Mount Pocono to this chocolate capital today.


Tejas Gas Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Allied Capital Advisers reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Lakeland Industries reports earnings for Year to Jan 31


Dixon Ticonderoga reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Property Trust of America reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Inter-City Products reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Pistols and Roses Ends Up With Triple Frown
The Preakness lost one of its star horses today when Pistols and Roses, the winner of four races in a row in Florida last winter, suffered swelling in his left front ankle and was sent back to his home at Calder Race Track near Miami.
The colt, who ran a dull 16th in the Kentucky Derby nine days ago, was found to be hurting Saturday morning after a workout for next Saturday's Preakness at Pimlico.
His trainer, George Gianos, reported today that "it looks like a little strain," and added: "It's not serious. He'll be out of training maybe 10 days. There'll be other races."


Livery-Cab Driver Shot and Killed in Bronx
A Manhattan-based livery-cab driver was shot and killed in the Bronx early yesterday during an apparent robbery, the police said.
He was the seventh cabdriver to be killed in the last three weeks and the 17th so far this year.
The victim, Gregorio Santos, 37 years old, of Washington Heights, was found at 7:20 A.M. by a passer-by who saw his body slumped over in the passenger seat of his cab, a 1982 white Cadillac.
The car was parked in front of 758 Dawson Street in Hunts Point, said a Police Department spokesman, Sgt.
Nicholas Vreeland.


For Dinkins, Windfall of Good Fortune
The Queens County Democratic chairman, Representative Thomas J. Manton, surveyed the flock of party regulars gathered for their annual dinner in the Baroque-modern ballroom of the Astorian Manor last week, and told them how much they owed their visitor from across the Triborough Bridge, Mayor David N. Dinkins.
"The city of New York should be proud that we didn't go through the agony that other cities did" after the Los Angeles riots, said Mr.
Manton, who praised the Mayor for walking 125th Street in Harlem to help keep the peace.
Mr.
Manton once worked the same street as a police officer, "so I know that area pretty well," he added.
"I think we have to give David Dinkins a lot of credit, and I think he deserves a round of applause."


Presley Cos.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Dance in Review
New York City Ballet  New York State Theater
When the Princess Aurora of Valentina Kozlova married the Prince Desire of Philip Neal, it was obvious that they would rule as benevolent monarchs.
Both dancers gave admirable performances in the New York City Ballet's production of "The Sleeping Beauty" on Saturday afternoon.
Miss Kozlova made a slightly forced attempt to be girlishly exuberant in her entrance in the birthday-party scene.
But she was impressive in the stately passages that followed.
Because of her poise in the Rose Adagio, her feats of balance were more than technical tricks.
With each step that she took, her body formed and held a beautiful shape in space.
When Aurora pricked her finger on the evil fairy's spindle, Miss Kozlova's look of incomprehension suggested that this sheltered princess had never before experienced pain.


Bridge
A century ago a British Prime Minister, arriving for a dinner party, was faced by a double staircase rising to a central point.
He spent half an hour trying to think of a logical reason to go from the left or from the right.
This mirrors the problems of the player who tries to guess whether to play for a queen to be on the left or the right.
Another practical problem of life, for men, concerns shaving: Should you start on the left or the right?


Knicks Storm Back to Pull Even With Bulls
When their playoff series against the Chicago Bulls began, many people expected the Knicks to be blown away.
Instead, they are making a stand.
The Knicks allowed nothing to stop them yesterday from tying their playoff series with the Chicago Bulls.
So what if Patrick Ewing was in foul trouble.
Who cared if the Bulls felt they had regained control of the series after winning Game 3.


Phoenix Re Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Majestic Contractors reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


E&amp;B Marine Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 28


New York Sludge Disposal Respects Environment and Budget
To the Editor:
The allegations by City Council Member Carolyn Maloney in "New York City's Sludge Record Doesn't Inspire Confidence" (letter, April 13), that the contracts awarded under the sludge management program were improperly let, have been fully litigated before the United States Magistrate and the United States District Court.
The court dismissed her suit, finding it to be without merit.
Ms.
Maloney's characterization of the three contracts as "dysfunctional" is incorrect.
Merco, the contractor slated to transport sludge to Oklahoma, will now ship New York City sludge to Texas for the same land application originally planned in Oklahoma.
The only change in the Merco contract is the site because a last-minute permitting process required by Oklahoma might have delayed the start of the contract beyond the July 1 Federal deadline.


Times's Delivery Dispute Back in Court
After a weekend of scattered violence, several arrests and disrupted deliveries of The New York Times, a complex labor dispute between the drivers' union and a wholesale newspaper distributor and The Times returns to court today for a hearing on a possible contempt citation against the union.
The hearing, before Judge Pierre N. Leval of Federal District Court in Manhattan, will be held this morning to determine if the union has violated a restraining order issued by the judge last Friday directing the drivers not to interfere with deliveries of The Times.


Ragan (Brad) (A) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Topics of The Times; Carrying Fickle Too Far
A reader who rates spring as the star of all the seasons feels it is a little unfair to fault it for missing its cues so badly this year -- sulking in the wings and letting bit parts like Drip, Drizzle and Chill take over the stage.
Spring, he points out, has always been typecast as Fickle.
Everybody applauds its act and forgives its vagaries -- whether it roars or bleats in March, laughs or weeps in April, or plays Midsummer in May.
It is a wonderful role, done to the hilt.


Canadian Utilities reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Hees International reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


In U.S. Trial, Grisly Details Of Murders
With grisly details, a prosecutor has described Thomas Pitera as a drug-dealing Mafia member who murdered seven people, dismembered some of the bodies and buried them in a desolate area of Staten Island.
The first victim was a drug trafficker suspected of becoming a police informer, the prosecutor, Elisa Liang, told the jury in the Government's opening statement last week in Federal District Court in Brooklyn.
Mr.
Pitera faces murder, drug, weapons and racketeering charges.


Biospecifics Technologies reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Dr. Frank A. Seixas, 72, an Expert on Alcoholism
Dr.
Frank A. Seixas, an expert on alcoholism and a leader in the effort to classify it as a medical illness, died on Friday at Cabrini Nursing Home in Dobbs Ferry, N.Y.
He was 72 years old and lived in Hastings-on-Hudson.
He died of Alzheimer's disease, his family said.


Review/Pop; Connection With Fans, Physical and Otherwise
During the first song of Sound garden's set at Roseland on Saturday night, the lead singer, Chris Cornell, took the plunge.
As the band smashed through the metallic sludge of "Searching With My Good Eye Closed," a track from Soundgarden's third album, "Badmotorfinger" (A&amp;M), Mr.
Cornell began hopping around the stage like a baboon, then jumped into the audience.
The wild fans held him above their heads and rolled him around.
Mr.
Cornell's shirt disappeared within seconds.
When the guitarist Kim Thayil's solo ended, the crowd hoisted Mr.
Cornell back to the front lines.
He climbed onstage and finished the song.
Throughout the show, Soundgarden never let its connection with the audience waver.
Whether Mr.
Cornell was crouching down to look people in the eye, charging about manicly or hitting his guitar strings with his fist, he always played to the crowd: there was nothing casual about the band's performance, nothing taken for granted.
On record, Soundgarden's hard-riffing crossbreed of hard-core and heavy metal communicates anger and futility; live, its expression is both more artful and more primal.
Mr.
Cornell screams in a high, narrow range, and Mr.
Thayil's chords are brusque and amelodic.
The bassist, Ben Shepherd, and the drummer, Matt Cameron, specialize in complex time signatures and beats as relentless as a dungeon forge.


Symposium on Ailey Work
"Continuing Revelations," a symposium on Alvin Ailey's "Revelations," is to take place today from 1 to 5 P.M. in the Bruno Walter Auditorium of the New York Public Library for the Performing Arts at Lincoln Center.
The free program, presented by the library and the Ailey Dance Theater Foundation, will explore the making and performing of the 1960 modern-dance classic through film clips and a discussion by dancers who have performed the piece.
The symposium is presented in conjunction with "Body and Soul," an exhibition documenting the Ailey company's history, in the library's Main Gallery on the second floor.
The exhibition runs through May 23.


Menley &amp; James Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Northgate Exploration reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


A Vanished Exxon Official Is Called Quiet and Popular
In the late 1950's, about a year after Sidney J. Reso graduated from Louisiana State University and got an engineering job with the Humble Oil and Refining Company, he was assigned to a no-longer-productive oil field in an out-of-the-way town called New Iberia, La.
"The joke around the company was that he was being exiled to New Siberia, because there wasn't much going on there," said Murray Hawkins, who had been one of his professors at Louisiana State.
"But when he got there, he got busy and looked at all the maps and found a bunch of oil that hadn't been tapped by wells, about seven million gallons."


The Mother of All Holidays


When Readers Tell a Magazine That They Want to Smell It Like It Is
Call it the War of the Noses -- all those competing perfumed strips in magazine ads.
Or call it the War
on
Noses, as some magazine readers do, nostrils twitching, eyes smarting and ires rising.


Suzanne Boris, Gregg Sofer
Suzanne Marie Boris, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Frank Boris Jr. of Edison, N.J., and Gregg Nathaniel Sofer, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
William Sofer, also of Edison, were married yesterday at Farrington Manor in East Brunswick, N.J.
Rabbi Shimon L. Berris and the Rev.
Robert Davidson, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated.
Mrs.
Sofer, 25 years old, and her husband, also 25, are graduates of Rutgers University.
An associate at the New York law firm of Cahill Gordon &amp; Reindel, she received a law degree from George Washington University.
Her father is a salesman for Bloomingdale's in Short Hills, N.J.
Her mother, Patricia Boris, is a secretary for the Trimax Rehabilitative Institute in Edison.


Fleet Aerospace Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Short (C.A.) International reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29


F&amp;C International reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Ericsson reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Essay; Foiling the Compu-Tappers
The world's espionage agencies are busily re-tooling.
Military intelligence is no longer the hot model; technological trade secrets are what the customer wants.
You might think, with foreign economic spies intercepting our global data transmissions, faxes and phone calls, the Bush Justice Department and National Security Agency would be helping American businesses defend communications from prying eyes and ears of overseas competitors eager to steal our scientific advantage.


Industrial Holdings reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Vidmark Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Right-Handed World Imperils Lefties; The Side of Greatness
To the Editor:
To suggest in "America Lurches to the Left" (editorial, April 23) that it is heartening to have the left-handed George Bush, Bill Clinton or Ross Perot as President insults us left-handers.
Those three are aberrations in the superiority of left-handed people over right-handers.
I cite as examples Leonardo da Vinci, Michelangelo, Alexander the Great and Elizabeth Taylor.
ROBERT A. FRIEDMAN Springfield, Va., April 23, 1992


Treasury to Auction Only Bills This Week
Treasury financings this week will include only today's regular auction of three- and six-month bills.
By late Friday, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was at 3.62 percent, and the six-month bill was at 3.74 percent.


United Mobile Homes reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Continued Pessimism About Racial Relations
The thick plumes of smoke that rose over Los Angeles during the recent riots were like warning signs for Andrew Powers, a 23-year-old graduate student who feels confident about his own prospects but, like many Americans, is frightened for the nation's future.
"I feel pretty good about where I'm at because I've had a family that's helped me go to school and all," said Mr.
Powers, who is studying information and communications at Ball State University in Muncie, Ind.


Bailey Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to April 26


Barber Gets to Show Off Strong Side
Although he was the last rookie to come to terms with the Jets on a contract last year, Mo Lewis, a 6-foot-3-inch, 240-pound third-round draft choice out of Georgia, proved to be worth the wait for the Jets.
Lewis took over as a "strong side" linebacker -- the one on the side of the opposition's tight end -- in training camp and held it through the Jets' 16 regular-season games and one playoff game as the only rookie starter on offense or defense.


Review/Film; A Political Prisoner's Quest for an Apology
"Locked-Up Time" was shown as part of last year's New York Film Festival.
Following are excerpts from Caryn James's review, which appeared in The New York Times on Sept. 29, 1991.
The film, in German with English subtitles, opened yesterday at the Walter Reade Theater, 165 West 65th Street in Manhattan.
In 1984, Sibylle Schonemann and her husband, both film makers frustrated by restrictions on their work, asked the East German Government for exit visas.
The next thing they knew, they had been arrested on charges that were never made clear to them.
Ms.
Schonemann spent a year as a political prisoner, then was put directly on a bus for the West.
Her husband, who received a slightly longer sentence, and their two children were sent after her, with only a few suitcases of belongings.


Review/Opera; The All-Male Gran Scena Defines Dignity for Divas
Even the Metropolitan Opera would have been hard put to assemble a cast the equal of that presented by La Gran Scena Opera Company in Town Hall on Saturday night.
There, for the delectation of longtime admirers of her high C's, was Vera Galupe-Borszkh, a Russian "traumatic" soprano who sang the role of the "ditsy gypsy" from "Il Trovatore." There was Alfredo Sorta-Pudgi, the Italian tenor who, in an excerpt from "Tosca," got so carried away that he lifted the wig off his head.
There was Mirella Frenzi, a specialist in the soubrette repertory who is said to possess three of opera's greatest voices.
Even the last surviving diva of the Golden Age, Gabriella Tonnoziti-Casseruola, a doddering figure with a remarkably mature sense of phrase, made an appearance -- though she bore a surprising physical resemblance to the Scarpia sung by the "elegant but mid-priced" baritone, Fodor Szedan.
Given this array of talent it was hard indeed to choose a highlight from this gala program of highlights from the repertory of this unusual company, which now has a worldwide reputation.
Was it the "Ride of the Valkyries" billed as "Entrance of the Divas," which featured a hair-raising battle for premiere stage space among spear-carrying stars?
Was it Philene Wannelle's bel canto display of muscle in "Cruda sorte!" from "L'Italiana in Alegri" (demonstrating a style referred to as can belto)?
Was it perhaps the surprise encore in which the entire company broke into a Motown medley, including "Stop, in the Name of Love"?


Canucks Edge Oilers and Stay Alive
Canucks 4, Oilers 3
VANCOUVER, British Columbia, May 10 (AP) -- The Vancouver Canucks barely avoided elimination tonight as they squandered most of a four-goal lead but hung on for a 4-3 victory over the Edmonton Oilers.
The Oilers hold an advantage of 3 games to 2 in the four-of-seven-game Smythe Division final with the sixth game set for Edmonton on Tuesday night.


Peer Review Analysis reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Aaron D. Chaves; Health Official, 80
Dr.
Aaron D. Chaves, a former New York City and Suffolk County health official, died on May 5 at his home in Smithtown, L.I.
He was 80 years old.
He died of a stroke, his sister, Dr. Muriel Weinstein, said.


Jordan Group's Executive Shift
Mark Edmiston, executive vice president and group publisher of Times Mirror Magazines, today becomes co-chairman of the Jordan, Edmiston Group Inc., an investment banking firm that serves the publishing industry.
With the appointment of Mr.
Edmiston, who is 48 years old, the company changes its name from the Jordan Group, which was founded in 1987 by Wilma Jordan.
Ms.
Jordan becomes co-chairwoman.


Uni-Select reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Takeovers in Nicaragua Worry Peace Mission
Nicaragua has been swept by a new round of armed takeovers of major roads and public and private property that international peacekeepers fear could grow beyond the power of the Government to control.
Although some former members of the anti-Sandinista contras are among those involved, officials say the great majority are demobilized members of the Sandinista army demanding money, land and houses.


Sequa Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Resurgens Communications Group reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


A Back, Back, Back Moves the Mets Ahead
Jeff Torborg opened the book, and discovered it told more than one story.
Under Benzinger, Todd vs.
Fernandez, Sid, there was this line: 16 at-bats, two hits, two home runs.
Benzinger didn't hit Fernandez often.
But when he did, he hit him hard.
Torborg, weighing the information and with it the option of replacing Fernandez, at last decided he would risk adding another chapter to the case history.
With the Mets leading the Dodgers by 2-0 with two out in the seventh inning and men on first and third, Fernandez remained.


Software Spectrum reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Republic Pictures Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Coeur d'Alene Mines Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


CHRONICLE
After 23 years, MARCIA HAYDEE, the leading ballerina and director of the Stuttgart Ballet, has taken her last North American bow in the role of Tatiana in "Eugene Onegin."
Ms.
Haydee has danced the part to acclaim since 1965, when it was created for her by JOHN CRANKO, and it was her American debut in New York four years later.
The star of the Stuttgart Ballet for more than 30 years, Ms.
Haydee danced an emotional Tatiana on Saturday evening at the John F. Kennedy Center in Washington opposite RICHARD CRAGUN, her partner for nearly her entire career.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
In the first swap of emissions allowances, the T.V.A. and Wisconsin Power and Light will announce that they have signed a contract that calls for the T.V.A. to buy the right to emit some sulfur dioxide, which causes acid rain, freeing it from having to clean up its own plants as stringently.
It could break the ice for dozens of similar deals.
The price was not disclosed but is believed to be around $2.5 million to $3 million.  [ Page A1. ]


Joan Merrill; Performer, 74
Joan Merrill, a nightclub singer and actress, died on Sunday at her home in Manhattan.
She was 74 years old.
She died of a stroke, said her husband, Israel Seeger.


Unico Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Price Cut Is Set on an AIDS Drug
Astra A.B., a Swedish pharmaceutical company, said yesterday that the price of Foscavir, an eye drug that is one of the most expensive treatments for an AIDS-related disease, would be cut for patients in federally subsidized Public Health Service programs.
The company said it would cut 15 percent from the price of Foscavir -- currently $2,462 for the first 21 days and then $58.62 a day -- for these patients.
The reduction is the latest of several announced by drug makers under pressure from Congress and patient advocacy groups.


A Long-Vacant Position Is Being Filled at Ecogen
Ecogen Inc., a biotechnology company that specializes in biological pesticides, will name James P. Reilly Jr., an executive with experience running a variety of chemical businesses, its president and chief operating officer today.
Mr.
Reilly's arrival from Rhone-Poulenc Inc., where he was most recently general manager of the French company's $250 million fine organic chemicals business in the United States, provides nine-year-old Ecogen with a manager experienced in agricultural and international marketing during a period of rapid expansion through acquisition and new product introduction.


When This Private Eye Shoots, It's in 8-Millimeter; Camera in Hand, Today's Investigator Stalks Insurance Fraud, Not Maltese Falcons
Spade's face was white-yellow now.
His mouth smiled and there were smile-wrinkles around his glittering eyes.
His voice was soft, gentle.
He said: "I'm going to send you over. The chances are you'll get off with life. That means you'll be out again in 20 years. You're an angel. I'll wait for you." He cleared his throat.
"If they hang you I'll always remember you." -- Dashiell Hammett, "The Maltese Falcon."
The door and transom were secured with a square black burglar alarm, and the frosted glass panel was lettered "TC Lasky Associates Inc., Private Investigations." Inside, the narrow interior was lighted by hanging glass globes with pull chains.


Muizenberg Journal; South African Students Learn to Learn Together
In a land preoccupied with racial distinctions, David Cole, a science teacher, has faced integrated public-school classes for more than a year and remembers just one nervous moment.
Lecturing on the effect of light on colors, he told students that black is a good absorber while white is a better reflector, and he could sense "some discomfort among my students."


Review/Fashion; Furriers' Weapon: Sprightly Design
Arnold Scaasi opened fur fashion week yesterday morning with a lively, colorful presentation that included sumptuous minks and sables as well as topical animal patterns and graphic plaids.
Oscar de la Renta followed early in the afternoon with the multicolor checked mink coats that made their debut in Paris with the ready-to-wear collection he introduced there in March.
They complemented the checked wool suits and dresses that constitute his major message for the fall season and were supplemented with casual shearling coats and fur-trimmed casuals, including trench coats.
So the season opened on a lively note.
Buffeted by a sluggish economy, animal-rights protesters with their spray cans and threats, not to mention a warm winter in many parts of the country, furriers have decided to fight back.
Their weapon: fashion.


Books of The Times; McMurtry's Sequel to 'Terms of Endearment'
The Evening Star  By Larry McMurtry 637 pages. Simon &amp; Schuster. $23.
As Aurora Greenway thinks about her granddaughter, Melanie, leaving Texas for a new life in California, she feels her own spirits sink.
"All around them," she thinks, "was evidence of what she knew in her own heart: that life was nothing but a matter of innumerable comings and goings, separations and separateness, of departures from which there might be no certain return." In short, "People left, they died, they didn't come back."
These melancholy thoughts pretty much sum up the dominant mood, not to mention the plot, of "The Evening Star," Larry McMurtry's sequel to his 1975 novel, "Terms of Endearment." Some 15 years have passed since Aurora's daughter, Emma (played by Debra Winger in James L. Brooks's 1983 movie adaptation), died of cancer, and Aurora (played by Shirley MacLaine in that movie) is now reluctantly entering her 70's.


Exar Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


German Trade Surplus Up
A sharp rise in exports helped fatten Germany's trade surplus in March, reflecting an upturn in global demand and leading economists to forecast a further strengthening of the country's trade position.
The German trade surplus nearly doubled to 4.90 billion marks, or $3 billion, in March, from 2.20 billion marks, or $1.34 billion, in February, the Federal Statistics Office said today.


METRO DIGEST
METRO DIGEST AIDS RULE IS OVERTURNED
A Federal rule barring Government funding for any AIDS educational materials deemed "offensive" to "a majority of adults" was declared unconstitutional by a Federal judge in New York.
The decision, which will affect how $200 million a year is awarded to states and AIDS groups, was expected to have a nationwide impact on the content of posters, brochures and writings prepared to educate Americans to the dangers of the disease.
B3.
PRESSING FOR A REVISED CENSUS
A coalition of 30 states and cities accused the White House in Federal court in Manhattan of using political pressure to stop an adjustment to the 1990 census that would have added at least 5 million people, many of them black and Hispanic, to the official population.
The coalition, which includes New York City and State and New Jersey, is seeking a statistical adjustment of the census, which will influence such decisions as the distribution of Federal aid and representation in Congress.
B3.
NEW YORK CITY  SUBWAY CHIEF GETS AN EARFUL
Alan F. Kiepper, the president of the New York City Transit Authority, went to the Union Square subway station and talked with riders.
Some had complaints: about the homeless, about broken turnstiles, about trains that emit piercing shrieks when rounding curves.
Some offered advice.
And a few even had compliments.
B3.
A NEW LOOK AT SOUTH AFRICA
Mayor Dinkins said he was reviewing the city's sanctions against companies doing business in South Africa and had dispatched four of his top aides to Johannesburg for talks with black political leaders about possible changes in the city's position.
B3.
A baby's mother faces charges.
B3.
REGION  CONFUSION ON LIFE SUPPORT
New York's law on the removal of life support machines is both the strictest and the most nebulous in the United States: It requires "clear and convincing evidence" of what a patient would have wanted, but leaves it to each hospital to determine exactly what that is.
So families find themselves scrambling to provide proof that their relatives would not want to be kept alive by machines.
A1.
AT THE DEFENSE TABLE
In a White Plains courtroom, as her second murder trial draws to a close, Carolyn Warmus sits calmly at the defense table, taking endless notes.
She could be a junior lawyer, there for the afternoon to assist with the case.
But there are moments when the focus jarringly shifts and there are reminders of why the 28-year old woman is in court.
Reporter's Notebook, B5.
A CANCER RIDDLE
More than 40 witnesses, many of them cancer patients, came to a hearing to urge the Federal Government to help solve the riddle of why one in nine Long Island women develops breast cancer, compared to the national average of one in ten.
The hearing was sponsored by groups concerned about the high rate of breast cancer in Nassau and Suffolk Counties.
A state study has confirmed the higher rate, but failed to explain the reasons for it.
B5.
Our Towns by Andrew H. Malcolm B5 Chronicle B6


A NEW FOREIGN-LANGUAGE PHONE SERVICE FOR TRAVELERS
The American Telephone and Telegraph Company said it had introduced a foreign-language phone service that would enable visitors to the United States to prepay for international news, weather reports, currency-exchange information and interpretation services, as well as telephone calls.
Customers can buy small credit-cardlike tickets similar to the coin cards for pay phones in France and Japan, although they do not insert the cards into phones or other devices.
By first dialing an "800" number, then a 10-digit "teleticket" number, the customer can hear one-minute news reports, weather forecasts and the previous day's exchange rates for more than 15 currencies.


Atwood Oceanics Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Transit Head Hears (Plenty) From Straphangers
Alan F. Kiepper, the president of the New York City Transit Authority, decided recently that he wanted to hear firsthand from the city's straphangers.
So yesterday he planted himself for 90 minutes on the mezzanine of the Union Square subway station and took questions from riders.
Of course, he got an earful.
People complained about the homeless on the subway, sprawling over several seats on the trains or panhandling aggressively.
They complained about broken turnstiles, closed restrooms, stations that are too hot in the summer, trains that emit piercing shrieks when rounding curves and the lack of express service from Bay Ridge.


CHRONICLE
For those who think that Washington political figures travel in rarefied circles, try this: ELIZABETH MOYNIHAN, whose husband is Senator DANIEL PATRICK MOYNIHAN, will deliver a lecture, "But What a Happiness to Have Known Babur," on Thursday evening at the Smithsonian Institution.
Babur, the subject of her happiness, is the 16th-century conqueror who established the Mogul dynasty in northern India.
Mrs.
Moynihan is an architectural historian, and she is fond of Babur because he introduced the Mogul garden, a geometric layout of plantings around a pond or fountain, to India.


Executive Changes
AMERICAN EXPLORATION CO., Houston, an oil and gas company, named Harold M. Korell senior vice president of production.
CFR CORP.
Roseville, Minn., a manufacturer and marketer of commercial cleaning systems, named Jeffrey L. Burnham chief executive.


Dinkins Reviewing Sanctions On Pretoria
Mayor David N. Dinkins said yesterday that he was reviewing New York City's sanctions against companies doing business in South Africa and had dispatched four of his top aides to Johannesburg for talks with black political leaders about possible changes in the city's position.
But the Mayor said he would stand fast on sanctions until the African National Congress, led by Nelson Mandela, requests that they be lifted.
He said he was considering lifting some sanctions that hurt black South Africans while keeping those that punish the Government and the military.
He said he would also push for guarantees that workers in those companies that are removed from the sanction list are treated fairly.


CHRONICLE
EMILY LLOYD, who was sworn in yesterday as New York City's Sanitation Commissioner, passed up the usual City Hall ceremony and took her oath of office instead at the District 17 and 18 Sanitation Garage in Canarsie, Brooklyn.
"People were very mystified as to why I wouldn't want to be sworn in in City Hall," Ms.
Lloyd, the first woman appointed to the post, said later.
"But picking up the garbage and sweeping the streets is the essence of what we do, so I thought it was more appropriate to do it where real people do real work." And, she added, "This garage, which is only five months old, is absolutely spectacular."


Bertucci's Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to April 18


Times Adds Pollution Index And Expands Local Forecast
Starting today, The New York Times's weather page will include an air quality index and an expanded extended forecast for the New York region.
The air quality index, which will appear as part of the Metropolitan Almanac Tuesday through Saturday, compares the previous day's air quality in selected areas with standards for pollutants set by the Federal Environmental Protection Agency.
Information for the index is collected by state agencies from locations around the region.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: White House; Bush Announces New Effort to Immunize Children
President Bush announced at a Rose Garden ceremony today that the Federal Government would begin a nationwide campaign to immunize children against preventable diseases by the age of 2.
Pediatricians and other public health experts said Mr.
Bush's proposal was belated and inadequate.


Chess
Much has been made about tailoring your play to the profile of your opponents, especially when you can get a clear line on each one from a computer stocked with one of the several available comprehensive game data bases.
And much of the time the results are visible in tournament and match performances.
Nevertheless, in this high-technology age, most players at some time or other willfully stick to the kind of strategy that delights them best, just when doing so ignores the opponent's strengths.
That holds true even for Gary Kasparov of Russia, the world champion.
When he encountered Gata Kamsky of Brooklyn, the United States champion, in the third round of the Dortmund International Tournament in Germany in late April, Kasparov went right ahead with a favorite risky counterattack.
This played into the hands of Kamsky, who, though not yet 18 years old, has shown himself in several important games to be extraordinarily confident in the defense of difficult positions.
He did so once again.


Investment Banking Chief Quits Suddenly at Kidder
Scott C. Newquist, head of investment banking at Kidder Peabody &amp; Company, suddenly left the firm yesterday because of what he called "differences of management style and philosophy" with senior management.
Mr.
Newquist, 43 years old, said he had reached a mutual agreement with the firm's leaders that his departure was in the best interests of Kidder, a subsidiary of the General Electric Company.
He said he had no immediate plans.


NASA Seeks to Send 16 Landers to Mars
IN a move away from reliance on a few complex and expensive spacecraft, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration is drawing up plans to send 16 small, low-cost landers to the surface of Mars beginning late in this decade.
The spacecraft are being designed to conduct a global reconnaissance of the planet by providing surface measurements of weather, chemistry and seismic activity.
The measurements would complete studies to be begun by the Mars Observer, a spacecraft scheduled to be launched this September and to go into orbit around the planet in August 1993.


GRADUATES FACING WORST PROSPECTS IN LAST 2 DECADES
When bands stop playing at college graduation ceremonies this spring, members of the class of '92, who came of age in a recession, will doff caps and gowns and enter one of the toughest job markets that any class has seen in decades.
Studies by two universities indicate that nearly one-third of the nation's entry-level jobs for new graduates have evaporated during the recession as many large employers have reduced their hiring.
At the same time, the market is already glutted with nearly a million unemployed managers and professional workers.


American BioMed Inc. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


On My Mind; Ending The Pain
When I was young, frozen into a full-body plaster cast by bone disease, and hurting, I tried to bribe God.
I said I had come to understand my first value and goal -- to walk again and achieve the absence of pain.
If He allowed me that, or just showed me how, then I would no longer worry about things like college grades, or getting a job someday, or girls.


Recent Remarks by Tyson Are Called Out of Character
Mike Tyson will be finishing up his 10-day sentence in a restricted unit at the Indiana Youth Center this week.
Tyson landed there because he made threatening remarks on May 4 to prison personnel after an allegation by a guard who accused Tyson of threatening him.
That behavior was out of character for Tyson, according to Kevin Moore, a spokesman for the Indiana Department of Corrections.


Pessimism Is Overshadowing Hope In Effort to End Yugoslav Fighting
For many in the old city of Sarajevo, the legend spray-painted on a wall in a predominantly Muslim quarter expressed the agonies of civil war: "Welcome to hell."
For weeks, some of the deadliest weapons in modern warfare have been used against civilians across Bosnia and Herzegovina and its capital, Sarajevo.


Scope Industries reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Cardinal Distribution reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Pre-Incan Artifacts
Archeologists in northern Peru have found a large trove of pre-Incan artifacts, including a body adorned with gold and jewels, the leader of the dig said yesterday.
The archeologist, Dr.
Izumi Shimada of Harvard University, said in London that the discovery provided the first comprehensive look at the Sican culture of the 10th and 11th centuries.
The Sicans, also known as Lambayeque, were often mistaken for the later Incas.


Biscayne Holdings Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Bull Run Gold Mines Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Great Shots, but What's Going On?
There's something about watching ESPN's coverage of the America's Cup that inspires diverse reactions among those idle enough to tune in daily at 3 P.M.
"What a technical achievement," said one TV sports executive.
"I sat in my hotel room in Palm Springs for three hours a day watching it."


Sterling Electronics Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 28


Hope and Fear in Los Angeles As Deadly Gangs Call Truce
When one of his brothers was thrown through a plate-glass window during the riots here and another was shot, Reggie Harris barely flinched.
Having spent most of his 22 years in street gangs, he has seen a civil war's worth of suffering.
Violence in the streets seems commonplace and permanent to him.


Review/Television; Interviews and Pop Music Recycled
For television, repackaging has one especially irresistible charm: no need for big budgets.
The product, except for new wraparounds, is already in the can.
Big names can be recycled on the cheap.
An enviable example: the Ed Sullivan show, still doing well for CBS in periodic tributes and this fall going into syndication with several dozen half-hours culled from a library spanning 23 years.
Welcome to repeat heaven.
This week, two veteran personalities put their idiosyncratic stamps on the repackaging game: tonight at 10, Barbara Walters, in "The Best of Barbara Walters," offers "Legends: The New Generation," and tomorrow at 9, Dick Clark is the host of the "American Bandstand 40th Anniversary Special."


Citfed Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


L.I.R.R. Train Strikes Stalled Truck; 11 Suffer Minor Injuries


James Jacobson Dies; A Retired Banker, 84
James A. Jacobson, a retired senior vice president of Chase Manhattan Bank, died on May 3 at the Bryn Mawr Terrace nursing home in Bryn Mawr, Pa.
He was 84 years old.
He died of congestive heart failure, said his stepdaughter Patricia Onderdonk Pruett of Bryn Mawr.


Don't Tie Foreign Students to Black Ph.D. Drop; Students Needed
To the Editor:
To blame distribution of aid biased against black applicants and favoring foreigners for the low number of blacks receiving doctoral degrees (front page, April 21) runs counter to my observation at the University of Medicine &amp; Dentistry of New Jersey.
You misuse data in the National Research Council's 1990 summary report of doctorate recipients, on which much of the conclusion is based.
The data are for "primary" source of support, but you limit description of aid to university support.
That is deceptive.
While 39 percent of black Ph.D.'s in the life sciences reported universities as their primary source of support, 31 percent listed the Federal Government.


Adams Resources &amp; Energy Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Texaco Canada Petroleum reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Covington Development Group reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


BSN Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Maas, Still Sitting, May Make a Stand
There is no hope in the lineup card.
Kevin Maas keeps checking, but every time he looks, the disappointment builds.
He has voiced his frustration to Yankee management and the news media, he has met on occasion with the manager, and he has conferred with his agent.
None of it seems to soothe his unhappiness.
In the first 31 games of the season, Maas has started just 11 times.
When the club begins a 12-game stand at the Stadium tonight against the Seattle Mariners and left-hander Randy Johnson, he'll be on the bench again.
No sense even looking at the batting order.


DNA Links A Stabbing To a Woman
Using DNA tests to determine maternity, the police yesterday charged a 17-year-old Brooklyn woman with stabbing and abandoning her newborn baby boy nearly seven weeks ago.
The woman, Leonora Gayle of 820 Linden Boulevard in East Flatbush, has been charged with attempted murder, assault and endangering the welfare of a child.


Rabin Stresses Settlement Issue in Campaign
Laying out basic themes of his election campaign, Yitzhak Rabin of the opposition Labor Party said today that Government money now being spent on Jewish settlements in Israel's occupied territories should be used instead to absorb immigrants from the former Soviet Union.
Mr.
Rabin, who was elected Labor's leader three months ago, also said Palestinian autonomy in the territories could be achieved without endangering Israeli security, and he suggested that the present Government was not forthcoming enough in the continuing Middle East peace process.


B&amp;H Maritime Carriers reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Political Week; Perot and Riots Redraw Bush Campaign Plans
It has been a turbulent year for the people whose job it is to get George Bush re-elected, not at all the kind of stately progress toward an emphatic November victory many of them had expected.
In late January and February, Patrick J. Buchanan was the nemesis.
Then, gradually, Mr.
Bush rallied and the troubles of Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas, the presumptive Democratic nominee, accumulated on several fronts.
Polls and politicians concluded that the President, for all his troubles, was a likely winner after all.


Some Old Complaints Arise Over Heileman's New Brew
Ten months ago, Heileman withdrew Power Master malt liquor because regulators said the name emphasized its high alcohol content and advocates complained the product was aimed at young black men.
Now, the brewer is introducing a similar product -- with a different name.
The product, Colt 45 Premium, comes in a black-and-red can similar to Power Master's.
The new brew will have a lower alcohol content than Power Master's 5.9 percent but a higher level than the Colt 45 already on the market, which is 4.5 percent.
The G. Heileman Brewing Company would not specify the alcohol content of the new product.


PLM International reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Recommendation Made in Police Drowning
A New York City Police Department trial judge recommended yesterday that a lieutenant be found not guilty of departmental charges that he neglected to supervise properly a police officer who drowned during a training exercise last June.
The judge's recommendation now goes to Police Commissioner Lee P. Brown, who could approve or reject it.
If found guilty, the lieutenant could face dismissal.


First Marathon reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Peoples Savings Bank (Brockton) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


President Bush and the Sewer
The Democratic Congress, finally heeding public anger, passed a solid campaign finance reform package and sent it to the President's desk.
It wasn't perfect -- merely a giant leap in the right direction.
So how did Mr.
Bush, the self-proclaimed government reformer, respond?
He raised his veto pen and killed the bill, for the thinnest, most cynical of reasons.
And he did so on the weekend, while public attention was still fastened on Los Angeles.


USA Waster Services Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


CPC-Rexcel reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Ramtek Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Will Gooden Cry, 'Uncle'?
Dwight Gooden and Gary Sheffield, uncle and nephew, met behind the plate last night for photographs and conversation.
They'll meet at 60 feet 6 inches tonight, and there won't necessarily be smiles.
Sheffield, the third baseman acquired by the Padres before the season, is hitting .310, with 4 homers and 21 r.b.i.
"Maybe it'll be fun if no one is on base," the 27-year-old Gooden said of his first square-off against his nephew.
"But if someone is on base, it'll be all business."


18th I.R.A. Conviction Unravels: Briton Is Freed in '74 Bomb Case
A woman jailed for the last 18 years on conviction of setting off a bomb that killed 12 people in 1974 was freed on bail today when judges and prosecutors agreed that her confession to the police should not have been relied on as evidence against her.
The woman, Judith Ward, 43 years old, was described by rueful British prosecutors in court today as a person with a vivid imagination who could have simply fantasized the story of her involvement with the Irish Republican Army, which had taken responsibility for setting off the bomb in an army bus on a highway near Leeds.


Strapped for Funds, 3 Musical Groups Bow Out or Cut Back
As the concert season winds to an end, three of the independent organizations that give New York City's musical life its special texture have announced they are either folding or reconsidering their futures.
One group, the Sine Nomine Singers, founded in 1968, is disbanding after its concert on Sunday.
Its founder, Harry Saltzman, says the reasons are artistic and financial: he would like to expand the repertory into the large 19th-century works, but to do so would require a budget he said he has no hope of raising.


May Department Stores reports earnings for Qtr to May 2


European Nations to Recall Envoys From Belgrade
Struggling to force Serbia to end its military attacks in the newly independent republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina, European Community governments decided today to recall their ambassadors from Belgrade and seek the international isolation of what remains of Yugoslavia.
At a meeting in Brussels, community foreign ministers also backed United States efforts to have Serbia and Montenegro suspended from the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe and threatened to tighten existing economic sanctions against Belgrade into "a total embargo."


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.25-6.5
6.25-6.5
8.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.81
3.71
5.50
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.62
3.60
5.60
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.72
3.74
5.63
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.03
7.06
7.93
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.88
7.89
8.26
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.80
8.85
9.35
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.66
6.67
7.22
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


In the Arts In Vienna, All Is Not Gemutlich
The glamorous opening events of this year's Vienna Festival on Saturday involved the two most prominent artists in the city's musical and theatrical life.
Yet despite fervent cheers, both the Italian conductor Claudio Abbado, who bears the title music director of the city of Vienna, and the German stage director Claus Peymann have suffered attacks this season that seem virulent even by Vienna's standards of bitter artistic controversy.
Their bases at the Vienna State Opera and the Burgtheater, the most prestigious opera company and theater in the German-speaking world, have both been under siege.
Never has Vienna's reputation as a nest of cultural vipers, or Austria's image as a land in which culture is fought over with a passion reserved elsewhere for politics and sport, been better illustrated.
Indeed, in Austria, culture
is
both politics and sport. Resignation and a Death
At the opera, Mr.
Abbado resigned in October as music director after the theater authority refused to renew the contract of the State Opera director, Claus Helmut Drese, and the subsequent regime said it was determined to de-emphasize high-quality, high-visibility premieres.
Then on March 29, Mr.
Drese's successor, the popular baritone Eberhard Wachter, died of a heart attack while walking in the Vienna Woods.


NEWS SUMMARY
"They said I'd need five people to swear Rosie had specifically said she would never want this tube, that tube, this antibiotic, that transfusion. We never talked like that. Who talks like that? But I know she wouldn't want to live like this. No one would. Would you?" -- WILLIAM DOHERTY of Brooklyn, whose wife has been in a coma for a year.  [ A1:2 ]


Storm Joining NBC
HANNAH STORM has left CNN and agreed to a three-year contract with NBC worth approximately $600,000.
Storm, 29, will be a co-host for late-night Olympic coverage from Barcelona, Spain, with JIM LAMPLEY after making her NBC debut on the network's telecasts this June from Wimbledon, where she also will be late-night host.


Don't Tie Foreign Students to Black Ph.D. Drop
To the Editor:
"Drop in Black Ph.D.'s Brings Debate on Aid for Foreigners" (front page, April 21) compares two dissimilar issues in an inflammatory manner.
To claim that the presence of foreigners is responsible, if only in part, for the absence of blacks in universities is largely misleading.
The majority of foreign students study science and engineering.
They remain in the United States filling junior positions, particularly in engineering departments that without them would have to close and jobs in industries that until the most recent economic downturn would have been crippled without them.


Servotronics Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


New York Rule Compounds Dilemma Over Life Support
Had Rosemarie Doherty lapsed into a coma in Arkansas, Iowa, Louisiana, Texas or a long list of other states, her family could have instructed doctors to remove the feeding tube that snakes from her nose to her stomach and the breathing tube that is taped into a hole in her throat.
Had she lapsed into a coma in Florida or Washington, D.C., the instructions could even have come from a close family friend.


New President of Thrifty Wants Renting Cars to Be Fun
To help build market share in the hotly competitive auto rental industry, Thrifty Rent-a-Car System Inc. says it plans to push the company's personality in a new direction: more fun for both its employees and customers.
To help carry out some of the changes, Thrifty, a Chrysler Corporation subsidiary based in Tulsa, Okla., yesterday appointed Donald M. Himelfarb, president of Thrifty Canada, as president.
He will succeed Jim Philion, who will become chairman, a post that had been vacant.


HealthInfusion reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Critics Honor 'Lughnasa'
Brian Friel's "Dancing at Lughnasa" has been named the best new play of the 1991-92 season by the New York Drama Critics Circle.
The Critics Circle also selected August Wilson's "Two Trains Running" as the best new American play.
At the annual awards meeting yesterday in the Time &amp; Life Building, the critics decided not to give an award for best new musical.
The winners will be honored on Monday evening at the Coffee House club, with Mr.
Friel receiving a check for $1,000, a prize given annually by Lucille Lortel.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Candidate's Record; Perot Stand on Prisoner Issue Left a Residue of Bitterness
Five years ago George Bush, then the Vice President, and senior members of the Reagan Administration had a bruising private confrontation with Ross Perot over the Texas billionaire's effort to take command of the Government's investigation of American servicemen missing in Southeast Asia.
The bitter residue explains some of the tension that exists today between President Bush and Mr.
Perot, who is considering an independent run for President this year.


Alteon Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Observer; Ruled By Tools
After using my powerful word processor to write a letter to a friend, I printed it on my state-of-the-art laser printer.
What a professional look it had!
It didn't look like a letter at all.
It looked like a piece of junk mail.
Every day brings a dozen documents that look exactly like this letter.
Every day they flutter into my trash can unread.
One knows their messages too well:


Astrosystems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Ballistivet Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


NWNL Companies reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Goody's Family Clothing reports earnings for Qtr to April 25


UNITED PARCEL TO BECOME BIG CELLULAR CUSTOMER
United Parcel Service Inc., the big delivery service, said yesterday that it planned to use mobile phone technology to allow it to track packages from pickup to delivery.
The company plans to buy about $150 million worth of equipment and cellular service from Motorola and four carriers, including McCaw Cellular Communications.
The Motorola equipment is for modems and other telecommunications gear that works with U.P.S.'s current system of order-taking equipment known as Diads.
These clipboard-like devices scan bar codes and record the status of packages.
They also contain a special "digital signature pad," upon which customers sign their names.


West Coast Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Black Dallas Official Is Acquitted In Tense Trial on Assault Charge
A jury in Dallas today found a Dallas County Commissioner not guilty of felony assault charges, amid speculation that a guilty verdict might have sparked the kind of racial violence that recently struck Los Angeles.
The commissioner, John Wiley Price, 42 years old, is among the most prominent black elected officials in Dallas, and his lawyers asserted in the two-week trial that his prosecution was racially motivated.
Mr.
Price, who frequently leads public protests on racial issues, was accused of breaking the ankle of a construction worker, who is white, during a scuffle outside the Dallas County Administration Building last Aug. 2 shortly after a demonstration that protested hiring practices and news coverage at a television station.
Mr.
Price said he acted in self-defense.
Jurors Report Threats
A previous trial on the same charges ended in a hung jury last December.
As the violence raged in Los Angeles on May 1, three jurors in the Dallas case reported to the court that they had received telephone calls in which they were threatened with death if they returned a guilty verdict.
An assistant district attorney, Mike Gillett, told the court he had received a similar threat.
A day earlier testimony had been interrupted when a Dallas City Councilman, Al Lipscomb, who is black, stormed out of the courtroom, saying "racist, racist" in a loud voice, apparently referring to the proceedings.
After these incidents, the prosecutors sought a mistrial, arguing that the jury would be unwilling to convict Mr.
Price because of the violence that followed the verdict in the trial of four Los Angeles police officers accused of beating a black motorist, Rodney G. King.
Judge James K. Walker of State District Court denied the motion last week.
The makeup of the Dallas jury closely reflected that of the city's population, with five members of minorities.
The jurors deliberated for about five hours today before reaching a verdict.
On May 2, while the Los Angeles violence was under way, Mr.
Price helped organize an emergency meeting of some 200 people from all of the city's major ethnic and racial groups with the goal of defusing potential racial tensions in Dallas.
Mr.
Price, who in 1984 became the first black elected to the Commissioners Court, a county executive body, has recently faced repeated and highly publicized criminal charges.
In 1990 he pleaded guilty to criminal mischief charges for whitewashing billboards during a protest against alcohol and tobacco advertising in minority neighborhoods.
He was convicted in 1991 on criminal mischief charges for damaging the windshield wipers of a van during a protest demonstration.
The verdict is now on appeal.
Mr.
Price is now under indictment in connection with the rape complaint of a county employee in 1990.
He also faces felony mischief charges in an incident in which a television news photographer's camera was damaged in 1990.
In closing arguments on Friday, Mr.
Price's lawyer, Billy Ravkind, asserted that his client would not have been prosecuted if he were white.
"Race has got everything to do with everything," he said.
Had he been convicted, Mr.
Price would have faced up to 10 years in prison, a fine of up to $10,000 and the loss of his Commissioners Court seat.


Treasury Prices Slightly Higher
Prices of Treasury securities inched higher in quiet trading yesterday, as credit market participants readied themselves for release later in the week of economic statistics that most expect will be favorable for fixed-income investors.
"People have money to put to work, and we should get good statistics over the next week," said one Government-bond trader.
"Right now is not an occasion to be aggressively bullish, but it is a time to be involved."


Monenco Group reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Classical Music in Review
Joaquin Rodrigo Tribute Carnegie Hall


Wall St. Arbitration Programs Criticized
After a two-year review of the arbitration programs that handle most of the complaints that individual investors bring against Wall Street brokers, the General Accounting Office has concluded that investors cannot be sure of getting a competent and impartial hearing unless improvements are made in the way arbitrators are recruited and trained for their task.
The arbitration programs now in place do not "provide a reasonable level of assurance regarding either the independence of the arbitrators or their competence in arbitrating disputes," the study said.


M.D.C. Holdings Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


W.R. GRACE WILL LOOK TO CHINA FOR SALES GROWTH
W.
R.
Grace &amp; Company, the chemical conglomerate, said it planned to step up the sale in China of its cement additives, food packaging and health-care products.
"We're especially focusing on the Far East and China for future growth," Grace's president, J. P. Bolduc, said after the company's annual stockholders meeting.
"A market of 1.1 billion Chinese consumers represents considerable opportunities."


Judge Finds Driver Union In Contempt
A Federal judge ruled last night that a newspaper truck-drivers' union was in contempt of court for disrupting circulation of The New York Times in a labor dispute involving the newspaper, the union and a wholesale delivery operation.
He ordered the union to pay The Times $100,000 for every hour of further disruption of the newspaper's weekday and Saturday deliveries and $500,000 for every hour of disruption of the paper's Sunday delivery.
The judge's ruling came on a day in which action on many fronts significantly intensified the union's six-day-old labor dispute with the wholesaler, Imperial Delivery Service, and The Times.
Arthur E. Imperatore, who owns Imperial, said one of his employees had been kidnapped and threatened with death.


McCarty-Cooper Collection Is Auctioned at Christie's


Review/Rock; Eric Clapton, Ever Solid and Reliable
For Eric Clapton's fans, his concerts are like visits to a favorite steakhouse.
Reliability, not novelty, provides the pleasure as Mr.
Clapton serves hearty, medium-tempo, blues-marinated rock.
Through the years, the trappings may change slightly; at Brendan Byrne Arena on Friday night, Mr.
Clapton wore a suit and played a guitar with a wireless hookup.
But where much current popular music celebrates fragmentation and irony, Mr.
Clapton offers continuity and sincerity.
Mr.
Clapton was justly praised in the 1960's as one of the best British blues guitarists, bringing together the styles of three American blues Kings: Freddie, Albert and B. B. King.
His style has grown more familiar through the years, in part because he has been so widely imitated.
But most of his solos are still lean and incisive, moving from wiry, spiraling single-note lines to aggressive riffs.
And his husky, melancholy voice has become as expressive as his guitar when he sings about love gone wrong.


Stocks Flat in Tokyo
Stock prices were little changed today in Tokyo.
Less than an hour before the close of trading the Nikkei index of 225 issues was down 24.09 points, or 0.13 percent, to 18,584.00.
Brokers said the market easily absorbed profit-taking and futures-linked selling but was losing steam after recent sharp gains.
On Monday, the Nikkei index rose 232.14 points, or 1.26 percent.


Patterns
A Lens for Conde Nast
After being wooed by Harper's Bazaar, the fashion photographer Steven Meisel has signed an exclusive magazine contract with Conde Nast, the publisher of Vogue and other magazines.
Mr.
Meisel is also known for his advertising photographs, among them the current Barneys New York ads (including the Madison Avenue billboard of Linda Evangelista with a butterfly on her nose).
He recently completed a book on Madonna that is to be published in September.


Classical Music in Review
Krystian Zimerman  Pianist Avery Fisher Hall
On Friday night in Avery Fisher Hall there seemed no reason, at first, why Krystian Zimerman was not more effective than he actually was.
The Polish pianist, who won the Warsaw Chopin Competition in 1975, is not one of those players who feels compelled to be distractingly original at the price of the music being played.
He is a traditionalist, following the score and never taking too many liberties.
As on his Deutsche Grammophon recordings, his performances had a directness and confidence.
Mr.
Zimerman can flip off octave runs with the same ease as any other virtuoso.


Fibronics International Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Dynamics Is Selling Missile Unit to Hughes
The Hughes Aircraft Company said today that it had agreed to acquire the General Dynamics Corporation's missile business for stock worth at least $450 million.
The deal continues the consolidation of the weapons business now that the cold war has ended and puts Hughes neck-and-neck with its chief rival, the Raytheon Corporation, as the nation's largest missile maker.


National Heritage Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Unitil Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Bush and Congress Facing a Showdown on Forests
Galvanized by a classic conflict between jobs and the preservation of the Pacific Northwest's virgin timber and the home it provides wildlife, the Bush Administration and Democrats in Congress are heading for a showdown that could test the influence of a growing anti-environmental backlash.
At issue are unlogged forests in Northern California, Oregon and Washington.
Even as a Cabinet-level committee votes this week on how much forest should be cut, two committees of the House are set to deal with proposals that would protect endangered species by identifying and preserving ranges covering millions of acres.


Resource Recycling Technologies reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Lexington Precision reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


'Value' Joins the Vocabulary of Wine
After decades of using mystique, prestige and cachet to pitch their products, some of the nation's wine makers have lately learned a new word: value.
And those who have learned it best are selling more wine even while the industry is in its worst depression since Prohibition.
Value, of course, has always been in the eye of the oenophile, but most agree that it applies to a wine, costing $7 to $10 a bottle, that can give customers a taste that usually costs $12 to $16.
The strategy behind such wines, which has been time-tested in many other industries, is to push up sales volume by keeping costs low.
Making Cutbacks


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Chemical Banking Corp., New York, is offering $100 million of 7.375 percent senior notes due on June 15, 1997, at a price of 99.764 to yield 7.43 percent through Merrill Lynch &amp; Co.
The noncallable notes are rated Baa-2 by Moody's Investors Service Inc. and A- by Standard &amp; Poor's Corp.


Learning to Save Trees
WHEN personal computers first appeared in offices a decade ago, seers forecast a future in which paper documents would be obsolete, replaced by flurries of electrons and phosphors.
Instead, according to one study, American businesses generated a record 775 billion pages of paper last year.
So much for the paperless office.
Computers appear to have fueled the rise in paper use, not retarded it.


Early Tallies in Philippine Election Narrow Field to 3
Early unofficial results from the election to find a successor for President Corazon C. Aquino suggested today that the race had narrowed to three candidates, only one of them committed to carrying on Mrs.
Aquino's policies.
Election officials said the general election Monday had been the most peaceful and potentially the cleanest in the modern history of the Philippines.


Magnetic Crystals, Guides for Animals, Found in Humans
An intriguing claim that human brain cells possess crystals of a highly magnetic mineral known as magnetite was described today by Dr.
Joseph Kirschvink, a professor at the California Institute of Technology.
The 38-year-old geobiologist said he believed that magnetite crystals enabled animals from bees to whales to navigate by using the earth's magnetic field.
He said he doubted that they supported any sensory capability in humans, although he suspected that they might account for the possible influence of strong electromagnetic fields on human health.


Ingles Markets reports earnings for Qtr to March 28


MANY EMPTY SEATS AT MIDEAST TALKS
The Middle East peace talks resumed today, with sessions in Washington and Brussels devoted to discussion of regional arms control and economic development, but both sessions were marred by empty chairs and bitterness.
Missing from the Washington session on arms and regional security were the delegations from Syria and Lebanon, which boycotted the meeting.
The Palestinians were also not present, even as part of a Jordanian delegation, because only states with military establishments were invited.


Perini Investment Prop.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Editorial Notebook; Felice Kirby's War on Crime
Daryl Gates, meet Felice Kirby.
He is the militaristic Los Angeles police chief.
She works for a group called the Citizens Committee for New York City, and for the past seven years she has tried to help communities and police officers get past alienation and work together.
Before the videotaped beating of Rodney King, no one at the top of Chief Gates's department seemed to consider such alienation a serious problem.
The Los Angeles rioting made clear its devastating potential.


Almanac: Democratic Delegates


Kinder-Care Learning Centers reports earnings for Qtr to April 3


Furr's/Bishop's Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 28


P&amp;F Industries reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Buffets Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to April 22


Taking Time From Injured And Giving Relief to Clubs
No crying, please, for the owners.
They don't deserve anyone's sympathy.
They sob about the salaries they have to pay and the imbalance in revenue between large- and small-market teams, but they have never been clever enough to formulate a solution to their so-called problems.
The rise in the number of players on the disabled list this season, especially the appearance of familiar faces on the list, has prompted the thought that perhaps this is one area where the clubs could get some relief.
And in this era of stratospheric salaries, the players could afford to provide it for them.


Coalition of States and Cities Accuses White House of Politicizing '90 Census
A coalition of 30 states, cities and counties accused the White House in Federal court in Manhattan yesterday of using political pressure to block an adjustment to the 1990 census that would have added at least 5 million people, many of them black and Hispanic, to the official population.
The coalition's lawyer, Robert S. Rifkind, said White House officials "had their thumbs on the scale."


Russia's Rocket Deal With India Leads U.S. to Impose Trade Bans
The United States imposed a two-year ban today on exports to a Russian arms agency and to the Indian Space Research Organization because of an agreement between them to transfer Russian rocket technology to India.
A State Department spokesman said the transaction violated the guidelines of the international Missile Technology Control Regime, which was intended to curb sales of sensitive military technology.
Under United States law, such transfers now carry penalties.
This is the first such action against either country.


Networked Picture Systems reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


A Downturn With a Difference
With Japanese economic growth slowing, Sadahiko Hidaka took a few minutes recently to tally the costs of the downturn on the metal fabrication company he heads.
He said he expected his company's sales to drop 20 percent this year from last year's $15 million, because of cutbacks by his customers, which are big manufacturers like auto, shipbuilding and weapons companies.


Don't Tie Foreign Students to Black Ph.D. Drop; A Difficult Investment
To the Editor:
Your April 21 front-page article on black Ph.D.'s and aid for foreign students states, "Unlike financial aid for undergraduates, which is often based on need, graduate assistance is usually competitive and based on ability." In the context, the statement can be taken to mean that the black males not getting Ph.D.'s are perhaps less able to than whites and foreigners.
Furthermore, it is not true that graduate assistance is based on ability, rather than need.
At Harvard Uni versity, where I am about to complete a Ph.D., a financial aid office -- not the academic department -- determines how much aid a student receives based on his or her own resources.
Personal assets and spouses with good incomes have kept several brilliant students I know from receiving grants.


World Panel Denies Reynolds's Appeal
Butch Reynolds, the world-record holder at 400 meters, failed in his attempt yesterday to convince the world governing federation for track and field that he did not use an anabolic steroid in August 1990.
As a result, his two-year suspension will continue, preventing him from competing in the United States Olympic trials next month in New Orleans and the Summer Olympics in Barcelona, Spain, a month later.
The track and field competition at the Olympics will conclude Aug. 9, two days before Reynolds's suspension expires.


How Tools of Medicine Can Get in the Way
Even in an age of high-technology medicine that has vastly improved diagnostic precision, a cardinal rule for doctors is to listen to the patient and to learn by using their hands and stethoscopes in the traditional physical examination.
But doctors sometimes overlook the rule as they get carried away with the romance of medical technology.


To Our Readers
Since Friday, distribution of The New York Times in parts of Westchester, Connecticut and Long Island has been disrupted because of a labor dispute affecting a wholesale delivery company used by the newspaper. (Article, page B1.)
The Times regrets the inconvenience to readers.


Telemundo Group Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Colonial Commercial reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Canadian Foremost reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Allied Waste Industries reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


When Rangers Go Head to Head With Jagr . . . They Go Bottoms Up And Penguins Go Up, 3-2
Jaromir Jagr, the large and nimble Pittsburgh right wing, looked more like Mario Lemieux with each stride, with each subtle shift of the shoulders.
Jagr grew in stature as he bore down to beat John Vanbiesbrouck on a penalty shot in the first period.
He became a 6-foot-2-inch Ranger nightmare in the third period, as he deked past defenseman Jeff Beukeboom and Vanbiesbrouck for the winning goal with 5 minutes 33 seconds to play.


A Hesitant Spring Takes a Bold Step Forward


B&amp;H Ocean Carriers Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


I Left My Heart in The Land of Cyberpunk
CYBERPUNK is a curious blend of science fiction and comic book art, computer hacking, electronic music and fin de siecle moodiness.
It is a literary movement, among other things, but it is also a way of looking at life.
It appeals more to the young than to the middle-aged, but it is by no means limited to people who think the world began in 1972, just as not everybody who watches MTV is 20 years old.
Beyond Cyberpunk, a collection of electronic essays for, of course, the Macintosh, is for both the inquisitive and those in the thick of such things.


Pomeroy Computer Resources reports earnings for Qtr to April 4


Violence Racks Hispanic Area Of Washington
The arrest of a man for fighting in a restaurant touched off four hours of disturbances early today in a poor, largely Hispanic neighborhood that was the site of three days of violence a year ago.
The outbreak, in which dozens of people threw rocks and bottles, set small fires and looted a convenience store in a short commercial strip called Mount Pleasant, began about midnight when a group of bystanders argued with police officers as they arrested the man for fighting.


Lil E. Tee Pushes On Minus the Glamour
Like the man who shot Jesse James, the colt who outran Arazi in the Kentucky Derby was unrecognized when he stepped down a ramp today onto the hard dirt yard outside the Preakness Barn at Pimlico Race Course.
His next steps on this journey could make him more than merely a footnote to racing history.
He is Lil E. Tee, a horse with a peculiar name, an obscure past and an uncertain future.
He is also a horse with a modest trainer who stabled his colts in a boondocks barn at Churchill Downs, far from the elite travelers from Europe; an 82-year-old owner who had already lost the Derby three times, and an evangelical jockey who hadn't won a Derby in 10 attempts.


Ryan-Murphy Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Methodists Reaffirm Church's Teaching On Homosexuality
The United Methodist Church, the nation's second largest Protestant body, voted this evening to retain the church's position that homosexual behavior conflicted with Christian teaching.
The action followed the pattern of several major Christian denominations, including the Presbyterian Church (U.S.A.) and the Episcopal Church, that have recently reaffirmed current teaching on sexuality while encouraging further study in local churches.
The vote, 710 to 238, was taken at the church's General Conference, a gathering of nearly a thousand elected delegates that meets every four years to set policy for the 8.9 million-member denomination.
The action set aside the conclusion of a majority on a special committee set up by the General Conference four years ago to study homosexuality.
The committee majority advocated a statement that the church "lacked a common mind" on homosexuality.


Clasical Music in Review
Metropolitan Opera Orchestra  Carnegie Hall
As the Metropolitan Opera Orchestra emerges more frequently from the theater pit and into the relatively open air of the concert hall, it becomes evident that this is an orchestra not like others.
Whether its distinction is due to the contained acoustical environment it is used to, to its accustomed role as vocal accompanist or simply to the sensibilities of its director, James Levine, there is a weightlessness to the sound, an extraordinary fineness and a marked lack of heft from its deeper elements.
In the opening tutti of Mozart's Piano Concerto No. 12 on Saturday night, the violinists seemed amazed, even disoriented, by the resonance of Carnegie Hall.
It was playing of uncommon refinement that nevertheless came out in a dazzling blur of sound.
As the Mozart progressed and then "Das Lied von der Erde" began, this striking transparency of texture and liveness of timbre took on fine edges.
The bass clarinet was made to speak out of its midst as if from a chamber ensemble; the inner brass choirs in "Von der Jugend" were a picture of delicacy and yet absolutely clear.


Riley Quick to Respond to Rages of Bulls' Coach
Verbal jousting between the Knicks and the Chicago Bulls continued today, as the teams prepared for Game 5 of their deadlocked playoff series.
Coach Pat Riley of the Knicks criticized Phil Jackson for comments that the Bulls' coach made on Sunday after New York's 93-86 victory in Game 4.


Cubist Collection Brings $21.5 Million at Auction
A crowd of serious collectors and dealers gathered at Christie's last night to bid and watch the auction of important modern works from the collection of the interior designer William A. McCarty-Cooper.
Although the salesroom was full, it was by no means overflowing with the usual crowd of social voyeurs.
But those who needed to be there were.
Of the 91 works up for sale, all but one were originally owned by Mr.
McCarty-Cooper's adoptive father, the British art historian and collector Douglas Cooper, and all but five found buyers.
The sale totaled $21.5 million, right in the middle of Christie's pre-sale estimates of $18.5 million to $23.7 million.


Crystal Oil Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Intertape Polymer Group reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Sallie Mae Prices $550 Million Issue
The Student Loan Marketing Association, known as Sallie Mae, yesterday priced $550 million of short-term, floating-rate notes due on Nov. 12, 1992, through various securities dealers.


Bonn May Quit Europe Effort To Develop New Jet Fighter
The German Government, increasingly pressed for cash, is reportedly planning to withdraw from a European project to design and build a new jet fighter.
Germany's decision means that the multibillion-dollar project, which was developed in cooperation with France, Spain and Britain, will probably be scrapped.


Atlanta Journal; Some Say Recent Unrest Broke More Than Glass
Atlanta didn't burn.
But the violence that shook this city for two days recently may have said as much about the forces choking America's downtowns as did the flames in Los Angeles after four white police officers were acquitted in the beating of a black man.


Business and Health; A Generous Plan Is Given a Trim
FACING a $100 million increase in its health-care spending this year, I.B.M. is asking its 186,000 employees to pay a bit more of their hospital costs.
The company recently announced that it was revising its medical and dental coverage by raising some charges and offering incentives to use the services of a dental H.M.O.
I.B.M. has long been known as a company that offers some of the most extensive and expensive health benefits around.
Its spending on health care surged past $1 billion in 1991, up nearly 10 percent, after annual increases that have averaged 11 percent since the mid-1980's.


Thais Plan a Way to End Army Rule
A weeklong demonstration that has effectively paralyzed Thailand's military-dominated Government was suspended early this morning after opposition leaders said they would support an amendment to the Constitution to require the Prime Minister to be an elected member of Parliament.
Tens of thousands of students, workers and members of this rapidly developing country's prosperous new middle class have turned out to protest the appointment of a former commander of the armed forces, Suchinda Kraprayoon, to head the Government.
The former general, who led a military coup last year, had not run in the March 22 parliamentary elections.


The AIDS 'Plot' Against Blacks
Bizarre as it may seem to most people, many black Americans believe that AIDS and the health measures used against it are part of a conspiracy to wipe out the black race.
A survey of black church members in 1990 found that an astonishing 35 percent believed AIDS was a form of genocide.
A New York Times/WCBS-TV News poll in 1990 found that 1 black in 10 believes the AIDS virus was "deliberately created in a laboratory in order to infect black people" and an additional 2 in 10 thought that might be so.
A Gallup/Newsweek poll in March produced similar results.


Goldcorp Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


First Marathon reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Don't Tie Foreign Students to Black Ph.D. Drop; Help From Overseas
To the Editor:
In our efforts to recruit more Americans, let's not blame foreigners for filling a very critical Ph.D. shortage (front-page, April 21).
It's a very long, difficult and expensive process to get a Ph.D., and there's no pot of gold waiting at the end of the educational road.
It's no wonder that few Americans of all races seek this career path.


Advanced Gravis reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Blyth Holdings reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Alliance Imaging Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Cayard: New World Discovery By Italians
An Italian television commentator was explaining to Paul Cayard recently how the 32-year-old skipper had become a national sports hero in Italy, as big as any soccer star.
Cayard, whose attention is mostly focused on his boat these days, seemed genuinely surprised.
"As big as soccer?" he asked.
He smiled, then gazed out at the water as if to digest the thought.


Gibraltar Mines reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Barrie J. Webster; Advertising Executive, 46
Barrie J. Webster, an advertising executive who developed the strategy that led to the slogan "fill it to the rim . . . with Brim," died yesterday at New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center in Manhattan.
He was 46 years old and lived in Manhattan and Southampton, L.I.
Mr.
Webster, who had hemophilia, died of kidney failure and multiple bacterial infections brought on by AIDS, said a family spokesman, David Mandell, who added that Mr.
Webster contracted AIDS from a blood transfusion.


A Reorganized Henszey &amp; Co.
Henszey &amp; Albert in New York said yesterday that it had reorganized and changed its name to Henszey &amp; Company following the departure of Rick Albert, president.
In a telephone interview, Dane Solomon, the agency's director of account services, said that Mr.
Albert had left by mutual agreement "to pursue other interests." In a separate interview, Mr.
Albert declined to discuss his departure.


ABC Adds 4 Comedies and 3 Dramas for Fall
ABC announced its prime-time lineup for the fall yesterday.
It included seven new series -- four comedies and three dramas -- and reflected some deferred decisions.
The network was the first to announce its schedule.
The others will follow in the next few weeks.


Westport Bancorp Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Brooklyn Man Fined for Harassing Officer
A 42-year-old Hasidic man was fined $200 yesterday for an incident in the Williamsburg, Brooklyn, last year in which he harassed a Hispanic police officer who had asserted that Jews in the area get special treatment from the police.
The man, Moishe Schwartz, was found guilty of the harassement violation on May 6 after a three-day non-jury trial conducted by Judge Martin Karopkin in Criminal Court in Brooklyn.
Judge Karopkin imposed the fine on Mr.
Schwartz, who could have been sentenced to a maximum of 15 days in jail and a $250 fine.


Nordstrom Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Child World reports earnings for Year to Feb 1


10 Nations Reach Accord on Saving Dolphins
IN the first major international accord to save dolphins, 10 nations that fish for tuna in the eastern Pacific Ocean have agreed to cut the killing of dolphins by 80 percent during the 1990's.
The agreement, negotiated by the Inter-American Tropical Tuna Commission in late April, builds on an earlier 80 percent drop in dolphin kills, achieved from 1986 to 1991.


Adirondacks Plan Offered by Assembly
The Assembly today renewed long-stalled efforts to strengthen protections for the Adirondack wilderness, offering a new package of economic enticements for local governments to go along with tougher zoning restrictions for many lakeside and forest areas.
The package, which comes in the six-million-acre park's centennial year, was a clear bid by the Democratic-led Assembly to make new park regulations more palatable to the Republican-controlled Senate.


P.A.M. Transportation Services reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Central Reserve Life reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Scurry-Rainbow Oil reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Shuttle Again Fails to Capture Stranded Satellite
For the second consecutive day, a wayward satellite tonight eluded capture by the astronauts of the space shuttle Endeavour.
The astronauts repeatedly tried to grab the $150 million communications relay satellite and haul it from the cold void of space into the payload bay of the shuttle Endeavour.


Sloan-Kettering Gets $652,173 From Runners
More than 22 years ago, FRED LEBOW ran in his first marathon, a four-times-around looped course in the Bronx.
While he remembers no spectators or news-media coverage, he does remember a certain glow.
"First time around at the water stop, they gave me a cup and it had bourbon in it," he said.
"Next time around, it happened again, and I felt great. I remember thinking, 'So this is why people run marathons.' Third time around, it wasn't there, and I was disappointed."


Arden Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 28


La Guardia Made a Career as a Maverick
To the Editor:
Letters by Adam D. Elfenbein and Albert L. Kraus ("La Guardia's Party," April 19) correct A. M. Rosenthal's characterization of Fiorello H. La Guardia as a Democrat.
They state La Guardia was a Republican and a Fusionist.
Yes, La Guardia ran on the Republican Party ticket for Congress between 1922 until 1930, except in 1924, when he ran on the Socialist Party line (he had been refused the Republican designation because of his endorsement of the Presidential candidacy of the Progressive Party's Robert M. LaFollette in 1922).
He ran for mayor in 1933 on two ballot lines, Republican and Fusion Party (a type of good-government party).


In New York, Gorbachev Looks for Cash
Mikhail S. Gorbachev took the final step and welcomed exploitation by a capitalist businessman last night as he was cheered by more than 2,000 of the city's more affluent citizens in bringing his foundation fund-raising drive to New York.
The former Soviet President delighted the crowd by noting that Malcolm S. Forbes Jr., chief executive of Forbes magazine, had provided his corporate jet for the two-week Gorbachev fund-raising mission, as well as center stage last night at Radio City Music Hall for the magazine's mogul-crammed 75th anniversary celebration.


In and Out of Character At a 2d Murder Trial
During Carolyn Warmus's first trial for the murder of her lover's wife, there were some who put her in the role of the nightmare blonde whose obsessive love could have ruined any man's life.
There were others who portrayed her as the victim of a man who used and discarded her.
In the courtroom now, as her second trial draws to a close, she seems determined to play a different part.
Calmly taking unending notes at the defense table, in her professional suits and skirts, she could be the junior lawyer, just here for the afternoon to assist in a case that is being retried because the first jury could not reach a verdict.


Citing Breast Cancer Rates in Nassau and Suffolk, Group Asks for Research
Her voice shaking with emotion, 15-year-old Robin Brody said no one could tell her why her 41-year-old mother had been stricken with breast cancer.
"She was so healthy," Robin, a Coram, L.I., teen-ager, told a panel from the Federal Centers for Disease Control gathered this morning at the Nassau Academy of Medicine.
"She watched her weight and exercised, but somehow it got to her, and no can explain why. And they can't assure me that I won't get breast cancer when I'm her age."


Pacific Aqua reports earnings for Year tp Dec 28


American Israeli Paper reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Accounts
*
Infiniti Canada, Toronto, to Chiat/ Day/Mojo, Toronto, for the luxury car's account, previously at Hill, Holliday, Connors, Cosmopulos, Toronto.
A spokesman confirmed the account change, reported in this week's Adweek, saying that Nissan, which makes Infiniti, wanted to consolidate all Canadian marketing activities at one agency, Chiat, which handles the company's Nissan models.
In America, Hill, Holliday, which announced top-level executive changes on Infiniti last week, continues as the Infiniti agency.


Warner's Sequel Weapon Cuts Down Promotion Costs
THIS Friday, "Lethal Weapon 3" will open at about 2,500 screens across the country, and Warner Brothers' advertising campaign helps explain why movie companies are so eager to produce sequels.
With many studios under severe pressure to produce profits, making a sequel is probably one of the savviest ways to control advertising expenses.
The original "Lethal Weapon" and the first sequel, both starring Mel Gibson and Danny Glover as tough cops in Los Angeles, were mega-hits, with No. 1 taking in $75 million and No. 2 $150 million.


Democrats Agree to Assist Bush On Investing in Poor Urban Areas
Democratic Congressional leaders, who have long been unenthusiastic about urban enterprise zones, pledged today to work with President Bush to encourage investment in the impoverished inner cities.
The idea of enterprise zones, which has long been promoted by Jack F. Kemp, the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development, was embraced by President Bush in the aftermath of the recent riots in Los Angeles after he had given it only tepid support in the last three years.


Judge Overturns U.S. Rule Blocking 'Offensive' Educational Material on AIDS
A Federal rule barring Government financing for any AIDS educational materials deemed "offensive" to "a majority of adults" was declared unconstitutional yesterday by a Federal judge in New York.
The decision was expected to have a nationwide impact on the content of posters, brochures and writings prepared to educate Americans to the dangers of the disease.
The rule that was struck down -- part of the guidelines used by the Federal Centers for Disease Control for awarding $200 million a year to states and to thousands of AIDS education groups -- has been described by critics as a tool of censors that has been used for years to block sexually explicit educational information.
The critics argue that the rule has sacrificed lives to arbitrary moral standards.


UNITED AIRLINES IS OFFERING FAST FOOD ON THE FLY
United Airlines, the nation's second-largest carrier, said it had begun offering McDonald's cheeseburgers, sausage-biscuit sandwiches and cookies on more than 250 flights departing daily from O'Hare International Airport in Chicago.
The Friendly Sky Meals must be ordered at least six hours in advance but are available without charge to all passengers on nonstop snack and meal flights from Chicago.


9 Lifetimes of Memories Wander Into Hall of Fame
After his mother's funeral several years ago, when it was time for his brothers and sister to return to their homes, Al McGuire had a sobering thought.
He had reached the point in his life when reunions were no longer happy occasions.
Who knew when they would all be together again?
"The next time was when we'd be on the other side of the grass," he said.
Tonight, when McGuire shared a defining moment as he and eight other inductees entered the Basketball Hall of Fame, the former Marquette University coach thanked the crowd at the Springfield Civic Center for a special reunion on this side of the grass.


COMPANY NEWS: Annals of Auto Sales; Olds Gives Achieva Special Attention
Has the Achieva, Oldsmobile's new compact, lived up to its name?
Consider the evidence.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League
AL -- Named Derek Irwin director of finance.
BOSTON RED SOX -- Optioned Mo Vaughn, first baseman, to Pawtucket of the International League.
Recalled Mike Brumly, infielder, from Pawtucket.
MINNESOTA TWINS -- Placed Donnie Hill, infielder, on the 15-day disabled list.
Recalled Jeff Reboulet, infielder, from Portland of the Pacific Coast League.


Wal-Mart Stores Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Daly Is Married
Long-hitting JOHN DALY, winner of last year's P.G.A.
Championship, has married the girlfriend who sued him for palimony, her lawyer told a Georgia newspaper.
Last Friday, the 25-year-old Daly married BETTYE FULFORD, 39, in a private ceremony in Arkansas, the lawyer, CARL REYNOLDS, said Sunday night.


Go-Video Off 50 After Suit
Go-Video Inc.'s stock price fell 14 percent today after reports of a shareholders' lawsuit accusing officials of the videocassette recorder company of recklessly spending corporate funds.
Go-Video stock closed at $3 in over-the-counter trading, down 50 cents from Friday's close.
The company markets dual-deck VCR's made for it by a Korean company.


Perot Files for Spot on Texas Ballot
Thousands of supporters of the Presidential candidacy of Ross Perot, the Texas businessman, marched to the Capitol in Austin yesterday to deliver 90 cartons of petitions intended to put his name on the ballot.
To qualify Mr.
Perot for a spot, the petitions must include signatures of 54,275 registered voters who did not vote in the state's primaries.
Organizers said more than 225,000 had been gathered. (Associated Press)


COMPANY NEWS
CHOCK FULL O'NUTS CORP., New York, adopted an odd-lot purchase program under which stockholders owning fewer than a hundred shares on May 8 could sell all their shares on the open market, with the company paying brokerage fees and related expenses.
COCA-COLA CO., Atlanta, signed an agreement with Fraser &amp; Neave Ltd., for a new joint-venture soft drink company to operate initially in Singapore and Brunei, and later in Malaysia.


Scientific-Atlanta reports earnings for Qtr to March 27


EnviroSource Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Q&amp;A
Steamy Summers
Q.
I understand that Consolidated Edison pipes steam to warm New York City buildings in winter, but why is it done in summer?
A.
Steam can also be used for air-conditioning, said Roger Sarno, director of development and support programs for the Consolidated Edison Company.


Salton/Maxim Housewares Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Report, Delayed Months, Says Lowest Income Group Grew
The Government released a report today showing that the percentage of full-time workers who earn less than $12,195 annually grew sharply in the last decade, despite the economic expansion that brought increased prosperity to the affluent.
The report, compiled by the Census Bureau, was quietly made public after bureau officials fought for more than five months over how much attention to draw to the findings.
Dated March 1992, the report was officially released today only because Government printers had begun last week to distribute it through the mails.


FOOD COMPANY SELECTS SITES FOR DISTRIBUTION CENTERS
The Nestle Distribution Company, a division of Nestle USA, said it would upgrade its United States distribution operations and had selected sites in Atlanta, Fort Worth and DeKalb, Ill., for the first three of eight new distribution centers.
The centers, which will serve 23 states, will cost $75 million, according to Nestle USA, the American arm of the packaged food, coffee and chocolate company Nestle S.A. of Vevey, Switzerland.
The distribution centers will handle the majority of the more than 1,000 food and beverage items sold by Nestle USA.


Fourth Graders Socko in Bill's Dane King Weeper
THE Scene: A suburban bedroom on a dark and stormy night.
Evan London, an elementary-school teacher, sleeps.
Above the bed a ghost appears.
He begins to tell the story of a Danish king betrayed by his brother and poisoned.
The brother seizes the throne.
He marries the queen.
The dead king's son returns.
He goes insane.
Spies multiply.
Treachery runs amok.
The queen dies.
Stabbings abound.
Blood flies everywhere.
Then the ghost gets to the scary part.
He points at Mr.
London.
"You," the floating presence proclaims with painful slowness, "you have been chosen to present a Shakespearean drama using 22 10-year-olds."


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Edberg Defeats Stich  Stefan Edberg, playing his first clay-court tournament of the year, rallied from a set down and overcame two rain delays to beat the Wimbledon champion, Michael Stich, for the German Open title in Hamburg yesterday.
The top-seeded Swede outlasted Stich, 5-7, 6-4, 6-1, and took home $166,600 for the 34th title of his career.
It was his first tournament victory since the Tokyo indoor in October.
Stich, seeded third, was trying to become the first German to win the tournament since Wilhelm Bungert in 1964.
The turning point of the match came at 4-4 in the second set, when one of Edberg's shots was ruled good, although Stich complained it had been wide.
A ruling in his favor would have given Stich a break point.
But the ruling stood, Edberg held and Stich went on to drop his own serve and give Edberg the second set. (AP) Ivanisevic Eliminated in Rome: After being away from tennis for seven weeks because of stress-related problems, Goran Ivanisevic became the first upset victim in the Italian Open at Rome.
Ivanisevic, the big-serving No. 7 seeded player from Croatia, seemed to play scared and was eliminated by Argentina's Christian Miniussi, 7-5, 6-3.
Miniussi, ranked 64th in the world, put Ivanisevic away by simply playing steady tennis and keeping the ball in play.
Following him out of the tournament was sixth-seeded Guy Forget of France, who was beaten by Spain's Javier Sanchez, 7-5, 4-6, 6-4.
Meanwhile, Michael Chang played patiently and advanced in the $1.4 million clay-court event.
Chang, seeded fifth, was taken to three sets by Argentine qualifier Gabriel Markus, but prevailed, 6-3, 2-6, 6-3. (AP) Kohde-Kilsch Beaten at Home: Fighting cool, rainy weather, Larisa Savchenko-Neiland of Lithuania beat Germany's Claudia Kohde-Kilsch, 6-2, 7-5, in the first round of the $550,000 Lufthansa Cup tournament in Berlin.
In another match, Mercedes Paz beat fellow-Argentinian Cristina Tessi, 6-1, 6-0.(AP)


National Convenience Stores reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Banks Aim To Block Fee Rise
On the eve of a pivotal regulatory vote for the banking industry, bankers and Bush Administration officials said today that they were close to victory in their drive to block any increase in the premiums banks pay to the deposit insurance fund.
Bank representatives who have met with the five members of the board of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation in anticipation of Tuesday's decision said today that they had at least two votes to put off a premium increase and thought that they would be able to convince a swing vote.


Peerless Tube Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Healthvest reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Transco Energy Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


INSIDE
Bush Offers Health Plans
President Bush announced programs for child immunizations and prenatal care, but some health experts called them late and inadequate.
Page A18.
AIDS Rule Overturned
A Federal judge in New York overturned a rule barring Government money for AIDS education material deemed "offensive." Page B3.
Downturn With a Difference
As growth slows in Japan, the nation's jobless rate might not rise much, but businesses are cutting back in other ways.
Page D1.
Close Vote in Philippines
Early results from the election to find a successor for President Corazon C. Aquino suggested that the race was among three contenders.
Page A3.


Life on the Racer's Edge: Survival an End in Itself
In 1989, when the Tour Du Pont bicycle race started as the Tour de Trump, its first hero was Thomas Craven.
When he won the prologue time trial in Albany, N.Y., photographers descended on the big three: Donald Trump, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and Craven, the obscure rider.
From then on, Craven's dreams have been bumped, detoured, stomped on and rerouted.
Three years after that day of victory, he is riding in the Tour Du Pont, not as a star in the mold of Greg LeMond of the United States or Gianni Bugno of Italy but as a journeyman struggling to make a living.


Saab-Scania Profit Soars STOCKHOLM, May 12
Saab-Scania A.B., the Swedish vehicle and aircraft maker, reported today that profit more than doubled in the first quarter, helped by lower losses at its Saab Automobile unit, which it owns with the General Motors Corporation.
Saab-Scania, wholly owned by the Wallenberg-controlled investment firm Investor A.B., said profit after financial items rose to $103 million, from $46 million a year earlier.


Enzyme Structure Is Found For H.I.V.
AN international team of researchers has determined the three-dimensional structure of reverse transcriptase, the enzyme that allows the replication of the virus that causes AIDS.
The researchers said they hoped the finding would eventually lead to the development of new drugs to fight the disease.
The finding, by a team of researchers from Rutgers University in New Jersey, the National Cancer Institute and Tel Aviv University, is reported in the current issue of Nature.


Case of the Adaptable Spy: Agent for Soviets, and Russia, Too
In a 27-year career as a journalist for a leading Belgian newspaper, Guido Kindt developed a reputation as an aerospace expert.
So it did not surprise his colleagues when he recently developed a close friendship with Belgium's first astronaut, who was aboard the Atlantis shuttle that completed a 10-day flight on April 2.
So close was the friendship with the astronaut, a physicist named Dirk Frimout, that Mr.
Kindt was the only Belgian journalist invited to a party held for the Atlantis crew in Houston on April 5.
Then, on April 7, Mr.
Kindt returned from the United States to Brussels, and three days later he was arrested on charges of spying for the former Soviet Union and for Russia.


Corrections
An article on Saturday about an investigation into whether there was a plot by Ronald Reagan's campaign to delay the release of American hostages from Iran referred incorrectly in some copies to the dates that the Federal Bureau of Investigation conducted electronic surveillance of Cyrus Hashemi, an Iranian arms dealer.
The surveillance took place between October 1980 and February 1981.


WesternBank reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Fairchild Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 29


Paulin (H.) &amp; Co. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Bridge
The American Contract Bridge League has long set its face against tournament play for cash prizes, a European tradition.
But there are now signs of flexibility in this area.
On May 22 the Greater New York Bridge Association will stage a "Green Point Pairs" at the New York Hilton.
The entry fee will be high, $200 per partnership, but so will the possible rewards: The prize fund, based on the size of the entry, is likely to exceed $10,000.
For full information, call Bob Blanchard at (201) 589-3006.
This is a two-session open match-point event, with qualifying and final, and simultaneous play of the boards using screens.
The only comparable event in New York City, and perhaps anywhere in the country, is the Cavendish Invitational Charity Pairs, which, however, is scored by imps, involves larger sums of money and is not open to all comers.


Forest Oil Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-11  BOSNIA COMES UNDONE
In Bosnian cities, towns and villages too dangerous for most outsiders to visit, international relief agencies say hundreds of people have been killed and nearly 600,000 left homeless.
A European tragedy with few precedents since World War II is unfolding, and international efforts seem unable to stop it.
A1  EUROPEANS ISOLATING BELGRADE
European Community governments decided to recall their envoys from Belgrade.
The foreign ministers also backed American efforts to suspend Serbia and Montenegro from the European security conference.
A10  3 LEAD FOR PHILIPPINE PRESIDENCY
Early election results from the Philippines suggested that the presidential race had narrowed to three candidates -- former Defense Minister Fidel V. Ramos; Miriam Defensor Santiago, a former judge, and Eduardo Conjuangco, a cousin of President Aquino and a close ally of the late President Marcos.
A3  THAI PROTEST SUSPENDED
A paralyzing Thai protest was suspended after opposition leaders agreed to back an amendment negotiated with the Government requiring a prime minister to be an elected member of Parliament.
A3  A PROMISE IN TAJIKISTAN
Prodded by the killing of demonstrators, the Tajik President agreed to a coalition government with at least eight important ministries led by the opposition.
A5  ROCKET-TECHNOLOGY SANCTIONS
The U.S. banned exports to a Russian arms agency and to the Indian Space Research Organization for two years because of their agreement to transfer rocket technology.
A8
Soviet spy who labored on: astronaut's friend unmasked.
A11  MIDEAST TALKS QUICKLY BOG DOWN
The Mideast peace talks resumed, with sessions in Washington and Brussels on regional arms control and economic development.
Both sessions were marred by empty chairs and bitterness.
A6  RABIN STAKES OUT DIFFERENCES
Yitzhak Rabin of Israel's opposition Labor Party said money being spent on settlements in the occupied territories should instead be used to employ and  Muizenberg Journal: Integrating schools in South Africa.
A4
British woman freed in '74 Irish-related bombing case.
A6  National A12-21  A DIPLOMA BUT POOR PROSPECTS
New college graduates are facing one of the toughest job markets in decades, with studies indicating that nearly one-third of the nation's entry-level jobs for new graduates have evaporated during the recession.
A1  GANG RIVALRY FADES AFTER RIOTS
An astonishing sight has risen from the ashes of Los Angeles: Crips and Bloods talking and playing like brothers.
A1  INQUIRY INTO L.A.P.D.
BEGINS
William Webster, the former director of both the Federal Bureau of Investigation and Central Intelligence, was appointed to head the official investigation into the Los Angeles Police Department's response to the riots.
A20  BIPARTISAN AID FOR CITIES
Democratic Congressional leaders pledged to work with the Bush Administration on an idea they have long dismissed: creating enterprise zones in the inner cities.
A20
Atlanta Journal: The damage, real and perceived, downtown.  A12
A study said cities gave more than they got from the Pentagon.
A20  PEROT VS.
BUSH, THE EARLY DAYS
The tension between Ross Perot and President Bush stems in part from a bruising private confrontation five years ago over Mr.
Perot's effort to take command of the Government's investigation of American servicemen missing in Southeast Asia.
A1  BUSH MOVES ON CHILDREN'S HEALTH
President Bush announced that the Government would begin a campaign to immunize children against preventable diseases by the age of 2.
Public health experts called the proposal belated and inadequate.
A18  VERMONT'S HEALTH CARE PLAN
The Governor of Vermont signed a law that is intended to give Vermont universal health care by 1995.
The Governor, who is also a doctor, won support from insurers, medical associations and officials.
A12  A DEAL FOR POLLUTION RIGHTS
The Tennessee Valley Authority and Wisconsin Power and Light, two utilities hundreds of miles apart, plan to announce an agreement allowing the T.V.A. to buy from Wisconsin Power the right to emit sulfur dioxide, a chemical that causes acid rain.
A1  SHOWDOWN OVER ANCIENT FORESTS
The Bush Administration and Congressional Democrats are heading for a showdown over jobs and Pacific Northwest forests that could test the influence of a growing anti-environmental backlash.
A14  LOW-INCOME GROUP SWELLS
A Government report showed that the percentage of full-time workers who earn less than $12,195 annually grew sharply in the last decade.
A15
A journalist who reported on a secret Klan rally has been killed.  A17
Disturbances erupt in a largely Hispanic Washington district.
A12  Metropolitan Digest, B1 LIFE-SUPPORT DILEMMA
New York's law on the removal of life support is both the strictest and the most nebulous in the United States: It requires "clear and convincing evidence" of what a patient would have wanted, but leaves it to each hospital to determine exactly what that is.
A1.
Business Digest, D1  Science Times C1-9  SATELLITE ELUDES GRASP
Spacewalking astronauts were stymied in their renewed efforts to snag a wayward communications satellite, but they considered trying again.
A1  Biologists say tiny magnets in brain may have role in navigation.
C1  Before Big Bang: what do COBE's findings mean for theories?
C1  Jury psychology plumbed by both sides in criminal cases.
C1  Arts/Entertainment C13-18  Trouble in Vienna's arts.
C13  McCarty-Cooper collection auctioned at Christie's.
C18  Fashion Page B20  Obituaries B8  Sports B9-15  Baseball: Mets home streak snapped.
B11  Basketball: Riley and Jackson in verbal war.
B9  Hockey: Penguins take 3-2 lead over Rangers.
B12  Editorials/Op-Ed A22-23  Editorials A22  The AIDS "plot" on blacks.
Mr.
Bush and the sewer.
David C. Anderson; Crime.
Letters A22  Russell Baker: Ruled by tools.
A23  A. M. Rosenthal: Ending the pain.
A23  Christoph Bertram: Go easy on worried Germany.
A23  Andrei Voznesensky: Angelic black holes.
A23  George J. Benston: Redlining -- or color-blindness?
A23


Central Vermont Public Service Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Classical Music In Review
Guarneri String Quartet  Metropolitan Museum of Art
The Guarneri seemed like two different quartets on Saturday evening, and not only because the first violinist, Arnold Steinhardt, and the second, John Dalley, swapped seats for one work. (Michael Tree was the violist, David Soyer the cellist.) In the first half of the program, a few errant passages apart, the group played with taut ensemble, secure intonation and buoyant rhythm, showing a commitment and vitality this listener has not heard from it in years.
But in the second half, in Tchaikovsky's Quartet in D (Op. 11), the Guarneri reverted to recent form, with slurred phrases, slithery intonation, lifeless pizzicatos and a general lack of focus.
Perhaps the relative unfamiliarity of the other offerings induced greater concentration.
In any case, with Mr.
Dalley in the lead, the players gave an excellent account of the tuneful A-minor Quartet by Juan Crisostomo Arriaga (1806-26).
And with Mr.
Steinhardt back in place, they treated Ned Rorem's Quartet No. 3 with an appropriate proprietary air; the work was written for them in 1990.


Universal Health Care Plan Is Goal of Law in Vermont
Gov.
Howard Dean, the only Governor who is a doctor, signed a law here today that sets in motion a plan to give Vermont universal health care by 1995.
The law is one of the more ambitious in a series of recent efforts by states to tackle the problems of runaway medical costs and the increasing numbers of uninsured.
Oregon, Minnesota and Florida have also passed comprehensive health insurance plans, as states have begun to act in the absence of Federal initiatives.


Goldriver L.P. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Brenda Mines reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


NewMil Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Today's Primaries


WPP Group Seeking Debt-Equity Swap
WPP Group P.L.C. presented a proposal to its banks last week to reduce the company's burdensome debt by about a third.


Turner Broadcasting System reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


By Design; Tops With Oomph
If you are searching for a summer jacket, you will probably have to settle for a blazer.
It's what you put underneath it that supplies the oomph.
Head for the lingerie or bodysuit department of most stores to find tops that are saucy but still enough unlike lingerie to peek out from under a tailored jacket.


Fashionable Fertilizer Solves a Disposal Problem for Zoos
TO zoo visitors, magnificent beasts like rhinos and elephants symbolize the romance and danger of the wilds.
But to zoo caretakers, these oversized animals can seem less like glorious emblems than giant manure machines.
Until recently, the huge piles of animal waste generated each day at the nation's zoos were relegated with pinched noses to piles that ended up in city landfills.
But in line with the rising tide of environmentalism, zoo keepers and entrepreneurs are turning this once troublesome waste into compost for eager buyers.


Baldwin Technology reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


UTILITY IS SELLING RIGHT TO POLLUTE
Two utilities hundreds of miles apart will announce today that they have signed a contract that calls for one to buy from the other the right to emit a chemical that causes acid rain, freeing the dirtier one from having to clean up its own plants as stringently.
It is the first such deal to be publicly disclosed, say those involved and other experts, and could break the ice for dozens of similar deals.


Sports of The Times; The Garden Still Rocks In Mid-May
IT didn't work out for Michael Jordan last weekend, but it did work out last night for that other major North American commercial star, Jaromir Jagr.
Amid all the heavy checking this spring by both tenants of Madison Square Garden, sheer athleticism broke loose in a hipper-dipper move by the willowy Czechoslovak, all of 20 years old.


Don't Tie Foreign Students to Black Ph.D. Drop; Recruitment Failures
To the Editor:
There is a shortage of black Ph.D.'s being trained in this country (front page, April 21), but not because of a racist conspiracy, as the statements you quote from Frank L. Morris Sr., dean at Morgan State University, would have us believe.
For the last seven years, I have run a graduate program in physiology at the University of Maryland at Baltimore, Morgan State's neighboring institution.
My colleagues and I have scoured the region for qualified minority applicants to our program.
We have prepared mass mailings, attended conferences, instituted summer training programs and had open houses for minority college students and their advisers from the Baltimore-Washington area.


International Holding Capital reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Versa Technologies reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Union Energy reports earnings for Year to March 31


MEM Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Tajik Leader Agrees to Coalition With Opponents
Prodded into action by the killing on Sunday of at least nine demonstrators, President Rakhman Nabiyev of Tajikistan agreed today to the formation of a coalition government that gives the opposition eight key ministries.
Mr.
Nabiyev, an old-style Communist whose refusal to sign an accord Sunday led to the bloodshed, is supposed to remain President at least until Dec. 6, when new elections are scheduled.
But Mr.
Nabiyev remains unpopular, and the new Defense Minister said the President was "unfit to serve."


Helen of Troy reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29


ABS Industries reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Advanced Polymer Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Bases-Loaded Walk in 10th Wins for Giants
Giants 8, Phillies 7
PHILADELPHIA, May 11 (AP) -- Reliever Mitch Williams walked Will Clark with the bases loaded in the 10th inning as San Francisco took an 8-7 victory over the Philadelphia Phillies tonight.
Jose Uribe walked to start the inning and raced to third when Williams threw wild for an error on Jim McNamara's bunt.
After Cory Synder fouled out to first, Darren Lewis walked to load the bases.
Willie McGee struck out, but Williams walked Clark on a 3-2 pitch.


Fumes and Falling Rocks Slow Search for Miners


Jurors Hear Evidence And Turn It Into Stories
DESPITE the furor over the verdict in the Rodney G. King beating case, scientists who study juries say the system is by and large sound.
Many also believe that it is susceptible to manipulation and bias, and could be improved in various specific ways suggested by their research findings.
If there is any lesson to be learned from the research findings, it is that juries are susceptible to influence at virtually every point, from the moment members are selected to final deliberation.


Feud at Indianapolis
A dispute flared yesterday between EDDIE CHEEVER and MARIO ANDRETTI, who will start side by side but hardly eye to eye on the front row of the May 24 Indianapolis 500.
Cheever said Andretti is trying to discredit him as a driver and is using "every possible tool to bend the truth" about an incident last month at Long Beach, Calif.
Andretti said Cheever "should be watched" to prevent future incidents.


MECA Software Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


HOME DEPOT INTENDS TO EXPAND BEYOND THE U.S.
Home Depot Inc., the rapidly growing chain of home-improvement warehouse stores, intends to open retail outlets outside the United States within five to seven years.
The company's president, Arthur Blank, said the company expected to decide within 18 months which foreign countries would be targets for new stores.


CHRONICLE
ROBERT LEE MORRIS, thea jewelry designer who has three shops in New York, is fighting mad about a pair of earrings he designed, and has filed suit against the Limited, charging that one of its divisions, Compagnie Internationale Express, has copied it.
"One of my people went into a Limited store and bought a pair," he said.
"I said, 'Let's see how many other stores in the city have it.' We bought five pairs from five different locations. I spend a great deal of time and effort going to Washington with all my new designs to make sure that anything original and copyrightable is protected by Federal law." His earrings sell for $220 a pair; he said the pair he calls a knockoff sells for $14.


In Bosnia, Majority Turns Into Minority
To the Editor:
Although "The Butcher of the Balkans" (editorial, April 15) is correct to criticize Slobodan Milosevic, the Serbian leader's departure would not solve the crisis in Bosnia.
Recognition of Bosnia and Herzegovina by the European Community and the United States ruined any prospect of peaceful settlement.
It undermined the fragile consensus reached among Bosnia's three ethnic groups.
Recognition stiffened the resolve of the ethnic groups not to be ruled by others.
In newly independent Bosnia and Croatia, more than two million Serbs have overnight become a minority.
Oddly, the principle of self-determination, upheld by the West for Croats, Slovenes and Muslims, seems not to apply to Serbs.
The Serbs fear a Croat or Muslim-dominated state even more than Croats and Muslims fear a Serb-dominated Yugoslavia.


Wal-Mart's And May's Profits Up
Wal-Mart Stores Inc. produced another set of stunning numbers yesterday -- profits up 26.1 percent -- as the major retailers started reporting first-quarter earnings.
Sales were up across the board, reflecting improved consumer spending, and earnings benefited from strict cost controls imposed during the recession.
The May Department Stores Company said profits rose 6.6 percent.
May, like many retailers, had a weak first quarter last year, when the Persian Gulf war cut into consumer spending.
Nordstrom Inc.'s earnings fell 16 percent from the extremely strong level of last year.


Review/Dance; A Flamenco-Butoh Staging of Genet
There cannot have been many flamenco-Butoh stagings of the plays of Jean Genet.
But Shigeko Suga Aguirre, a member of La Mama's Great Jones Repertory Company, proved that it can be done in a production of "Le Balcon" that was presented on Sunday night at La Mama's First Floor Theater (74A East 4th Street).
"Le Balcon" will be performed again Thursday through Sunday nights at La Mama, with a cameo appearance by Lowell Smith of Dance Theater of Harlem.
Flamenco dance and music are skillfully woven into a text adapted from the play and spoken by two of the performers.
Every bit of the stage space is used imaginatively.
And the actors are persuasive, particularly La Constancia as the lusty brothel keeper and the most impressive of the flamenco dancers.
But there at first seems to be more Brecht than Butoh in this provocative, mostly compelling adaptation, until Maria Alba enters the stage.


Sun Television &amp; Appliances reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29


GenCare Health Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Transit Head Hears (Plenty) From Straphangers
Alan F. Kiepper, the president of the New York City Transit Authority, decided recently that he wanted to hear firsthand from the city's straphangers.
So yesterday he planted himself for 90 minutes on the mezzanine of the Union Square subway station and took questions from riders.
Of course, he got an earful.
People complained about the homeless on the subway, sprawling over several seats on the trains or panhandling aggressively.
They complained about broken turnstiles, closed restrooms, stations that are too hot in the summer, trains that emit piercing shrieks when rounding curves and the lack of express service from Bay Ridge.


Market Place; Dividing the Parts Of Pacific Telesis
AN industry with more than $100 billion in annual revenue and more than $200 billion in assets -- a greater storehouse of riches than many European countries -- should not have any problems in attracting investors.
But in a reflection of the ferment in telecommunications, Pacific Telesis is studying whether to split its cellular telephone operations from its traditional phone business because many investors may be passing it by as yet another boring utility stock.
Not only Pacific Telesis shareholders and securities analysts but also the rest of the industry wonder whether the study could lead to the unlocking of billions of dollars in new value for Pactel and for the other six regional Bell companies with similar structures.


Lintas Gets Work From GM Hughes
The Hughes Communications division of the GM Hughes Electronics Corporation said yesterday that it had named Lintas Campbell-Ewald in Los Angeles as its national agency to handle the introduction of DirecTV, a proposed direct-to-home, pay-per-view satellite entertainment distribution system.


Death of Journalist Who Assailed Klan Is Mystery
Warren Duliere was enraged when the Ku Klux Klan came to town last year and set about wooing new members.
So he slipped into a Klan rally with a hidden camera and a tape recorder, then published the pictures and the venomous speeches in his newspaper.
It was not the first time the 60-year-old Mr.
Duliere, owner and sole reporter of the monthly West Virginia Advocate, had plunged into a controversial story.
The death threats in the months that followed a series of articles on the Klan were not new either.


Frontier Insurance Group reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Despite New Data, Mysteries Of Creation Persist
THEORISTS digesting a NASA satellite's intriguing measurements of the faint ripples that emerged from the genesis of the universe say that far from resolving the major mysteries of creation, the discovery emphasizes a need for still deeper probing.
Indeed the measurements by the Cosmic Background Explorer satellite seem, if anything, to have heightened disagreements among some theorists as to how the universe acquired the structure it exhibits today.


Delta Natural Gas reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Jagr's Penalty Shot Rare as Snow in Spring
Penalty shots are rare in hockey, especially during the spring madness of the Stanley Cup playoffs.
There have been several playoff years that passed without such a shot, but there was one called last night at Madison Square Garden, and it helped tip the National Hockey League Patrick Division finals Pittsburgh's way.
It was the first penalty shot in 72 playoff games this season and it was awarded to Jaromir Jagr, the 20-year-old, Czechoslovakia-born Penguins wing who has emerged as one of the league's stars in his second season.


Unicorp American Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Study Says Big Cities Don't Get Fair Share of Military Spending
A study made public today says most of the nation's major cities are paying out far more in taxes for the Pentagon than they receive in military spending, contributing to their severe financial problems.
The Boston Redevelopment Authority study, done by Employment Research Associates, an economic consulting firm based in Lansing, Mich., found that in 1990, New York City experienced a net loss of $8.38 billion to the Pentagon, Los Angeles a loss of $3.27 billion, and Chicago a loss of $3.1 billion.
In each of those cities, according to the study, the loss to military spending came to $3,000 or more per family.


Ex-C.I.A. Chief to Head Police Inquiry
The official inquiry into the Los Angeles Police Department's response to the recent civil disorders here began today with the appointment of William H. Webster, the former director of both the Federal Bureau of Investigation and Central Intelligence, to head the investigation.
The five-member Los Angeles Board of Police Commissioners, which oversees the department, charged Mr.
Webster, a former Federal judge, with examining both police preparation before the outbreak of violence on April 29 and the subsequent response.
The board also appointed as his chief deputy Hubert H. Williams, the former chief of police in Newark and now president of the Police Foundation in Washington.


American Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Padres Get a Quick Ride on Young's Slider
As the fifth starter, Anthony Young wasn't the first concern for the Mets at the outset of 1992.
But a month into the season and more than four weeks since his sole triumph as a starter, Young remains the unknown link in a chain of commanding pitching.
Young, once more not bad and yet again not good enough to win, was damaged early and at critical junctures last night as the Mets absorbed a 4-2 loss to the San Diego Padres at Shea Stadium.
The defeat stopped a club-tying 11-game winning streak at home.


New York Is Urged to Outlaw Surrogate Parenting for Pay
State health officials charged today that New York had become "the surrogate-parenting capital of the nation" because it had not joined other states in outlawing commercial baby-brokering.
The state's executive deputy health commissioner, Lorna H. McBarnette, estimated that 40 percent of all commercial surrogate-parenting arrangements in the country are now made in New York.


What Makes 'Samson' Run Amok? He's Manic in Jerusalem
The sturdy young Canadian thought he was Samson, and went on to prove it by smashing through a wall to escape the other week from Kfar Shaul, the Government psychiatric hospital on Jerusalem's western reaches.
"He was our first Samson," Dr.
Yair Bar-El, the hospital director, said as an aside before continuing to tell how the young man had got as far as the nearest bus stop when a nurse caught up with him.


Minerex Resources reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Amre Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 29


New York's Convention-Timed Plan on Homeless Is Makeshift
To the Editor:
The pending expansion of a New York City street outreach program to take in the homeless occupants of Penn Station should not go without comment.
A host of official apologists have rebutted the suggestion by Mary Brosnahan, director of the Coalition for the Homeless, that the timing and locus of the new initiative may have much to do with the Democratic National Convention, which is to be held in the adjacent Madison Square Garden in July.
Nonsense, the apologists in effect reply; this is just extraordinary business as usual.
There are two problems here.
The first, more trivial of the two, is the apparent ease with which a chorus of public figures feels free to deny the obvious.
Any ordinary citizen knows what kind of image-scrubbing goes into the preparations a host city makes for a national event of such proportions.
Ask those living on the street: they certainly expect such an effort to take place.
It did 12 years ago, without much fanfare, and eventuated in the founding act of the Coalition for the Homeless, providing alternative refuge in the courtyard of nearby St.
Francis of Assisi church.
But at that time city officials felt no compunction about "weeding the Garden," as one commentator called it, alluding to the convention site.
This time, at least on paper, things promise to be different.


Laser Repair of Eyes Shows Promise
The outlook is brightening for developers of an experimental technique that uses computer-guided lasers to treat nearsightedness.
Nearly all of the first few hundred nearsighted volunteers to undergo the surgical procedure have found their vision significantly improved -- good enough to drive a car legally in most states without wearing glasses or contact lenses.


Florio Signs Bill To Strengthen Death Penalty
Gov.
Jim Florio signed into law today a bill that strengthens the state's death penalty by rewriting a vague passage that critics had contended would have allowed endless appeals and delays in capital cases.
The new law will not speed up the pace of executions in New Jersey, which last executed an inmate in 1963, state officials said.
But its backers said the legislation was the first step in closing loopholes and eliminating vagueness in the 10-year-old capital punishment law.
The Legislature is also considering two other bills that would broaden the death penalty or remove obstacles to applying it.


Elbit Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


COMPANY NEWS: The Lion Stalks the Hunter; Will Combining 2 Flops Be a Hit?
The MGM film studio, which has spent the last few years nearly paralyzed by financial problems, has come up with a novel solution to its woes: acquire another ailing movie company.
The MGM-Pathe Communications Corporation, as the company is formally known, said today that it had submitted an offer to the Orion Pictures Corporation to distribute 10 films completed by Orion but not released, and possibly to acquire its film library.
The unreleased films and the library are the primary assets of Orion, which has stopped making movies and has lost most of its top executives.


Pollution Blights Investment, Too, in East Europe
Decades of unbridled pollution under Communist Governments are beginning to haunt their successors as more and more foreigners find that contamination of the environment is a deterrent to investment in Eastern Europe.
In some regions pollution has rendered water and soil unusable by Western standards.
Elsewhere, government officials say they have had to reduce the asking prices for businesses they wish to sell to allow for the cost of cleaning up.
And bankers, business executives and other experts say a major obstacle to investment is the absence of any firm rules defining responsibilities for past ecological damage.


Review/Film; Heroism and Humor As Paraplegics Learn
In 1984 Neal Jimenez, the screenwriter ("The River's Edge," "Something for the Boys"), was left with his legs permanently paralyzed after breaking his neck on a camping trip.
Now he has written and co-directed, with Michael Steinberg, "The Waterdance," a good, tightly constructed film about the kind of intense physical and psychological therapy that he himself went through during long months at a rehabilitation center.
It's easy to understand why "The Waterdance" was named the audience's favorite film at the Sundance Film Festival in January.
Though small in scale, it is big in feelings expressed with genuine passion and a lot of gutsy humor.
Also, because of the kind of movie it is, there's never much doubt that these paraplegics will somehow come through.
"The Waterdance," set mostly in a hospital ward, is occasionally harrowing, but it doesn't mean to expose anything except the human spirit's capacity to triumph over adversity.


CLINTON IS VICTOR IN TWO PRIMARIES
Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas edged closer yesterday to the Democratic Presidential nomination, decisively defeating former Gov.
Edmund G. Brown Jr. of California in two more primaries: West Virginia and Nebraska.
With more than three-fourths of the precincts counted in the West Virginia primary late last night, Mr.
Clinton had 74 percent of the vote to 12 percent for Mr.
Brown.
In Nebraska, with more than 80 percent of the precincts counted, he led by 47 to 23 percent.


Books of The Times; Experimental Novel of Hungary's Trek to Freedom
A Feast in the Garden  By George Konrad  Translated by Imre Goldstein. 394 pages.
A Helen and Kurt Wolff Book/Harcourt Brace Jovanovich. $23.95.
In "A Feast in the Garden," an experimental novel that is alternately scintillating and exasperating, George Konrad continues to describe Central Europe emerging from the ashes of war and tyranny.
Once again the distinguished Hungarian writer filters the story through his own personality, as he did so pointedly in his first novel, "The Case Worker." But his demanding new novel is written in a nonlinear style that forces the reader to indulge the author's throat-clearing and backing and filling while waiting and hoping for something to happen between the train stops of his narrative.


Sports of The Times; Karateball Just Isn't Basketball
JUDGING by the punishing playoff between the Knicks and the Bulls that now returns to Madison Square Garden with Michael Jordan and his troubadours leading, 3-2, in the four-of-seven-game series, the National Basketball Association should install another official at the scorer's table: a knockdown timekeeper.
When the Detroit Pistons reigned as the "bad boys" of pro basketball with their sledgehammer style, most purists were offended.
But now that the Knicks have adopted that sledgehammer style after having outslugged the Pistons in the opening round, most Knick loyalists suddenly consider it just "playing physical" or "having intensity."


Retailers' Results Show Some Recovery
The J. C. Penney Company yesterday reported a big jump in its profits for the first quarter, leading a group of retailers who over all posted a mixed bag of earnings from February through April.
But even the results of the industry's weaker performers bore witness to the thaw in consumer spending.
Penney put last year's abysmal retailing trends solidly behind it with a 70 percent surge in profits, while Venture Stores Inc., a discounter, lifted its net income by 48.6 percent.


Record School Construction
A record $10.7 billion was spent on public school construction and renovation last year in a building boom that reflects continued efforts by school districts in the United States to replace or restore aging school buildings.
The 1991 total, the seventh year in which school construction spending was higher than the year before, represented a 10.7 percent increase over the $9.7 billion spent in 1990, according to a soon-to-be released annual construction survey of the nation's school districts by American School and University magazine.


Insituform Group Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Competitive Auction Yields $30 Million
An enthusiastic group of art dealers and collectors gathered at Christie's last night, cheering one another on at a sale of Impressionist and modern paintings, drawings and sculpture.
The auction did far better than any of the experts had predicted.
Of the 51 works offered for sale, only nine went unsold.
Sales for the evening totaled $30 million, not far below Christie's pre-sale estimate of $34.1 million to $44.8 million.


TJX Companies reports earnings for Qtr to April 25


The Pop Life
Springsteen and Sales
When Bruce Springsteen's appearance last weekend on "Saturday Night Live" was announced on April 27, people assumed that the moderate response to his two new albums, "Human Touch" and "Lucky Town" (both Columbia) had forced him into it.
Mr.
Springsteen, known for being aloof when it comes to the media, had never done television.
To some people his acceptance of the decades-old open offer from "Saturday Night Live" reduced him to the status of mere mortal.
Whatever the reasons for his appearance, the performance of three songs on the show -- estimated by NBC to have been watched by more than 25 million viewers -- appears to have paid off.
Music stores across the country have already noticed an increase in sales.


Barnard Chief Urges Women To Be Leaders
Declaring that the nation is suffering a crisis of confidence, Ellen V. Futter, the president of Barnard College, told the graduating class yesterday that part of the solution was to encourage women to become leaders in politics, business, the professions, the arts and in communities.
"The moment for women in leadership is now," Ms.
Futter said, adding that she was not calling for a rejection of male leadership but rather for women's full partnership.
"There is a strong, caring, hurting voice in this country that is not being fully heard.


Transalta Utilities Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Health Risk Management reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.25-6.5
6.25-6.5
8.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.68
3.88
5.85
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.60
3.62
5.48
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.72
3.72
5.62
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.01
7.03
7.98
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.86
7.88
8.33
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.78
8.80
9.33
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.64
6.66
7.24
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Symbolics Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 29


New Campaign By Northwest
Amid the airline advertising dogfight over low fares, Northwest Airlines is introducing a campaign unusual in its effort to burnish the corporate image by using celebrities known for high-flying achievements.
Television commercials and newspaper advertisements carry a theme, "Some people just know how to fly," which replaces "The world is going our way." The campaign is the first for Northwest by J. Walter Thompson New York since it became one of the airline's agencies last year.


New Rochelle: A Portrait in Black and White; A City Is Forced to Square an Image of Racial Tolerance With a Night of Lawlessness
Whatever else New Rochelle has done in the postwar decades, its racial integration has been considered a success.
In the manicured neighborhoods off the main thoroughfare, North Avenue, many whites and blacks live side by side in a city that boasts one of the highest household incomes in Westchester County.
But events of the night of May 1 fractured the city's picture of itself.
For several hours, dozens of black teen-agers and adults roamed the downtown streets, smashing windows and looting, after the verdict in the Rodney G. King beating.


CHRONICLE
STEPHEN SONDHEIM, the Tony Award-winning lyricist and composer, has turned down the 1992 National Medal of Arts award administered by the National Endowment for the Arts.
He was chosen to receive the award by President Bush.
In a letter he sent on Friday to Susan M. Houston, special assistant to the chairman of the endowment, Mr.
Sondheim said that to accept an award from the endowment would "be an act of the utmost hypocrisy."


RPS Realty Trust reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


No Customers, but Cray Computer Is Not Ready to Quit
Seymour Cray, the supercomputer pioneer, assured his company's shareholders yesterday that it was not time to throw in the towel yet, although Cray Computer's unfinished supercomputer was still plagued with a number of bugs.
In December the Cray Computer Corporation, which is building a high-speed, high-risk supercomputer based on an unproved but ultrafast semiconductor material, lost its one publicly announced customer when the Lawrence Livermore National Laboratories said that it was switching its order to Cray Research -- the company Mr.
Cray left in 1989 to found Cray Computer.


Demanding Access in Desperate Ways; If Troops, Then Guns
To the Editor:
A sadly unpublicized aspect of the riots in Los Angeles was the extensive use of illegal firearms.
Of the 49 people who have died to date, most were killed by gunfire.


A Writer's View From the Edge Of the Playground
It is just before 1 P.M., and Michael Tolkin is sitting in The Ivy with all the Hollywood players.
David Geffen, in a T-shirt, is huddled in whispered conversation with a hefty man in an expensive suit.
The other tables at the restaurant on North Robertson Boulevard -- one of the most popular hangouts for Hollywood executives -- are filled with the tanned, the blond and the wealthy.
A laughing blonde woman in a tight gray sweatsuit enters and table-hops.
She resembles one of those only-in-Hollywood early-morning television exercise instructors.
Mr.
Tolkin stares at the woman with some confusion.


Portage Industries reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Parcells Is Named TV Game Analyst
Eleven months after being named a studio analyst for NBC's "N.F.L. Live" pre-game show, Bill Parcells yesterday became a game analyst and will team up on a weekly basis with the veteran announcer Don Criqui.
Since the resignation of NBC's No. 1 football analyst, Bill Walsh, who became coach at Stanford, there was speculation that Parcells would replace Walsh on the lead team with Dick Enberg.
But NBC tabbed Bob Trumpy, Criqui's longtime partner, to work with Enberg.


Philanthropies Pledge to Help Gorbachev Build a Firm Foundation
Mikhail S. Gorbachev met yesterday in Manhattan with leaders of some of the nation's most richly endowed private foundations, enlisting their support in setting up his own American-style presidential library, with a goal of $75 million in donations.
"I found him to be exuberant and highly animated, just brimming with ideas," said David Rockefeller Jr., chairman of the Rockefeller Brothers Fund, after the hourlong meeting, which was held at the Waldorf-Astoria.


Recoton Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Vidmark Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Laettner And Drexler Are Added To Team
The transformation of the United States Olympic basketball team from amateur to predominantly professional was completed Monday night when Clyde Drexler of the Portland Trail Blazers and Christian Laettner of Duke were named to join 10 other stars of the National Basketball Association for the Barcelona Olympics this summer.
Their selection was announced yesterday by USA Basketball, whose Olympic subcommittee had picked the other players last fall.


Dodgers Stop Skid On Gross's 3-Hitter
Dodgers 2, Expos 0
MONTREAL, May 12 (AP) -- Darryl Strawberry hit a towering two-run homer in his first time at bat following a four-game absence and Kevin Gross pitched a three-hitter tonight as the Los Angeles Dodgers beat the Montreal Expos, 2-0.
Gross (3-1) struck out a career-high 13 and improved to 13-4 against the Expos with a 2.52 earned run average.
It was his 12th career shutout and first since June 11, 1990, against Philadelphia.


Hong Kong Backs Expulsion of Boat People
Britain and Hong Kong signed an agreement today with Vietnam that will allow the British colony to resume the forced return of Vietnamese boat people who have been living in detention camps.
The Hong Kong Government said the agreement meant that next month it could begin the long process of emptying its camps, where more than 54,000 boat people are housed.


Valley Forge Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


LDDS Communications Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


One Dream: Ritz of African Restaurants
Bill Odarty is checking out the competition.
He is perched in the front seat of a yellow cab hurtling toward the African Restaurant in the Bronx, with a copy of his book, "A Safari of African Cooking" (Broadside Press, 1991), in his lap.
He has a dream.
"Now that I have written my beautiful book of African cooking, I want to open a restaurant so that all people can eat together," said Mr.
Odarty, who was born in Ghana 54 years ago and received a degree in history from the University of Hawaii and a master's degree in international studies from American University.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
Regulators voted to raise the premiums banks and savings associations pay to their insolvent insurance funds and to make fundamental changes in the way those premiums are assessed.
The 3-to-2 decision by the F.D.I.C., which defied heavy pressure from both the Bush Administration and the industry, would raise premiums an average of 22 percent starting in January.  [ Page A1. ]
Producer prices crept up a modest 0.2 percent in April, the Government said.  [ D1. ]


Where Some Will Go for the Gold, Many Will Go Out to Eat
ALL eyes are on Barcelona as it prepares to play host to the Summer Olympic Games starting July 25, serves as a focal point for celebrating Columbus's first voyage to America and becomes center stage for Europe's performing arts.
My own pre-Olympics visit to this winsome Catalan city included a marathon of another sort: 30 restaurants and tapas bars in 12 days. (Admittedly, that included an 11th-hour beer-and-tortilla stop at an airport snack bar solely to achieve an impressive round number.)


Review/Television; 'Edge,' in Final Outing, Scolds the News Media
If the public broadcasting program lineup is so strong tonight, then why am I feeling so sad?
Because the system is being battered, that's why.
On one side, there's the persistent financing problem.
That's primarily the reason that tonight's edition of "Edge," at 9 o'clock on Channel 13, is the last, pulled after only a few monthly programs and without a fair chance to develop.
On the other side are the right-wing ideologues, the Helms Brigades, maneuvering behind specious arguments about balance and fairness and community standards, not necessarily yours but theirs.
No longer able to get away with finding a Communist under every bed, they are wailing about left-wingers and assorted sex radicals behind every PBS programming decision.
This evening's version of Ravel's "Bolero" on "Dance in America" at 10 o'clock on Channel 13 will no doubt raise their temperatures another notch.
The ominous message: Conform to their dictates or be damned.
And they're not kidding.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Campaign Finances; Leading G.O.P. Fund-Raisers Have Links to Failed Banks
While some members of Congress are refusing contributions from executives entangled in the banking and savings and loan crisis, the Republican Party is relying on several of these executives to help raise money for the re-election of President Bush and others.
The most prominent member of this group is Lawrence E. Bathgate 2d, a finance chairman, or top fund-raiser, for the Republican National Committee.
In a civil lawsuit, Federal regulators are trying to foreclose on his houses and other assets to recover more than $21 million in bank loans to Mr.
Bathgate and his businesses in connection with the largest bank failure in New Jersey history.


The War Democrats, 1992 Style
There's no blaming unreconstructed cold warriors in the Pentagon or the Administration now.
It's Democrats in Congress who are throwing away the future to protect the past.
By insisting on spending billions to build unneeded weapons, they are protecting a few defense jobs but retarding the healthy development of as many permanent, non-defense jobs.
By propping up outmoded producers, they are keeping resources from flowing to products the country needs and the world wants.
By preserving pet programs in their districts, they reflect the worst in reckless parochialism instead of challenging President Bush for the lead in redefining national priorities.


Record School Construction
A record $10.7 billion was spent on public school construction and renovation last year in a building boom that reflects continued efforts by school districts in the United States to replace or restore aging school buildings.
The 1991 total, the seventh year in which school construction spending was higher than the year before, represented a 10.7 percent increase over the $9.7 billion spent in 1990, according to a soon-to-be released annual construction survey of the nation's school districts by American School and University magazine.


Eating Well
SEASONAL ingredients should be enjoyed undressed the first time out: strawberries eaten out of hand; crisp asparagus or newly dug potatoes, no bigger than your thumb, steamed and sprinkled with salt, baby lamb quickly grilled or roasted -- no fancy sauces, no pungent spices.
But as the season wears on, the innate charms of these same ingredients can be enhanced with the addition of herbs, spices, oils and vinegars.


Westport Bancorp Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Maitland A. Edey, Former Editor Of Time-Life Books, Dies at 82
Maitland A. Edey, a former editor in chief of Time-Life Books and a science writer and conservationist, died on May 9 at Martha's Vineyard Hospital in Vineyard Haven, Mass.
He was 82 years old.
Mr.
Edey, a Vineyard Haven resident, died of a brain hemorrhage, said his wife, Helen Kellogg Edey.


Puget Sound Power Promotes President to Chief Executive
Richard R. Sonstelie takes the helm this week as chief executive of the fast-growing Puget Sound Power and Light Company, which has entered the 1990's on solid financial footing after some turbulent years of involvement in nuclear plants.
He has been president and chief operating officer of the utility and will retain the title of president.
As chief executive he succeeds John W. Ellis, who remains chairman.
Mr.
Ellis is also a principal partner in the Baseball Club of Seattle, a group of investors, including executives from Nintendo of America Inc., who are attempting to buy the Mariners team.


Marino Is Angry at Noll
Miami Dolphins quarterback DAN MARINO assailed the former Pittsburgh Steeler coach, CHUCK NOLL for saying rumors about recreational drug use by Marino kept the club from picking Marino in the 1983 draft.
Noll's comments came Monday during an appearance on a radio talk show in Pittsburgh.
He answered a question about why the Steelers selected defensive lineman GABE RIVERA over Marino, who played at Pitt.
"These rumors have always been totally false and I'm extremely disappointed that Chuck Noll would even bring them up," Marino said in a statement issued by the Dolphins. (AP)


Transactions
Baseball  American League
TEXAS RANGERS -- Purchased the contract of Doug Davis, catcher, from Oklahoma City of the American Association.
Designated Mike Campbell, pitcher, for reassignment.
Activated Brian Bohanon, pitcher, from the 15-day disabled list and was optioned to Tulsa of the Texas League.
Announced Todd Burns, pitcher, has cleared waivers and was assigned to Oklahoma City.
National League


He Doesn't Call Them Dirty Deals
Many entrepreneurs have tried to pull off emissions-trading deals under the acid rain provisions of the Clean Air Act of 1990.
Apparently the first to be successful, with the agreement between the Tennessee Valley Authority and Wisconsin Power and Light, is a small Washington-based investment banking firm, Clean Air Capital Markets, established by John B. Henry 2d shortly after passage of the act.
Mr.
Henry, 43 years old, said in a telephone interview that his approach was different from many competitors, who were acting as consultants.
He is an investment banker, paid only if a deal is signed.
He did not disclose the fee for the T.V.A.-Wisconsin deal, but said he and his partners had spent more than $1 million "establishing the franchise," or setting themselves up to arrange such deals.


Quotation of the Day
"If they got the right guys, good for them. I have no anger, no hostility. I just want to be left alone. My biggest goal is to go home and be a dad to my kid." -- REGINALD DENNY, commenting on the arrest of four men on charges of beating him at the beginning of the Los Angeles riots.  [ A20:2. ]


Dinkins Seeks Spotlight for Urban Ills
Mayor David N. Dinkins came to the nation's capital today on the first of four trips in five days intended to focus public and governmental attention on the country's urban problems.
The Mayor's commuting will culminate Saturday, when he is to join with other urban leaders from around the country to address demonstrators gathered for a "Save Our Cities, Save Our Children" march.


Big Bang Doesn't Equate With Start of Time; A Flawed Theory
To the Editor:
The marginally observable fluctuations in the cosmic background radiation (front page, April 24) are likely to be confirmed if only because such fluctuations would be a concomitant of almost any known type of possible physical origin for this radiation.
They are not at all uniquely indicative of a Big Bang.


Moscow Journal; Capitalists Take to Streets, Creating Quite a Crush
Every morning about 10, Lyuda Averyanova takes up her spot in the middle of the crush on Stoleshnikov Lane, now the hottest street bazaar in a city seized by consumer frenzy, and starts selling bottles of German blond hair dye.
To her right, a woman sells Russian-made sweat suits for 500 rubles; to the left, other women offer Christian Dior moisturizer for 1,000 rubles and Spanish faucets for 3,500 rubles.


Berlitz International reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Regional Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Ann Taylor Stores Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to May 2


TJ Systems Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Dinkins Library Plan Is Challenged and Defended
The Dinkins administration defended its plan to restore five-day-a-week service to branch libraries yesterday as officials of the Queens and Brooklyn library systems charged that the Mayor had not budgeted nearly enough money to do the job.
Three weeks ago, with fanfare, Mayor David N. Dinkins proposed a $23.4 million increase in spending over two years on the city's three library systems and said it would be enough to keep all 205 branch libraries open at least five days a week.


The Odor at Fulton Fish Market
Between midnight and dawn, while most of New York City sleeps, the Fulton Fish Market bustles as refrigerated trucks arrive to supply the region's wholesalers.
Situated in a five-block area in lower Manhattan, this is the nation's largest seafood market, handling more than 125 million pounds of seafood each year.
It is also, thanks to decades of abdication by city government, a stronghold of organized crime where extortion and brutality are routine.


Dillard Department Stores reports earnings for Qtr to May 2


Victims of Rioting Buried, But Bitter Questions Linger
There were no speeches for Marvin Antonio Rivas on Monday night, no one to lead the small crowd of mourners in prayer.
The day before his body was to be shipped back to his native El Salvador, there were only whispers at his simple wake about how Mr.
Rivas had escaped death in his own country only to succumb to a different kind of war that has torn this city and this country asunder.
Mourners paused quietly in front of his open casket at the Latino Americana Mortuaria, lost in their confusion about the rioting in which 58 people died, last among them Mr.
Rivas, who was shot by National Guardsmen on May 3, five days after the rioting began and after the violence on the streets had subsided.


Treasury Notes and Bonds Gain
Prices of Treasury notes and bonds rose and interest rates moved lower again yesterday, as traders bought securities after the Government reported that a key measure of inflation remained at low levels in April.
The two-tenths of a percentage point rise in the Producer Price Index was a bit better than most Wall Street economists had been expecting.
So too was the two-tenths of a point rise in the index once food and energy prices are excluded.


Dunleavy Leaves The Lakers Coachless
Mike Dunleavy departed as coach of the Los Angeles Lakers today and opened the door to speculation about a number of possible successors, including one who may not seem so unlikely when the team begins to narrow its list of candidates.
Magic Johnson as Lakers coach?
If Johnson expresses interest, the Lakers just might be willing to discuss the vacancy.
Jerry West, the team's general manager, said he hadn't thought about a replacement for Dunleavy, who left to accept the head-coaching job with the Milwaukee Bucks, but he wouldn't rule out the former Laker star.


Metropolitan Diary
DEAR DIARY:
The passing of Marlene Dietrich brings to mind a scene I witnessed about 25 years ago when, fresh from Oklahoma, I moved to New York.
This particular afternoon I was outside Saks Fifth Avenue, waiting for the traffic light to change, when --
gasp!
-- I spotted the magnificent Marlene.
Though glamorous as ever, she went virtually unrecognized, no doubt because of her get-up -- cowboy gear, from Stetson hat to Tony Lama boots.


U.S. Summons Ambassador To Yugoslavia Over Bosnia
The United States recalled its Ambassador from Yugoslavia today and said that Washington would seek "strong collective action against Belgrade's aggression against Bosnia."
But the Bush Administration stopped short of suggesting any specific steps that could put pressure on the Serb militias who have dismissed all mediation efforts in their armed drive to prevent Bosnia-Herzogovina from achieving full independence or on the Government and Serbian-led Yugoslav Army command in Belgrade, which have backed and armed the irregulars.


The War Democrats, 1992 Style
There's no blaming unreconstructed cold warriors in the Pentagon or the Administration now.
It's Democrats in Congress who are throwing away the future to protect the past.
By insisting on spending billions to build unneeded weapons, they are protecting a few defense jobs but retarding the healthy development of as many permanent, non-defense jobs.
By propping up outmoded producers, they are keeping resources from flowing to products the country needs and the world wants.
By preserving pet programs in their districts, they reflect the worst in reckless parochialism instead of challenging President Bush for the lead in redefining national priorities.


In 3d Cup Race, America   Recovers Nerve and Lead
Bill Koch's America
dominated today's America's Cup yacht race from the start, never giving Paul Cayard and his Il Moro di Venezia crew the opportunity to pass.
America  won the match by 1 minute 58 seconds, to move to a 2-1 lead in the four-of-seven-race series, which will resume Thursday.
But the America
victory didn't come without intimations of a psychological challenge from the Italian team.


Congressional Roundup; Secret C.I.A. File Shows Agents Followed Oswald Before 1963
A Central Intelligence Agency file includes information that shows that agents kept track of Lee Harvey Oswald's travels in the years before the assassination of President John F. Kennedy in 1963, Congressional officials said today.
The 110-page file was given to the Senate Government Affairs Committee and made available to reporters.
Robert M. Gates, the Director of Central Intelligence, appeared before the committee and said he had ordered the file to be made public within days.


Space Agency Plans to Send Crew of 3 to Grab Wobbling Satellite
After repeated failures to rescue a wayward communications satellite, the crew of the space shuttle Endeavour today proposed a last-ditch plan that calls for space walks by three astronauts on Wednesday.
Late tonight the shutttle's ground controllers agreed to the astronauts' plan.
That many astronauts venturing into space at one time would be a first.


Dynascan Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


An Ohio College Says Women Learn Differently, So It Teaches That Way
The pitch is a simple one: small, Roman Catholic women's college in pastoral setting near lake offers the nation's only program tailored to the different way women learn.
Selling itself as a unique experiment in women's education, Ursuline College is using a revamped curriculum and a retrained faculty to test the theory that women learn better when they work together in small groups and relate what they study to their lives.


Child Support and the I.R.S.
Two unlikely Congressional allies urged that responsibility for the collection of child-support payments rest with the I.R.S.
Page A16.


Wine Talk
BEAULIEU VINEYARD, in the Napa Valley, has long been emblematic of the finest California wine-making traditions.
Its signature wine, Georges de Latour Private Reserve, first made in the late 1930's, is a benchmark by which other cabernets are judged.
Across the highway from Beaulieu, in the little town of Rutherford, Calif., is Inglenook, whose wines were winning prizes in this country and abroad half a century before the first Beaulieu Private Reserve came to market.
Inglenook first made wine -- 80,000 gallons of it -- in 1882.
The owner was Capt.
Gustave Niebaum, a Finnish seaman who had made a fortune in the Alaska fur trade and had bought the vineyard five years earlier.


Marcade Group reports earnings for Year to Feb 1


Economic Scene; Fixing Prices For Virtue's Sake?
IS it O.K. to fix prices in pursuit of a good cause?
If so, who gets to decide which causes are good enough?
These questions, rarely joined outside law school classrooms, are the nub of the Federal antitrust suit against the Massachusetts Institute of Technology that is set for trial in June.
And many observers, it is safe to say, will be torn between gut admiration for one of America's great institutions of learning and a nagging sense that only governments should be allowed to fix prices.


Casting a Credit Line to the Redlined
ORVILLE G. BRATHWAITE is a man of strong loyalties.
He began working at Chase Manhattan Bank as a summer intern in college and stayed for 20 years.
He rose through the ranks from teller to auditor to manager of three Manhattan branches to supervisor of a dozen executives at Chase's headquarters.
At the end, his responsibilities included advising the New York City Housing Authority on its huge investments, as well as wealthy individuals, one of whose home mortgage payments were $9,600 a month, a figure that still boggles his imagination.


Theater in Review
When the Wind Blows/News Update  Dance Theater Workshop Bessie Schonberg Theater 219 West 19th Street Chelsea Through Sunday Two puppet theater pieces designed and directed by Janie Geiser.
Presented by Dance Theater Workshop.
WHEN THE WIND BLOWS, Conceived by Ms.
Geiser; music composed by Chip Epsten; additional text from "The Ash King" by Daniel Zippi; lighting by Emily Stork.
Puppeteers: Judith Anderson, Matthew Buckingham, Trudi Cohen, Ms.
Geiser, Jenny Romaine and Mark Sussman.
Musicians: Mr.
Epsten, Konrad Kinard and Ms.
Romaine.
NEWS UPDATE, Audio by A. Leroy; developed in collaboration with the performers and Cathy Simmons.
Puppeteers: Judith Anderson, Kyle de Camp and Ms.
Geiser.
In the theater of Janie Geiser, there is a Lilliputian world of unpredictable occurrences.
Watching "When the Wind Blows/News Update," a brief double-header of puppet plays at Dance Theater Workshop, the perspective of the audience is altered.
On a small box set, a tiny puppet figure is suddenly chased by a tall pair of scissors threatening to shear her in half.
When a door is opened on a doll-size house, the walls swing apart and the building collapses.


From First Lady to Flesh-and-Blood Icon
It was a scene any Russian might have recognized: a line of 200 or more shoppers snaking through a store, crowds several hundred deep outside pushing against guards who were yelling, "Back off; please back off."
This being Fifth Avenue, the draw wasn't a morsel of meat but the signature of the former Soviet First Lady, Raisa M. Gorbachev, who was autographing her book at Brentano's yesterday.


Stocks Gain in Tokyo
Stocks were higher with a half hour left in the trading session today as investors stepped up purchases of incentive-backed issues, brokers said.
The Nikkei index of 225 issues, which had stayed in a narrow range for most of the day, climbed in the afternoon by 167.10 points, or just under one-tenth of 1 percent, to 18,675.63.
On Tuesday, the Nikkei ended down 99.56 points.


Whalers Dismiss General Manager
The Hartford Whalers' general manager, ED JOHNSTON, villified by fans for trading away several favorite players, was dismissed yesterday.
Johnston, who also served as vice president, met with the team's owner, RICHARD GORDON, late Monday night and reached a parting agreement, the team said.
Johnston had three years left on a $300,000-a-year contract.
The Whalers are the third National Hockey League team to dismiss a coach or general manager within the last week.
The Los Angeles Kings ousted Coach TOM WEBSTER and the Toronto Maple Leafs dismissed Coach TOM WATT.


Apple Suit By Quorum
Quorum Software Systems Inc. said today that it had brought legal action against Apple Computer Inc. in United States District Court here.
Quorum said it has asked the court to rule that Quorum has not infringed any copyrights or patents of Apple and to prohibit Apple from making assertions that Quorum's products violate any Apple intellectual property rights.
Based in Menlo Park, Calif., Quorum produces software that allows application programs written for Apple's Macintosh, such as word processors or spreadsheets, to run on computer work stations, including those made by Sun Microsystems Inc. and Silicon Graphics Inc.
Quorum's lawsuit stems from recent letters in which Apple accused the company of infringing its intellectual property rights, and revoked Quorum's privileges as an Apple-certified software developer.


4 HELD IN ATTACK AT RIOTS' OUTSET
Four black men linked to a violent street gang were arrested this morning in the beating and stomping of a white truck driver that was witnessed live on television across the nation and helped inflame the Los Angeles riots two weeks ago.
Three of the men, described by the authorities as members of the 8-Trey Crips gang, were defiant as they were led in handcuffs to a police car this morning.
One shouted obscenities at "you white folks."


INCREASE APPROVED IN FEES BANKS PAY TO INSURE DEPOSITS
Defying heavy pressure from both the Bush Administration and the industry, Federal regulators voted today to raise the premiums that banks and savings associations pay to their insolvent insurance funds and to make fundamental changes in the way those premiums are assessed.
The 3-to-2 decision by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation would raise premiums an average of 22 percent starting in January.
And for the first time since 1934, when the initial fund was set up in the wake of the bank collapses of the Depression, weaker institutions would pay a bigger increase than stronger ones.


Big Bang Doesn't Equate With Start of Time
To the Editor:
Though the Big Bang model based on Einstein's general theory of relativity does feature a universe whose age in years is finite (circa 15 billion years), it also lacks a first instant of time.
The concept of a finite but unbounded past is unfamiliar to common sense, but unproblematic in mathematical physics.
It is therefore misleading to describe the given cosmogonic theory as telling us "how time began."


C.D.'s and Bank Funds Off On Weak Demand for Loans
Yields on bank money market accounts and certificates of deposit were down for the week ended today, The Bank Rate Monitor said in its most recent survey.
Frank J. Barkocy, a senior vice president and bank analyst at Advest Inc., said that because of a weak demand for loans, many banks were flush with cash and had no need to increase rates to lure new depositors.
When rolling over certificates of deposits, banks have been able to offer rates at about half the level they were two years ago.


CHRONICLE
The Columbia University Graduate School of Journalism has awarded its highest honor, the 1992 Columbia Journalism Award, to ARTHUR OCHS SULZBERGER, the chairman and chief executive officer of The New York Times Company.
The presentation was made yesterday by JOAN KONNER, the dean of the school, at a luncheon for 1992 graduates in the John Jay Hall dining room.


Harper Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Utility Reports Second Sale Of Its Pollution Allowances
Wisconsin Power and Light announced yesterday a second, larger sale of emissions allowances under the Clean Air Act, after the previous disclosure of a sale to the Tennessee Valley Authority.
The second sale is to the Duquesne Light Company, which has headquarters in Pittsburgh.


Treasury Notes and Bonds Gain
Prices of Treasury notes and bonds rose and interest rates moved lower again yesterday, as traders bought securities after the Government reported that a key measure of inflation remained at low levels in April.
The two-tenths of a percentage point rise in the Producer Price Index was a bit better than most Wall Street economists had been expecting.
So too was the two-tenths of a point rise in the index once food and energy prices are excluded.


On the Longest Day, LeMond Shortens Gap
The people who run the Tour Du Pont, the people who televise it and the people who watch it would like nothing better than for Greg LeMond to win it.
Today, America's best-known bicycle racer made a big move toward winning America's most important bike race.
This was the sixth day of the 11-day, 1,000-mile stage race.
The day's stage was the longest of the tour, 150.8 miles from the Antietam National Battlefield in Sharpsburg, Md., through the Blue Ridge Mountains to the mountaintop Massanutten Resort here.


Windmere Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


The Odor at Fulton Fish Market
Between midnight and dawn, while most of New York City sleeps, the Fulton Fish Market bustles as refrigerated trucks arrive to supply the region's wholesalers.
Situated in a five-block area in lower Manhattan, this is the nation's largest seafood market, handling more than 125 million pounds of seafood each year.
It is also, thanks to decades of abdication by city government, a stronghold of organized crime where extortion and brutality are routine.


Foote, Cone &amp; Belding reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Ex-Judge Given Albany's Task For Districting
A Federal court today appointed a former Federal judge as a "special master" to draw new Congressional district lines in New York State after the Legislature failed to meet a court-ordered deadline to draw the lines itself.
The master, Frederick B. Lacey, served as a United States district judge in New Jersey from 1971 to 1986.
He is a registered Republican who was appointed to the bench by former President Richard M. Nixon.
Judge Lacey is currently the senior litigation partner with the law firm of LeBoeuf, Lamb, Leiby &amp; MacRae, which has offices in Manhattan and Newark.


Lean on Croatia, Too
Warring Serbs and Croats have now managed to agree about one thing in Bosnia: how to carve it up.
Their cynical deal not only dismembers a newly independent state, but also leaves Muslim Slavs, the republic's largest communal group, to fend for themselves in small enclaves.
Prolonged strife is inevitable.
The U.S. and Europe cannot countenance that result.
In an effort to preserve peace, they need to insist on keeping Bosnia intact.


Valspar Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to April 24


Limited Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 2


Congressional Roundup: Secret C.I.A. File Shows Agents Followed Oswald Before 1963; Budget Amendment
Senator Paul Simon, the Illinois Democrat sponsoring the budget-balancing amendment proposal with the widest support in Congress, told the House Budget Committee today that the amendment was needed to force the White House and Congress to get serious about eliminating the deficit.
In his first testimony on the amendment since he began a new push to get it passed, Mr.
Simon said, "It forces us to make the painful choice that candidly neither political party is willing to make right now."


California Braces for Battle Over School Vouchers
The stage is being set in California for what could be one of the most bitter and expensive political battles in the history of American public education, a battle that could well shape the future relationship between public and private schools nationally.
Proponents of a plan that would provide parents with what they call public "scholarships," or vouchers redeemable at public or private schools, including parochial schools, say they have gathered enough signatures to put the proposal to voters on the ballot in November as an amendment to the California Constitution.
Opponents, led by teachers and school administrators, say they are ready to go to almost any length to defeat it.


Brascan Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Primark Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Venture Stores reports earnings for Qtr to May 2


Laser Industries Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Arts Chief Vetoes 2 Approved Grants
In a move that indicates a shift to a more restrictive grant-making policy, the acting chairwoman of the National Endowment for the Arts vetoed two grants for sexually explicit art projects yesterday.
Both grants had been strongly recommended by the endowment's 26-member advisory panel, the National Council on the Arts, at its meeting in Washington on May 2.
But Anne-Imelda Radice, the 44-year-old Republican administrator who became acting chairwoman of the endowment on May 1, said the two applications "did not represent the best use of the endowment's funds."


SURPRISING COSTS FOUND FOR H.I.V.
A national study released today says people who are infected with the virus that causes AIDS but do not yet have the disease get much more hospital care than previously believed, substantially increasing the costs associated with the virus.
The survey of 325 private and public hospitals found that for every 100 hospital admissions for acquired immune deficiency syndrome, there are an additional 53 admissions of people infected with the human immunodeficiency virus, which causes AIDS but who are not classified as having the disease.


Penney (J.C.) Co. (N) reports earnings for Qtr to April 25


A Fine Night for Jordan, Frustration for Ewing
For Michael Jordan and the Chicago Bulls, it was a night of satisfaction.
For Patrick Ewing and the Knicks, it was a night of frustration.
Riding Jordan's 37-point performance, including 26 points in the second half, the Bulls took a 3-2 lead in the four-of-seven-game playoff series with a 96-88 victory in Game 5 tonight at Chicago Stadium.


Bush Plans to Join Other Leaders At Earth Summit in Brazil in June
As expected, President Bush said today that he would join more than 100 other world leaders and attend the Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro next month.
"Today's environmental problems are global and every nation must help in solving them," Mr.
Bush said in a statement.
"As the U.S. has demonstrated over more than two decades, protecting the environment and encouraging economic growth can go hand in hand."


New Offering From Telmex
United States and Mexican investors easily absorbed a secondary offering of shares of Telefonos de Mexico today, a year after Mexico privatized the company.
The $1.5 billion offering, roughly half of the Mexican Government's stake, consisted of 13.5 million American depository shares, 57 million common shares in Mexico and 9.5 million shares in other countries.


Demanding Access in Desperate Ways; Culture of Violence
To the Editor:
In "Life and Death" (column, April 23), Anthony Lewis has well said that "executions worsen, not alleviate, our underlying problem: the culture of violence in America."
That culture, I believe, runs very deep in our national psyche and comes far more from the upper echelons of society than from the so-called criminal element.


John Lund, Actor, Is Dead at 81; Leading Man in 1940's and 50's
John Lund, a leading man who appeared in films opposite Olivia de Havilland, Marlene Dietrich and Grace Kelly in the 1940's and 50's, was found dead on Sunday in his home in Los Angeles.
He was 81 years old.
The cause of death was not imediately known, but the police said the actor had a history of heart trouble, and Allan Dixon, a friend, said Mr.
Lund had been ill since December.


Griffin Bacal Creates New Units
Griffin Bacal Inc. in New York has established two more operating units that it hopes will offer specialized services to clients and potential clients.
One, called the licensing group, will identify and evaluate product and merchandise-licensing opportunities in the United States.
It will be headed by Janice Figueroa, the vice president and director of strategic planning.
The other, called Kid Think Inc., will focus on trends and ideas in youth marketing.
It will be headed by Robert Horne, a senior vice president.


CREDIT MARKETS;
A $100 million tax-exempt revenue bond issue by the California Department of Water Resources was priced yesterday through competitive bidding.
BT Securities, a subsidiary of the Bankers Trust Company, which was awarded the deal, priced the shorter-maturity serial bonds to yield from 3.5 percent for an issue due in 1993 to 5.1 percent in 1997, 5.85 percent in 2002, 6.25 percent in 2007 and 6.35 percent for bonds due in 2010 through 2012, the underwriter said.
For investors interested in a long maturity, there is a 6 percent bond due in 2021 that is offered at a price to yield 6.4 percent.


Elaborate Sting Operation Brings Arrests in Illegal Dumping of Toxic Wastes by Businesses
When undercover detectives, posing as illegal dumpers, went into the business of disposing of toxic waste from small businesses for $40 a barrel, no questions asked, they found the competition so fierce that they had to lower their price, officials said.
One business asked for a payment plan; another insisted it was accustomed to receiving a forged disposal manifest from other illegal dumpers; a third offered to find other clients with toxic wastes to dump, for a finder's fee.


Bronx Youngsters Learn an Important Lesson: Follow the Leader


Big Bang Doesn't Equate With Start of Time; Centuries of Testing
To the Editor:
The discovery of faint temperature fluctuations in microwave radiation is indeed important ("Scientists Report Profound Insight on How Time Began," front page, April 24).
However, your interior headline, "Astronomers Detect Proof of 'Big Bang,' " is somewhat misleading.
More accurately, the discovery of these minute fluctuations saves the Big Bang theory from a troublesome inconsistency.
Scientific theories cannot be proved, only disproved.


Greenery Rehabilitation Group reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-15  WILL THE VERY BAD GET WORSE?
As European officials withdrew in haste from Sarajevo, residents of the Bosnian capital feared that the terrifying bombardment of the last five weeks would soon give way to even more deadly efforts by Serbian guerrillas trying to carve the area into ethnic enclaves.
A1
The United States recalled its Ambassador from Belgrade.  A10
The truncated Yugoslavia saw bias by the Europeans and the U.S.  A10  SLIME ISN'T MONEY
Decades of uncontrolled pollution in the Eastern Europe of Communist days are haunting the new democratic governments, as foreigners find environmental contamination a deterrent to investment.
A1  BUSH WILL GO TO RIO
As expected, President Bush said he would join more than 100 other world leaders at the Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro next month.
A8
A major ocean-level rise could force island-group evacuations.
A8  PHILIPPINE COUNTING CONTINUES
Miriam Defensor Santiago, an outspoken former official who campaigned on an anti-corruption platform, continued to lead in early Philippine presidential election returns.
Former Defense Minister Ramos was also running strong.
A3  GERMAN EUROPHILIA EBBS
Preoccupied with problems of its own unification, Germany no longer seems so intent on forging ahead with expansion of the European Community to include the formerly Communist lands in the East.
A12  SENDING BACK THE BOAT PEOPLE
Britain and Hong Kong signed an agreement with Vietnam that will allow the British colony to resume the forced return of Vietnamese boat people.
Hong Kong authorities said that next month, it could begin emptying camps where more than 54,000 exiles are housed.
A9  JERUSALEM OF THE SHADOWS
Israel's new tourist wave consists of people suffering from what doctors are starting to call the Jerusalem syndrome.
These traumatized visitors present many faces -- messiahs, John the Baptists and King Davids wandering the narrow lanes of the Old City and proclaiming that the end, or perhaps the beginning, is near.
A13
Arab delegates insisted on discussing Palestinian right of return.
A13  U.S.
MAY HALT LEBANESE FOOD AID
The United States has decided to discontinue food aid to Lebanon at a time when the country is suffering through its worst economic crisis in five decades, officials associated with the aid program said.
A5  Moscow Journal: Street markets, a consumer smorgasbord.
A4  Iraqi Kurds prepare for elections in their northern region.
A14  Qataris petition Emir for greater freedom, and reap reprisals.
A15  National A16-23  VAST OVERHAUL IN BANK INSURANCE
Defying pressure from the Administration and the banking industry, regulators voted to increase the premiums paid by banks and savings associations and to make fundamental changes in the way those premiums are assessed.
A1  WASHINGTON RESPONDS TO RIOTS
The White House and Congressional leaders announced broad agreement on a set of modest programs that they said would bring relief to American cities.
A1  ARRESTS IN RIOT BEATING
Four black men linked to a violent Los Angeles street gang were arrested on charges of assaulting a white truck driver whose beating was witnessed by television viewers across the nation.
A1
For the last of 58 people who died, a quiet wake.  A21  RAISING FUNDS, AND EYEBROWS
While some members of Congress have refused campaign contributions from executives entangled in the savings and loan and banking crisis, the Republican Party is relying on several of them to help raise money for the re-election of President Bush and others.
A1
The Bush campaign declined to commit to any debates.  A23
Clinton moved ahead in his search for a running mate.  A23  RADICAL CHILD-SUPPORT PLAN
Two unlikely Congressional allies urged that responsibility for collecting child-support payments be transferred from the states to the I.R.S., that the Government pay a mother if it failed to collect from the absent father and that 300,000 new public service jobs be created to give unemployed fathers a way to make their payments.
A16  C.I.A.
OPENING AN OSWALD FILE
In the first trickle of what could soon be a vast river of publicly disclosed assassination documents, the Director of Central Intelligence ordered the release of a secret C.I.A. file dealing with Lee Harvey Oswald's activities before the Kennedy assassination.
A18  MILESTONE IN SPACE
After repeated failure to rescue a wayward communications satellite, ground controllers agreed to a plan by the crew of the space shuttle Endeavour a last-ditch plan that calls for space walks by three astronauts today.
That many astronauts venturing into space at one time would be a first.
A16  Indians thwarted a gaming raid by F.B.I. agents.A16  The Sierra Club Foundation faces an embarrassing legal dispute.
A16  Education Page B7  Do women learn differently than men?
Ursuline College thinks so.
California school "choice" proposal will provoke a ballot battle.
Campus Journal: Harvard Lampoon finds Dartmouth can't take a joke.
Metropolitan Digest, B1 DISTRICTING APPOINTEE
A Federal court appointed a former Federal judge as a "special master" to draw new Congressional district lines in New York State after the Legislature failed to meet a court-ordered deadline to draw the lines itself.
A1  Business Digest, D1  The Living Section C1-10  A food marathon in Barcelona.
C1  A writer views the playground.
C1  Health Page C12  Sorting out confusion about mammograms for women in their 40's.
Arts/Entertainment C13-18  Art auctions at Christie's.
C13  New endowment chief vetoes two grants.
C13  Film: Tim Robbins at Cannes.
C13  Obituaries D24  Sports B8-13 Basketball: Bulls take 3-2 lead over Knicks.
B9  Editorials/Op-Ed A24-25  Editorials A24  War Democrats, 1992 style.
Lean on Croatia, too.
Albany's hard choices.
Odor at Fulton Fish Market.
Letters A24  Anna Quindlen: The first stone.
A25  William Greider: Los Angeles do's and don'ts.
A25  Paul S. Grogan: Miami can teach L.A.
A25


Demanding Access in Desperate Ways
To the Editor:
Marlin Fitzwater, the White House spokesman, commenting on the outbreak of violence in Los Angeles following the verdict in the police brutality trial (news article, May 1), called it "outrageous for people to play politics in a situation in which our cities are burning, people are being killed, and political leaders need all the help and support they can get."
Two days earlier, Mr.
Fitzwater provided a clear definition of the kind of support he meant.


Theodora K. Sklover; Ex-Film Aide Was 53
Theodora K. Sklover, a former director of the Governor's Office of Motion Picture and Television Development who worked to broaden public access to film and television, died May 11 at her home in Manhattan.
She was 53 years old.
Ms.
Sklover died as a result of jumping out of her apartment window, Ellen Borakove, a spokeswoman for the New York City Office of the Chief Medical Examiner said, in what the Medical Examiner ruled yesterday as a suicide.


Alliant Techsystems reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Chase of Stolen Car Results in a Death
A Belleville police car chasing a stolen car into Newark crashed into another car early yesterday morning, killing a 26-year old Elizabeth woman.
The two police officers in pursuit of the stolen car were also injured in the crash, which occurred at the intersection of Broad and Market Streets at about 2 A.M., according to the Essex County Prosecutor's office.


Food Notes
From Farm to Door
American Family Farm is a new cooperative effort by a group of Hudson Valley produce and dairy farmers to market their products directly to consumers in Manhattan.
Ken Kleinpeter, of Hollow Road Farm, a sheep dairy farm in Stuyvesvant, N.Y., has organized this creative marketing effort to deliver farm-fresh milk in bottles, eggs, butter, cheese, yogurt and seasonal produce.


Zero Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Kentucky Central Life reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Voit Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 27


Police Shoot Suspect On a Brooklyn Street
A man armed with a semi-automatic weapon was shot and critically wounded last night by a police officer outside a Brooklyn station house after the man pointed the gun at the officer, the police said.
The incident began just before 9:30 P.M. last night when the man, whom the police did not identify, fired several times at another man at the corner of Classon Avenue and DeKalb Avenue in Fort Greene, said a police spokesman, Officer Andrew McInnis.


Congressional Roundup: Secret C.I.A. File Shows Agents Followed Oswald Before 1963; Voter Registration
Senate Republicans today managed to kill a measure intended to make voter registration easier, most of all by allowing people to sign up as they renew their driver's licenses.
The Administration had already been promising to veto the bill, asserting that the Democratic proposal would increase fraud at the polls.
But the Democrats vowed to make an issue out of what they saw as a Republican effort to keep minority members and the disadvantaged from voting.


HEWLETT-PACKARD INTRODUCES NEW WORK STATIONS
The Hewlett-Packard Company introduced two color-capable work stations for under $10,000, continuing its drive to deliver more power at lower prices than its competitors.
With a 16-inch color work station for $8,990 and a 19-inch for $9,990, not including disk drives, Hewlett-Packard said it now offered higher performance at lower prices than current models from Sun Microsystems Inc. or the International Business Machines Corporation.


US Facilities Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Efforts Intensify to End Newspaper Labor Dispute
As more incidents of violence and vandalism hampered deliveries of The New York Times, efforts intensified yesterday to chart a way out of the increasingly bitter weeklong confrontation pitting The Times and a news distributor against the delivery union.
At an emotional meeting of the Newspaper and Mail Deliverers' Union of New York and Vicinity last night, a packed hotel ballroom of cheering union members unanimously appointed three "go-betweens" to try to find an accord with The Times, which the union views as the key to resolving the dispute.


Clearly Canadian Beverage reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


TV Preacher Wins in Bid To Buy U.P.I.
Pat Robertson, the television evangelist, made an apparently successful $6 million cash bid for bankrupt United Press International today.
The bid came at a Federal Bankruptcy Court hearing to decide whether the news agency would be sold to the highest bidder or broken up and sold piecemeal to pay off its huge debts.


DEAL TO SELL LANDING RIGHTS TO AMERICAN IS BACKED
Trans World Airlines Inc. announced a $500 million agreement on a renegotiated deal to sell American Airlines 40 slots and three gates at Chicago's O'Hare International Airport.
Under the new agreement, which must be approved in bankruptcy court, T.W.A. gets a $500 million note with no interest, to be repaid by American in monthly installments over 20 years.
T.W.A. also has the option to accept a $150 million lump sum cash payment instead.


Mean Sort of Matchup: Jordan Confronts Ewing
The last vestige of championship cool detachment seeped out of Chicago tonight, and all pretensions of the Knicks as tough-but-friendly adversaries were laid to rest.
Late in the second quarter, Michael Jordan had words, face to face, with Patrick Ewing.
His good friend, Ewing.
His fellow millionaire with whom he shares an agent, David Falk.
The man of whom he said before the start of the Eastern Conference semifinals last week, "One of the best people I know, someone I'm really close to."


General Mills In Venture With Pepsico
Pepsico Inc. and General Mills Inc. agreed yesterday to merge six of their European snack food operations into a company with annual sales of $640 million.
With domestic growth slowing, sales of more chips overseas is a top priority for Pepsi.
International consumers nosh a mere 2.5 pounds of chips a year, compared with the 15 pounds consumed by the average American, Pepsi said.


OW Office Warehouse Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 28


Non-Kosher Gefilte Fish?
To The Living Section:
Joan Nathan is correct when she states in her article "As Many Versions of Matzoh Balls as Sections of U.S."  [ April 8 ]  that local culture has a profound effect on the style and tastes of Jewish cooking.
But I was startled to read that Jews in Louisiana make their gefilte fish from catfish.
All segments of Judaism consider catfish a non-kosher fish, as the Torah explicitly proscribes fish that do not have both fins and scales.


How Algren Put It
To The Living Section:
Re: Marialisa Calta's piece "A Hard-Boiled Look at Midwest Foods"  [ April 22 ] .
Nothing irritated Algren more than people misquoting his favorite aphorism.
It should read, "Never eat at a place called Mom's, never play cards with a man called Doc, and never sleep with anybody whose troubles are worse than your own." (Algren himself failed to heed this last bit of advice.) CAROLYN GAISER New York


Berry Petroleum reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Western Gas Resources reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


METRO DIGEST
STRUGGLE FOR A LABOR SOLUTION
As more violence and vandalism hampered deliveries of The New York Times, efforts intensified to chart a way out of the increasingly bitter confrontation pitting The Times and a news distributor against the delivery union.
At an emotional meeting of the Newspaper and Mail Deliverers' Union of New York and Vicinity, a packed ballroom of cheering union members unanimously appointed three "go-betweens" to try to find an accord with The Times, which the union views as the key to resolving the dispute.
B4.
NEW YORK CITY  A SETBACK FOR BRIDGE REPAIRS


EXECUTION APPEAL DENIED IN VIRGINIA
A Federal judge today rejected an appeal by a former coal miner who is scheduled to be executed next week for the rape and murder of his sister-in-law in 1981.
Lawyers for the man, Roger K. Coleman, said they could offer evidence -- including testimony from 20 witnesses -- absolving their client and implicating a neighbor of the victim.
"They're willing to let someone who may be innocent die for the sake of technicalities," the 33-year-old Mr.
Coleman said tonight from his cell.
"The Federal courts, especially the Supreme Court, have been heading in this direction."


Applied Materials reports earnings for Qtr to April 26


Spelling Entertainment Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Market Place; Trump's New Boast: Bonds Do Well
Donald J. Trump, whatever shortcomings he may have in the eyes of his bankers and original bond investors, knows a little something about hype.
The overextended developer has been putting that skill to use lately by calling around to boast about how well his three Atlantic City casino bond issues are doing.
He has even suggested that he may take two of the casino-hotels public later this year.
Mr.
Trump is expected to amplify those hints and hurrahs tomorrow when he will be the luncheon speaker for the Bear Stearns High Yield Conference, scheduled for the St.
Regis Hotel in Manhattan.


20-Year-Old Gift Leads to Dispute With Sierra Club
More than 20 years ago a group of environmentalists devised a plan to buy land in northern New Mexico that would allow impoverished Mexican-Americans to use it as grazing pastures and thereby protect a scenic mountain valley from developers.
Money was donated but the land was never bought, and now the good intentions of long ago have led to a bitter legal battle, producing accusations that the group that handled the project, the Sierra Club Foundation, violated laws governing charitable organizations.


Trico Products reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Tornadoes Strike in Oklahoma


DVI Health Services Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Kelley Oil &amp; Gas Partners reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Caesareans Decline, but Rate Is Called Too High
THE rate of Caesarean births in this country dropped significantly in 1990 for the first time in two decades, a health advocacy group said yesterday.
But the organization, Public Citizen's Health Research Group, said in a report that the rate, down to 22.7 percent of all births from 23 percent in 1989, was still far too high.
Almost half of those operations were unnecessary, it said, leading to $1.3 billion in extra costs.


Southwest Gas Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Radical Overhaul Proposed In System of Child Support
Despite a season of bitter partisanship, two of Congress's most divergent members today proposed a radical change in the way the country collects child-support payments from absent fathers.
Most experts agree that the current system is deeply flawed and that it contributes to a variety of urban problems, including escalating welfare rolls and children living in poverty.


Perot, in New York, Keeps Message Simple
If Ross Perot's seclusion from the press to develop more detailed policy proposals has borne fruit, he did not show it in a speech in Manhattan last night.
"My message is very simple," the undeclared candidate for President said.
"No. 1, we all love one another." He did not list a No. 2.


Review/Television; A Show Brought to You By the Letters S, E, X
Viewers ages 8 to 12 could do a lot worse tonight than tune in to Channel 13 at 8 for "What Kids Want to Know About Sex and Growing Up." The Children's Television Workshop offers the basics in an easy-to-take, easy-to-understand hour that manages to be serious without being grave.
Most of the information comes during question-and-answer sessions between junior high students and sex educators.
The boys talk to Dr.
Robert Selverstone, the girls to Rhonda Wise, and then the groups get together.
Toward the end, parents have a chance at the educators.
Animation enhances the explanations of topics from puberty to parenthood.


Sore Subject For Messier
How hurt is he?
Mark Messier said the pain in his back was not so bad today, but he shifted his weight uncomfortably in a chair and admitted that with a torn muscle that has caused spasms, he is not quite the same player.


Lean on Croatia, Too
Warring Serbs and Croats have now managed to agree about one thing in Bosnia: how to carve it up.
Their cynical deal not only dismembers a newly independent state, but also leaves Muslim Slavs, the republic's largest communal group, to fend for themselves in small enclaves.
Prolonged strife is inevitable.
The U.S. and Europe cannot countenance that result.
In an effort to preserve peace, they need to insist on keeping Bosnia intact.


Slight Rise In Producer Price Index
Producer prices crept up a modest two-tenths of 1 percent in April, the Government said today.
Economists said the report showed that the Federal Reserve had room to cut interest rates again to perk up the slowly recovering economy.
The Producer Price Index, which also went up by two-tenths of 1 percent in March and in February, has risen so far this year at a seasonally adjusted annual rate of just 1 percent, the Labor Department said.
"One reason the inflation rate is so low is the sluggish economy," said Sung Won Sohn, senior vice president and chief economist at the Norwest Corporation, a banking company in Minneapolis.
"I think the Fed will recognize this and take appropriate action as soon as possible."  Consumer Data Due Today
Analysts predict the Fed will wait to act until it sees if the low inflation figures are confirmed by the Consumer Price Index, which is scheduled to be released Wednesday.
"We will see further progress in reducing inflation in the C.P.I.," said Lyle Gramley, chief economist for the Mortgage Bankers Association.
That would ease any fears that another move to cut interest rates, which have been coming down steadily for more than a year, would overheat the economy and stoke inflation.
Mr.
Sohn contends the central bank should be aggressive and move for cuts of half a percentage point in both the Federal funds rate, which banks charge each other for loans, and the discount rate, which the Fed charges banks for loans.
Many economists maintain that such a move by the Fed would persuade banks to cut their prime lending rates by half a point.
Many business and consumer loans are pegged to the prime.
Most banks' prime rates are at 6 1/2 percent, although Chemical Bank in New York, the nation's fourth-largest, cut its rate to 6 1/4 percent after the Fed's most recent push, on April 9, to lower the Federal funds rate to 3 3/4 percent from 4 percent.
The Labor Department said the core rate of wholesale inflation, which excludes the volatile prices of food and energy, also rose by two-tenths of 1 percent in April.
Goods at the intermediate level rose one-tenth of 1 percent, and crude prices were up three-tenths.
Wholesale food prices fell three-tenths of 1 percent in April after dropping five-tenths in March.
Energy prices advanced by five-tenths last month, mainly because of increases in the price of refined oil products; they had shot up 1.2 percent in March.
Some economists expressed concern about the rise in energy prices.
"It's a good number," said Donald Ratajczak, director of economic forecasting at Georgia State University, referring to the overall index.
"But there are some special circumstances."  Gasoline and Heating Oil
He noted that gasoline prices rose by 1.4 percent last month, after gaining 1.1 percent in March.
Heating oil was up 4.6 percent in April, after advancing two-tenths of 1 percent in March and 16.2 percent in February.
But other economists said the rise in energy prices should not deter Fed policy makers from easing credit.
"Energy is clearly not something that can be rectified by monetary policy, and they should not be concerned about it," said Mr.
Gramley, a former Fed board member.
Michael Boskin, chief economic adviser to President Bush, said he thought the Fed was prepared to lower interest rates if inflation remained under control and the recovery appeared to falter.
Bond Prices Head Up
"They have the opportunity and the will to do something extra if necessary," Mr.
Boskin told reporters in Paris, where he was at a meeting.
Inflation-sensitive Treasury bond prices surged on the producer prices report, with the 30-year issue up more than half a point, cutting its yield to 7.86 percent, from 7.88 percent Monday.
Stock prices fell, however, as investors awaited the consumer price report on Wednesday.
Recent data show that business activity is gradually picking up speed, which would traditionally argue for the policy-setting Federal Open Market Committee to hold the line on interest rates.
The committee is scheduled to meet next Tuesday.
But economists said the Fed needed to insure that the recovery took hold and did not falter, as it did last year.
They added that the tepid 2 percent annual rate of economic growth recorded in the first quarter was not enough to accomplish that.


60-Minute Gourmet
TIME-PRESSED home cooks often blanch at a recipe that calls for a sauce, even an a la minute one.
Making sauces requires undivided attention, especially if reductions are involved.
As some readers have reminded me, undivided attention is a fantasy when children are running around.
The grilled salmon dish here has two sauces, but the difference is that they can be prepared ahead and heated just before serving.
Moreover, neither is served over the fish, so there is less chance of them breaking down if they sit at the table for several minutes.


New Glitch: Technology's Sore Hoof
One day after A.P.
Indy was withdrawn from the Preakness with a bruised hoof, two days after Pistols and Roses was withdrawn with a sore ankle, Technology came back from a workout yesterday with a bruised left hoof.
And this was only a week or so after Arazi had gone back to France with a bruised ego.
Sonny Hine, who brought Technology into prominence this spring with victories in the Florida Derby and the Tropical Park Derby, said he was not greatly concerned.
But he did acknowledge that the colt had thrown a shoe from the same foot while winning the Tropical Park Derby one month ago.
And Hine will fit him with new shoes with felt padding for the Preakness this Saturday.


Trans-Lux Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Top Yield 6.45% For Florida Bonds
The Florida Department of Natural Resources priced $300 million in tax-exempt revenue bonds yesterday through competitive bidding.
The bonds have a maximum yield of 6.45 percent for an issue due in 2013.
Morgan Stanley &amp; Company, the winning underwriter of the financing, said all of the bonds being offered were insured by the Municipal Bond Investor's Assurance Corporation, giving them a triple-A rating by both Moody's Investors Service and the Standard &amp; Poor's Corporation.


DANGER OF FLOODS WORRIES ISLANDERS
The 45,000 people of the Marshall Islands, a former United States trust territory in the Pacific Ocean, will need to be rehoused or evacuated within 30 years if ocean levels rise as much as some scientists predict as a result of atmospheric warming, according to a United States study.
The study, paid for by the United States National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, describes the Marshall Islands as one of the "innocent victims" of global warming.


Meredith Willson Salute To Star Barbara Cook
In honor of the 90th anniversary of the composer Meredith Willson's birth, the Juilliard School is to present "The World of Meredith Willson" on Monday at 7:30 P.M. in the Juilliard Theater, 155 West 65th Street, Manhattan.
The program, starring Barbara Cook (who played Marian the Librarian in the original Broadway cast of Willson's "Music Man"), salutes his music and humor from Broadway, radio, film and television.
Among the featured artists are Tammy Grimes (the first star of "The Unsinkable Molly Brown"), singers from the Juilliard School, a barbershop quartet and the Juilliard Orchestra.
The script is by the playwright William M. Hoffman; musical direction is by Wally Harper.


Editors' Note
The Outdoors column in Sports Sunday on May 3 described a turkey hunt on a cattle ranch in southwest Texas.
It reported that one hunter, John Falk, had early success using Winchester No. 5 copper-clad pellets, a type of ammunition "much touted by Falk."
Mr.
Falk is the public relations manager of the Winchester Group of the Olin Corporation, which makes the ammunition discussed in the article.
His employment with the manufacturer should have been specified.


ECI Telecom Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Another Bout for Canadiens' Corson
Montreal Canadiens forward SHAYNE CORSON says he tried his best to avoid his latest bar altercation, which brought a punch on the nose at about 12:30 A.M. yesterday at a downtown Montreal nightclub.
Corson and teammate MIKE KEANE filed a complaint against ALVIN POWELL, a 6-foot-5-inch, 305-pound offensive tackle for the London Monarchs of the World League, who play in Montreal next weekend.


About the Weather
The New York Times has added an air quality index and an expanded extended forecast to its weather page for the New York region.
The air quality index, which will appear Tuesday through Saturday as part of the Metropolitan Almanac, compares the previous day's air quality in selected areas with standards for each pollutant set by the Federal Environmental Protection Agency.


Flyers' Coach Has Pact Extended
The Philadelphia Flyers have extended the contract of Coach BILL DINEEN, who took over at midseason and brought the team into the ranks of respectability.
Terms of the contract were not announced.
The Flyers were only 8-14-2 when PAUL HOLMGREN was ousted and Dineen replaced him.
Under Dineen, helped by some trades, the Flyers were 24-23-9 the remainder of the season although they didn't make the playoffs.(AP)


Citicorp Offers Some Shareholders a Swap
Citicorp yesterday proposed a $400 million recapitalization intended to save it $33.5 million a year in preferred stock dividends.
But Wall Street traders immediately placed bets that the nation's largest bank holding company would be forced to sweeten the deal to win acceptance by holders of its preferred stock.
Citicorp offered to issue as many as 21.1 million common shares, worth $396 million at yesterday's closing price, in exchange for two series of preferred shares.


Public &amp; Private; The First Stone
The number of incidents in which public figures have been publicly taken to task by the Catholic Church on the issue of abortion has grown long enough to fill a six-page chronology.
And that's only through 1990.
We can now add to the list Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan and Lynn Yeakel, the Senate candidate from Pennsylvania.
John Cardinal O'Connor of New York wrote to the president of the University of Notre Dame to object to the Senator's selection for a medal honoring an outstanding Catholic.
Anthony Cardinal Bevilacqua of Philadelphia told the president of Rose mont, a Catholic women's college, that he was displeased about the selection of Ms.
Yeakel as commencement speaker.


Ultrasound Guides a Drill To Unclog Heart Arteries
An ultrasonic device tiny enough to navigate the arteries of the human heart could one day help doctors do a better, safer job of removing cholesterol-laden plaque from blood-vessel walls.
The device, still under development, would aid cardiologists in performing a technique known as atherectomy -- the use of a tiny, high-speed drill to shave away arterial plaque.


Methodists Again Say No to Homosexuality
The United Methodist Church, the nation's second-largest Protestant denomination, has reaffirmed its rejection of homosexual behavior and approved a proposal to move the church's largest agency out of New York City.
Both actions, taken Monday evening by the church's governing General Conference, which meets every four years, reflected grass-roots suspicion of theological change and of established church leadership.


Theater in Review
Ruthless!
Players Theater 115 Macdougal Street Manhattan Book, lyrics and direction by Joel Paley; music and musical direction by Marvin Laird; scenery by James Noone; costumes by Gail Cooper-Hecht; lighting by Kenneth Posner; sound by Tom Sorce; production stage manager, Pamela Edington.
The Musical Theater Works, Anthony J. Stimac, artistic director, presented by Kim Lang Lenny, Wolfgang Bocksch and Jim Lenny.
WITH: Joanne Baum, Laura Bundy, Donna English, Denise Lor, Susan Mansur and Joel Vig.
One of several running gags in "Ruthless," a campy musical farce that will do almost anything for a laugh, concerns the reason that Sylvia St.
Croix, a woman who specializes in grooming talented children to become stars, has changed her name.
"My real name is Sylvia St. Sydney; need I say more?" she huffs, referring to the veteran movie star Sylvia Sidney.
Like most of the show's jokes, the humor is less in the words than in their ferocious delivery.
As portrayed by Joel Vig, a stocky actor whose bright red dress matches his lipstick, Sylvia suggests an overweight Rosalind Russell playing a voracious talent agent.
Sylvia has descended on the suburban home of Judy Denmark (Donna English), a chirpy housewife, and her 8-year-old daughter, Tina (Laura Bundy), whom she is hellbent on turning into a child star.
Tina, a cuddly little monster whose every move has the calculated cutesiness of a Shirley Temple routine, is only too eager for fame.
The girl's ambition drives her to arrange the strangulation by jump rope of her victorious rival for the lead role in the school play, a moronic little musical called "Pippi in Tahiti."
"Ruthless," at the Players Theater, belongs to a theatrical genre exemplified by the comedies of Charles Busch, in which almost everything has a show-business reference.
Shirley Temple movies, "Gypsy," "Mildred Pierce" and "All About Eve" are among the most obvious touchstones for a spoof that has enough absurd plot twists and multiple identities to fill several old movies.
Such shows stand or fall on their humor.
And until it nearly runs amok late in the second act, "Ruthless," which has music by Marvin Laird and a book and lyrics by Joel Paley, who also directed, delivers a fairly steady quotient of laughs.
The songs, which are mostly generic show-business anthems of the brassier sort, are uneven.
The one attempt at a comic show stopper, "I Hate Musicals," falls apart on such too-obvious lines as "I hate musicals, but not as much as I hate the words to this song!"
Most of the fun comes from the sheer brazenness of the caricatures.
They include Tina's loopy third-grade teacher (Susan Mansur), a pretentious drama critic named Lita Encore (Denise Lor), a monstrous Broadway prima donna (Ms. English) and her scheming, sycophantic assistant, Eave (Ms. Baum).
The performance that holds things together is Ms.
Bundy's Tina.
Through her parody of a psychopathic latter-day Shirley Temple, the golden-locked young actress with a big piping voice projects an engaging sweetness.
The look of "Ruthless" matches its tone.
James Noone's candy-striped sets and Gail Cooper-Hecht's fluorescent costumes create a stylized world in which all values have been reduced to the breathless childhood intoxication of show-business glory as experienced in a grade-school pageant.


Critic's Notebook; At Cannes, Tim Robbins Proves a Double Threat
Tim Robbins is courtly and unassuming, and in spite of that he is suddenly at the red-hot center of this year's Cannes International Film Festival.
Mr.
Robbins would stand out here even if he were nothing more than a strong contender for the best-actor award, which he is for his performance as the smooth-talking Hollywood executive Griffin Mill in "The Player." But today he emerged as a directorial talent as well.
"Bob Roberts," the political satire that he wrote, directed and stars in, is the first new title here to touch off that current of surprise, chatter and excitement known on film-festival circuits as the buzz.
Mr.
Robbins's fiendishly funny film, which is included in the Directors' Fortnight section of the festival, is obviously an idea whose time has come.
Constructed as a mock documentary, it is a "This Is Spinal Tap" for the political arena, with flashes of Robert Altman's television series "Tanner '88" thrown in for good measure.
Not for nothing has Mr.
Altman been touting Mr.
Robbins as a new director to be reckoned with, a recommendation that counts for a lot more than the standard hyperbole that is heard in this hype-crazy setting.
It became clear at this morning's screening that Mr.
Robbins, in simultaneously embodying the slick soullessness of both Hollywood and electoral politics, is truly the man of the hour.


Waban Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to April 25


Apple Ruling Reconsidered
A district court judge agreed today to reconsider his April 14 ruling throwing out most of Apple Computer Inc.'s long-running copyright infringement suit against Microsoft and Hewlett-Packard.
Judge Vaughn Walker gave lawyers for Hewlett-Packard 20 days to file briefs in response to Apple's request for reconsideration.
But the judge again chastised Apple for being late in its filings and for ignoring, until the last minute, his requests for an item-by-item account of the way the Microsoft Corporation and the Hewlett-Packard Company's products infringe Apple's copyrights.


BELGRADE SHOCKED BY EUROPEAN MOVE
Despite weeks of being warned that it could not continue with the effective dismemberment of Bosnia and Herzegovina and escape diplomatic and economic sanctions, the Serbian-dominated Yugoslav Government appeared somewhat surprised today by the moves taken by the European Community and the United States to begin the process of isolation by withdrawing their ambassadors from Belgrade.
An official Yugoslav statement claiming that Western governments were guilty of "bias" against Serbia in designating it as the main culprit in Bosnia was not issued until late today, more than 24 hours after the European Community's foreign ministers announced that they were pulling out their envoys.


ERICSSON TO SUPPLY PLANNED TOKYO CELLULAR SYSTEM
L.
M.
Ericsson of Sweden, one of the world's biggest makers of telecommunications equipment, signed a $120 million contract with Tokyo Digital Phone, an international consortium that plans to build a cellular telephone system for Tokyo.
The contract is an important one for Ericsson because Germany and Japan, two of the most highly developed economies, are expected to have strong demand for cellular, or wireless, telephones.


Book Notes
Honor for the General
Gen.
H.
Norman Schwarzkopf has added a new honor to his heavily decorated chest, but this one is for an accomplishment on the publishing battlefield.
The Book-of-the-Month Club has bought the book-club rights to the general's autobiography for "a record-breaking sum for a nonfiction book," said Brigitte Weeks, the club's editor in chief.
Ms.
Weeks would not disclose the amount, but said it was "in the high six figures" and was substantially more than the club had ever paid for a nonfiction book.


Germany Focuses on German Unity; European Unity Will Wait
Preoccupied with the problems of its own unification, Germany no longer seems as ardent as it once was about forging ahead with rapid expansion of the European Community to bring in the formerly Communist countries of Eastern Europe.
Though German officials deny that they are in any way turning away from Europe and inward upon themselves, as many enthusiasts about Europe feared they might do after unification, there has been a notable change in tone in recent German pronouncements about what the community's next steps should be.


Theater in Review
Iphigenia in Tauris  La Mama Annex 74A East Fourth Street Greenwich Village Through May 24 By Euripides; performance text compiled by Yannis Houvardas as adapted from the English translation by Richard Lattimore with excerpts from the original Greek text; directed by Mr.
Houvardas; produced by Yanni Simonides; sets and costumes by Dionyssis Fotopoulos; music composed and performed by Genji Ito; lighting by Howard Thies; stage manager, Marybeth Ward.
Presented by La Mama E.T.C., in association with the Greek Theater of New York and the Greek Society for International Communication Through the Arts.
WITH: Christina Alexanian, Paul Beauvais, Alyssa Bresnahan, Sandra Daley, Sarah Graham Hayes, Natalia Kapodistria, Akyllas Karazissis, Gregory Karr, Monica Koskey, George Kormanos, Anna Mascha, Randolph Curtis Rand, Laurie Galluccio and Ching Valdes-Aran.
The adaptation of Euripides' "Iphigenia in Tauris" directed by Yannis Houvardas at La Mama is so revisionary and idiosyncratic it makes Mr.
Houvardas a coauthor, and a formidable one.
Mr.
Houvardas, a leading director in Athens, severely trims the ancient play and turns it inside out to dramatize his own intriguing ideas about cultural confrontation.


A's Streak Ends at 5 As Olerud Homers
Blue Jays 3, Athletics 0
TORONTO, May 12 (AP) -- John Olerud hit a two-out, two-run homer off Dave Stewart in the sixth inning tonight as Toronto beat Oakland, 3-0, to stop the Athletics' winning streak at five games.
Jimmy Key, Duane Ward and Tom Henke combined on a seven-hitter for the Blue Jays.
Twins 6, Reds Sox 3


BRITISH PETROLEUM SELLING ITS STAKE IN CANADIAN UNIT
The British Petroleum Company said it was selling its 57 percent stake in BP Canada Inc. to investors for $374 million (Canadian), or about $314.3 million in United States funds.
Shares will be sold at $13 (Canadian) each, payable in installments over two years.
BP Canada has significant interests in the deep gas fields of the western Canadian Basin.
Its shares are listed on the Toronto, Montreal and Vancouver stock exchanges.


United Thermal Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


U.S. to Halt Food Aid Program for Lebanon
The United States has decided to discontinue food aid to Lebanon at a time when this country is suffering through its worst economic crisis in five decades, officials associated with the aid program said today.
The United States Agency for International Development has informed the Lebanese Government and charitable institutions that food aid will be stopped at the end of this year, said the aid officials, who did not want to be identified further.
As many as 185,000 families have been receiving American food aid for several years.


Magadan Dives, And Mets Prevail
The reaction was pure instinct.
The play was absolute art.
And the impact of it all was unqualified, for it meant an unspoiled triumph for the Mets.
First, the scene: Shea Stadium, top of the seventh, the Padres trailing the Mets, 5-3, with the bases loaded, two out and a pair of runs already across.


54 Qatar Citizens Petition Emir for Free Elections
A group of 54 prominent citizens of Qatar have presented the ruler of that emirate in the Persian Gulf with a petition demanding free parliamentary elections, a written constitution and the expansion of personal and political freedoms.
Since the petition was submitted to the Emir of Qatar a few weeks ago, several of those who signed it have been called in for questioning by the police, Arabs familiar with the situation said.
At least two of the petitioners were arrested and detained for a few days, they said, while three others were prevented from leaving the country and had their passports confiscated.


Kent Electronics reports earnings for Qtr to March 28


Vintage Petroleum reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Congressional Roundup: Secret C.I.A. File Shows Agents Followed Oswald Before 1963; New B-2 Bombers
In the first step toward ending a five-year dispute between the Pentagon and Congress, a House Armed Services Committee panel today conditionally approved the Bush Administration's request to buy 20 B-2 bombers and then halt the program.
The Pentagon originally wanted to buy 132 of the radar-evading planes, but Congress refused for the past two years to buy more than 15.
Lawmakers tentatively approved a 16th aircraft last year, but attached several restrictions.


Handy &amp; Harman reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Syracuse Hospital Admits Causing Death of Patient
Accepting blame for the death of a cancer patient, officials of a Syracuse hospital said yesterday that the wrong chemotherapy drug was administered to a woman identified by local newspapers as Muriel Simons, the wife of Judge Richard D. Simons of the State Court of Appeals.
"One of the hardest things to do is to stand up and admit that a mistake has been made, a tragic mistake, a human mistake, and it cost someone a life," said Bonita Voiland, a spokeswoman for Crouse Irving Memorial Hospital.


Lomas &amp; Nettleton Mortgage reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Rhode Island Bonds Priced
Fleet/Norstar Securities, a subsidiary of the Fleet Financial Group, yesterday tentatively priced $122.56 million in general obligation bonds being issued by Rhode Island and Providence.
The maximum yield is 6.407 percent for a bond due in 2007, while shorter-maturity serial bonds are priced to yield from 3.4 percent in 1993 to 5.3 percent in 1997, 6.05 percent in 2002 and 6.25 percent in 2004.


Corrections
A picture caption on Sunday about an East German gunboat being examined by the United States Navy misidentified the officer shown.
He was Lieut.
Comdr.
Andreas Kuhfuss, the former captain of the boat.


Yankees Stop Losing On a Deft Perez Start
Melido Perez had this sort of nifty game bottled up inside of him all season.
His first six starts were almost unblemished, except for one or two poor pitches or a quirky umpire call that tossed him off stride and spoiled another superb effort.
Last night, Perez refused to let anything spoil his effort.
Even a stomach virus.
Sure, there was a questionable infield single by Kevin Mitchell in the fourth inning that spoiled Perez's no-hit attempt, and a single by Greg Briley in the seventh that knocked him from the game.
But that was virtually all the Mariners could claim from Perez as his baffling forkball held them to six hits and helped boost New York to a 3-1 victory last night at Yankee Stadium.


Dollar General reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Fitch Says He Made the Decision to Step Down as Coach of the Nets
After leading his discontented team to the playoffs for the first time in six seasons, Bill Fitch stepped down as head coach of the Nets yesterday, simultaneously confirming rumors that his departure was inevitable and confounding expectations that it would be anything but voluntary.
"It was my decision," Fitch said in a statement released by the Nets.


3 to Develop Prudhoe Find
Three oil companies have approved a plan for joint development of Point McIntyre in the Prudhoe Bay area, one of the biggest domestic oil discoveries in the last decade.
ARCO Alaska Inc., BP Exploration (Alaska) Inc. and Exxon Co.
USA plan to start production at the Point McIntyre field in the third quarter of 1993, according to a statement issued today by ARCO.


National Intergroup reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Contractor Is Labeled As Corrupt
In a move that could cost New York City millions of dollars in Federal and state transportation funds and further delay repair of the deteriorating Manhattan Bridge, City Comptroller Elizabeth Holtzman yesterday recommended that a $96.8 million contract to fix the south side of the bridge be rejected because, she said, the contractor was corrupt.
In a letter to Mayor David N. Dinkins, Ms.
Holtzman said the contract with the Yonkers Contracting Company should be rejected because the company had failed to disclose its history of corrupt business practices and falsified its application for the contract.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Front-Runner; Clinton Begins Search To Pick Running Mate
In yet another sign that the Democratic primary campaign has essentially ended, Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas announced today that he was formally starting his search for a running mate.
Mr.
Clinton said he had asked Warren Christopher, a 67-year-old veteran of three Democratic administrations, to lead the effort.
He will be assisted by Vernon Jordan, the former head of the National Urban League, and former Gov.
Madeleine Kunin of Vermont.


Personal Health
KENNETH LEVINE had just started college when large chunks of his hair unaccountably fell out.
The hair grew back after a series of steroid injections into the bare spots on his scalp.
Then a year later, just as mysteriously as before, his hair fell out again.
This time, however, he lost all the hair on his head, face, arms, legs, chest, everywhere.
And this time, no treatment could get it to regrow.


Anti-Corruption Campaigner and General Lead in Early Philippine Returns
An outspoken former official who campaigned on an anti-corruption platform continued to lead today in early returns in the Philippine presidential elections.
Even though Filipino electoral experts said it might be at least a week before the final results of Monday's vote were known, the front-runner, Miriam Defensor Santiago, predicted that she would emerge as the successor to President Corazon C. Aquino.
A tabulation compiled early today by the ABS-CBN television network showed that with about 10 percent of the vote counted, Mrs.
Santiago, whose calls for clean government and fiery style kept her at the top of public opinion polls for more than a year, had received 669,075 votes, or about 26 percent of the 2.6 million votes tallied.


BRIEFS
Debt  *
Boston Safe Deposit and Trust Co., a unit of American Express Co., New York, is offering $100 million of 4.50 percent notes due on May 19, 1993, at a price of 100 to yield 4.50 through Lehman Bros.
The noncallable notes are rated A-2 by Moody's Investor Service Inc. and A+ by Standard &amp; Poor's Inc. *
Deere Capital Corp., New York, a unit of Deere &amp; Co., is offering $100 million of 7.20 notes due on May 15, 1997, at a price of 100 to yield 7.20 through Goldman, Sachs &amp; Co.
The noncallable notes are rated A-2 by Moody's and A by S.&amp; P.


NBC Likes Young Viewers, Judging From Its Fall Plans
IF NBC needs a theme to promote its prime-time schedule for 1992-93, "Young at Heart" might do.
The network has embarked on a much-discussed effort to bolster its advertising revenues by attracting younger viewers, consumers aged 18 to 49, for whom marketers yearn because they spend more freely and are more likely to try new products or change brands.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Debate; Bush to Make No Decision Until August on Debating
President Bush's campaign manager said today that Mr.
Bush would not decide whether to debate other Presidential candidates until after the Republican convention in August, raising the possibility that he might not debate at all in the fall campaign.
"It's too early to talk about that," said Frederic V. Malek when reporters at a breakfast asked him about Presidential debates.
"We'll address that after the convention."


Study Revives Debate on Need For Mammograms Before 50
AT a time when more women are getting mammograms and many insurers are willing to pay for them, women in their 40's are hearing conflicting advice on whether they need the test.
Doctors have long debated the advisability of mammograms to screen for breast cancer in this age group, but the controversy recently exploded anew when preliminary reports from a large Canadian study suggested that there was no benefit to women from 40 to 49 years old.


Unilab Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


ACCORD IS OUTLINED ON MOVES TO HELP THE NATION'S CITIES
Trying to demonstrate that a beleaguered Washington establishment is responding to the Los Angeles riots, the White House and Congressional leaders today announced broad agreement to enact measures that they said would bring relief to American cities.
Democratic and Republican officials said a consensus was emerging on a set of programs that amounted to a few billion dollars nationwide.
They include "enterprise zones" that offer tax incentives for creation of businesses in blighted neighborhoods, new efforts to drive out drug dealers and expand social services in poor neighborhoods, and enhanced job-training programs.


To Our Readers
Since Friday, distribution of The New York Times in parts of the New York region has been disrupted because of a labor dispute affecting a wholesale delivery company used by the paper. (Article, page B4.)


Executive Changes
AMERICAN EXPRESS BANK INTERNATIONAL, New York, a unit of the American Express Bank Ltd., appointed Sergio J. Masvidal president and chief executive.
ATLANTIC BANK OF NEW YORK, New York, a unit of the National Bank of Greece, S.A., named Nicos Katsoulis senior vice president.


Oklahoma City Coach Goes to Baylor
DARREL JOHNSON, who led Oklahoma City University to two-straight N.A.I.A. championships, was named basketball coach at Baylor yesterday and signed a five-year contract.
Johnson's up-tempo, run-and-gun Oklahoma City teams won 53 straight games.
He had a 38-0 record last season and a 35-3 record two years ago with the Chiefs.(AP)


INSIDE
A Newly Public Oswald File
The Director of Central Intelligence ordered the release of a C.I.A. file dealing with Lee Harvey Oswald's activities before the 1963 assassination of John F. Kennedy.
Page A18.
School Spending Disparities
New York City's school districts spend money in sharply different ways.
Some districts pay more for teachers; others pay more for security guards.
Page B1.
How Do Women Learn?
Ursuline College, near Cleveland, has an experimental curriculum tailored to what its leaders say is the way that women learn.
Education, page B7.
Pat Robertson to Get UPI
Pat Robertson, the television evangelist, made a successful $6 million bid for United Press International at a bankruptcy court auction.
Page D1.
A Plan for Grand Train Travel
Amtrak wants to transform the General Post Office building into a station intended to rival the grandeur of the old Pennsylvania Station.
Page B1.


COMPANY NEWS
ALLIED-SIGNAL INC., Morris Township, N.J., an aerospace concern, began construction of a new $220 million industrial fibers plant in France that will produce industrial polyester for car tires and other heavy-duty reinforcement applications.
The plant will employ about 300.
THE FUTURE NOW INC., Cincinnati, a computer reseller, agreed to acquire nine computer reselling operations owned by Intelligent Electronics Inc., Exton, Pa., a microcomputer chip company.
The agreement calls for The Future Now to issue about 1.6 million shares of its common stock to Intelligent in exchange for the operations acquired.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Courier Defeats Muster  Jim Courier, playing his first clay-court match of the year against one of the game's toughest players on that surface, beat Thomas Muster in straight sets yesterday in a first-round match of the $1.4 million Italian Open in Rome.
Courier defeated the Austrian left-hander, 7-6 (7-1), 6-4.
Pete Sampras, seeded second, had little trouble disposing of Italy's Paolo Cane, winning by 6-4, 6-4 in 1 hour 20 minutes.
The tournament, however, lost one of its top players when Michael Stich of Germany, seeded fourth, withdrew during a match, complaining of an ankle injury.
Stich had won the first set against Fabrice Santoro of France, 7-5, and was down by 1-2 in the second when he pulled out.
Among those advancing were Ivan Lendl, seeded ninth, who beat Jordi Arese of Spain, 6-1, 6-4, and Emilio Sanchez of Spain, seeded No. 11, who defeated Christian Bergstrom of Sweden, 6-4, 2-6, 6-3.
But Karel Novacek of Czechoslovakia, the No. 12 seeded player, was eliminated by Spain's Tomas Carbonell, 4-6, 6-4, 6-3, and a clay-court specialist, Carlos Costa of Spain, beat No. 13 Aaron Krickstein of the United States, 6-4, 6-1. (AP)


Perennial Candidate Takes On New Guises
Almost every Presidential election year, the freckle-faced, Dumbo-eared, gap-toothed Alfred E. Neuman runs for President, on the cover of Mad magazine, of course.
Esquire, however, decided to go Mad one better.
A freckle-faced, Dumbo-eared, gap-toothed George Bush appears on its June cover under Alfred's famous slogan, "What, Me Worry?"


IVAX Corp.(AX) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


For Warmer Weather, Pizza With Fruits of Farm and Sea
OUR eating habits are often determined by the weather as well as the season.
When it gets warmer, we tend to eat more vegetables and generally lighter fare.
This eclectic menu exemplifies this approach.
It includes a broccoli rape and sausage pizza, a fricassee of squid and potatoes, and a carrot and parsley salad.
A reasonably priced fresh fruit is the best way to conclude this meal.
The pizza is a first course here, but it also can be served on its own as a main dish for lunch.
In fact, pizza is one of the most versatile new stars of the culinary world.
People are now eating it not only for lunch, dinner and snacks, but also as hors d'oeuvres, cut into small pieces.
Choices in topping add limitless possibilities.
Our broccoli rape and Italian hot sausage topping can be replaced by sliced tomato, onions and herbs, as well as the more classic pizza topping, tomato sauce and mozzarella cheese.


Fear of Serb Onslaught Increases As Europe's Monitors Quit Bosnia
As military monitors of the European Community withdrew in secrecy and haste from Sarajevo this morning, the residents they left behind were growing markedly more fearful that the terror bombardments of the last five weeks were about to give way to even more violent efforts by Serbian guerrillas seeking to carve up this capital region into ethnic enclaves.
"If the Serbs destroyed so much in front of the European Community's eyes, just imagine what they'll do now that the monitors have gone," said Envera, a 29-year-old Muslim Slav woman stepping carefully through a bombed-out row of offices in the city's radio and television broadcast center, where she works.
"We're finished."


Too Early to Celebrate Release of Syrian Jews
To the Editor:
"Light for the Jews of Syria" (editorial, May 2) repairs a longstanding misimpression about the refugee situation that followed Israel's achieving independence in 1948.
You note a little-known fact -- the flight or expulsion of Jews from Arab states -- and observe that in Syria some 4,500 Jews were refused emigration rights and have been "cowed and manipulated for decades by a hostile regime."
But you are premature in stating that President Hafez al-Assad "has now lifted the harsh restrictions on his Jewish subjects" and that "the new freedom for Jews of Damascus is cause for rejoicing." Since the State Department and White House reported on April 27 that Syria had informed U.S. officials that travel restrictions against Jews had been lifted, hundreds of Syrian Jews have applied for passports but none have been issued.
In some instances, applicants were told that new instructions had not yet been given.
Others were told to come back in three weeks, and some were informed that permission to leave would be granted only for cases of family reunification.


Sanders Dropping Out of Stanford
SUMMER SANDERS, choosing to swim instead of study, will drop out of Stanford to concentrate on the four events she'll be competing in at the Barcelona Olympics.
"I decided two weeks ago that it would be best to give up my N.C.A.A. eligibility and start the process of looking for sponsorship," Sanders said yesterday during a conference call.
Sanders, a sophomore, said she started thinking about leaving school following the Olympic swimming trials in March.
At the Summer Games, Sanders will compete in the 100 and 200-meter butterfly and the 200- and 400-meter individual medleys. (AP)


Transmedia Network Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Making Albany Make the Hard Choices
The New York Legislature has made such a mess of drawing new Congressional lines that a U.S.
Court of Appeals panel yesterday named an outsider to do the job.
The Senate and Assembly, both incapable of compromise, submitted separate, partisan proposals to the court last month and haven't budged since.
The panel, led by Judge George Pratt, had little choice but to name a special master, former U.S.
District Judge Frederick Lacey.
But the lawmakers can still produce a redistricting plan of their own.
They've failed so far because they've been unwilling to make hard choices.
Changes in the U.S. population over the 1980's will cost New York three Congressional seats -- and, to make way for a new Hispanic district, another incumbent could lose his or her seat.


Supercuts Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Charter Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Bridge
For those who have never played bridge, or have played very little, there will be an unusual opportunity during the Eastern Regional Championships at the New York Hilton, Avenue of the Americas and 53d Street in Manhattan.
There will be free two-hour lessons, given by experienced teachers, for complete beginners and those with limited experience.
They are scheduled at 10 A.M on May 23 and on May 25.
For reservations call Bill Rosenbaum at (212) 725-2135.
The teachers could use the diagramed deal for three different levels of expertise.
The beginners can be taught to open one no-trump and to raise to six no-trump when the hands total 33 points.
Looking at two hands, they can be taught to count 11 tricks and shown the possibility of a club finesse to find a 12th.


Making Albany Make the Hard Choices
The New York Legislature has made such a mess of drawing new Congressional lines that a U.S.
Court of Appeals panel yesterday named an outsider to do the job.
The Senate and Assembly, both incapable of compromise, submitted separate, partisan proposals to the court last month and haven't budged since.
The panel, led by Judge George Pratt, had little choice but to name a special master, former U.S.
District Judge Frederick Lacey.
But the lawmakers can still produce a redistricting plan of their own.
They've failed so far because they've been unwilling to make hard choices.
Changes in the U.S. population over the 1980's will cost New York three Congressional seats -- and, to make way for a new Hispanic district, another incumbent could lose his or her seat.


Urban Car Thief: Elusive, Treacherous Prey
Sgt.
Ken Tillotson saw the stolen white Buick running on a flat tire at 10th and Avon, but the Buick saw him too, and rammed the unmarked police car to escape down Avon.
Five minutes later Sgt.
Don Zsaki spotted the Buick headed down Freylinghuysen.
It turned up Meeker, moving fast on the smoking flat, and Sergeant Zsaki fell in behind in his car.
Sergeant Tillotson pulled out of a side street in front of the Buick, but the Buick jumped the curb, blew another tire and careered 100 feet up the sidewalk, as far as Elizabeth Street, before Lieut.
Tony Mullarkey pulled out to block it with his big Chevy.


Virgin Megastore to Enter U.S. Market in a Big Way
Richard Branson, the 41-year-old British entrepreneur, said yesterday that he planned to open the largest record store in Los Angeles next fall in the first United States venture for his fast-growing Virgin Megastore division.
"It will be three times as big as that of our nearest competitor," he said of the store, which is to in a shopping mall on Sunset Boulevard.


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
May 8
May 1
May 10
1992
1992
1991
Gasoline production, daily
6.9
7.1
7.0
Distillate production, daily
2.8
3.1
2.9
Gasoline stocks
216.3
216.4
206.2
Distillate stocks
89.8
93.3
101.7
Crude imports, daily
6.0
5.8
6.2
Product imports, daily
2.0
2.4
2.2
Crude stocks
353.5
353.0
338.7
Crude production, daily
7.2
7.3
7.3
Refinery utilization (%)
85.0
85.9
87.0
Source: American Petroleum Institute


Corrections
An obituary yesterday about Barrie J. Webster, an advertising executive, misstated the day of his death.
It was May 6.


School Boards Vary Widely On Budgets
New York City's Schools Chancellor released budget documents yesterday showing that the city's 32 school districts spend their money in sharply different ways, some channeling far more into classroom teachers while others spend more on security guards, supplies and administration.
The documents, made public for the first time, have the potential to transform the educational politics of the city, and that is apparently Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez's goal in releasing them.
He hopes that by making the information available to parents he can enlist their aid in pressuring the 32 independent school boards to spend their money more effectively.


Sbarro Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to April 19


Amtrak's Envious Look at Post Office
Expecting significant growth in ridership over the next decade, Amtrak is seeking to transform the sprawling General Post Office building at 33d Street and Eighth Avenue into a new station intended to recapture the grandeur of the old Pennsylvania Station.
Coming 30 years after the original Pennsylvania Station was leveled to make way for office towers and Madison Square Garden, Amtrak's proposal in effect acknowledges what architects and historians have been saying all along: that demolishing the stately Roman Revival building was an appalling mistake.


Herbalife International reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Britain Plans an Identity Check on Europeans
Prime Minister John Major is confident he can persuade other European countries to let Britain keep checking documents of travelers arriving from the Continent after the European Community abolishes internal customs controls next January, aides said today.
The British plans, set out by Foreign Secretary Douglas Hurd to a skeptical audience of community foreign ministers in Brussels on Monday, have been criticized as a violation of the spirit, if not the letter, of the 1987 treaty establishing a single European market, which will become reality next Jan. 1.


Gorbachev, in New York, Warns Yeltsin on Social Instability
The former Soviet President, Mikhail S. Gorbachev, broke his silence about his Kremlin successors yesterday, saying the Russian Government of President Boris N. Yeltsin had "carried its reforms to the edge" and needed corrective steps to avoid a social "explosion."
Without mentioning Mr.
Yeltsin by name, Mr.
Gorbachev warned that greater social safeguards were needed at home to fight inflation and the plummeting standard of living if political instability is to be contained.


In Defense of Clutter
To The Home Section:
Permit a strong dissent to the notion that clutter is the evil scourge it's made out to be in your article  [ "Surrounded by Stuff? Call a Clutter Buddy!" April 23 ] .
To paraphrase Michael Douglas's Gordon Gekko in the film "Wall Street": "Clutter is
good
!
"
In reality, given that everything eventually becomes a collectible,
nothing
should ever be discarded.
Instead of workshops on "Letting Go of Clutter," there should be sessions on "The Joy of Living With Clutter."


Women Have Little to Lose in Reporting Rape; Tell Boys Not to Rape
To the Editor:
It is distressing that the prevailing form of rape prevention continues to place responsibility for avoidance on the victims -- that is, girls are told what to do to avoid being raped ("How to Outwit a Rapist," Personal Health, April 29).
I submit it is time that boys were told not to rape.
Secondary-school hygiene or personal development courses include units on family living and/or sex and sexuality.
Alcohol and drug abuse are openly discussed and inveighed against.
The same should be done with sexual assault and rape.
Boys should be taught that sexual assault and rape are wrong, that such behavior is not "macho" but actually a sign of insecurity and weakness.


TII Industries reports earnings for Qtr to March 27


Velcro Industries NV reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Pop and Jazz in Review
'The Big Squeeze'  Symphony Space 2537 Broadway (at 95th Street) Manhattan Through tomorrow
The World Music Institute's accordion showdown, "The Big Squeeze," which started last weekend and ends tomorrow, is one of those events defined by New York.
Musicians from various places troop through, displaying their wares for culturally hungry New Yorkers in a post-modern salad bar of culture.
The nature of the show demands misinterpretation: how can music be understood outside its context?
A formal analysis of music meant for dancing finds its subject coming up short, for example, or something that seems honest to its rural practitioners is hopelessly archaic and funny to urban dwellers.
Some misunderstanding happened on Saturday night at Symphony Space.
Art Moilanen and Tom Hiltunen, two Finnish-American performers from the Upper Peninsula of Michigan came out and performed polkas and schottisches, folk material that had a light European feel to it.
Mr.
Moilanen, the accordionist, let his fingers breeze through the complicated melodies.
For some members of the audience, the material was funny: polka and accordions are kitsch (and kitsch is a form of condescension) and listeners laughed at the songs and their rustic stiffness.
Clearly, the music means something radically different in the Upper Peninsula and on upper Broadway.


Advanced Telecommunications Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Deb Shops reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Post Office Criticized for Opening Its Address List
Some lawmakers are raising questions about the ability of companies to obtain the names and addresses of millions of people who leave forwarding information with the post office.
Since 1985, the United States Postal Service has been licensing a computerized list of all its change-of-address forms to marketing, insurance and credit companies.
As a result, people who have moved and want to keep their new addresses private cannot do so if they want the post office to forward their mail.


Florio Signs Bills on Child Abuse and Exploitation
Gov.
Jim Florio today signed into law three bills that increase penalties for people who exploit and abuse children.
Together with a bill that Mr.
Florio signed in April that made possession of child pornography a crime, the new laws give New Jersey one of the toughest set of child-protection standards in the nation, state officials said.


Trinity Industries reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


DETECTING FRAUDULENT CALLS -- FOR A PRICE
In a bid to stem what it called "a rapidly growing criminal enterprise" and make money as well, A.T.&amp; T. said it would introduce a service for corporate customers called Net Protect this summer.
Intended to stop fraudulent long-distance calls, it will include increased surveillance to detect unusual patterns, like a large number of overseas calls from phone numbers that normally have mostly domestic calls.
The long-distance carrier will not listen in on calls, but will monitor their destination.
A related service, a computer program called Hacker Tracker, will cost customers nearly $2,000, but A.T.&amp; T. will not announce prices for other services like Net Protect until filing notice with the Federal Communications Commission next month.


Essay; V.P. Morning Line
Because this is Pundits' Ratings Week, issues of substance cannot be discussed here.
Only subjects fit for a TV food fight can be considered, which limits us to gee-whizzing meaningless polls or wild speculation about who will be chosen by Presidential nominees to be their running mates.
I choose the latter because my last experience with polls led to Prime Minister Kinnock, and because of my responsibility as a Great Mentioner, in Russell Baker's classic construct.
Anybody mentioned herein will be identified elsewhere for years in yellowing clips as "mentioned for Vice President." (The latest software yellows scanned-in clips.)


Intermediaries Are Optimistic In Dispute At The Times
In the first signs of a break in the volatile eight-day newspaper delivery dispute that has disrupted distribution of The New York Times, a panel of go-betweens selected by the drivers union met yesterday with officials of The Times and a news distributor and said afterward that they had started a process they hoped could lead to a settlement.
At the same time, the newspaper reported its first night without problems affecting production or delivery since a labor contract was rejected last week.


Wicat Systems reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Garden Q. &amp; A.
Terrace Space Savers
Q.
A friend suggested I use espaliered plants as space savers on my small terrace.
What are they, and what plants do you suggest for containers outdoors all year? -- Dierdre Jeanne Raymond, New York
.
A.
Espaliers are woody plants trained to grow flat against a trellis or other support.
The plant grows all in one plane, typically a symmetrical shape --candelabrum, U or fan -- although a free-form design is possible, too.
Espaliered plants have long been used in European orchards to achieve maximum yield of fruiting species like grapes and apples, in minimum space.
The technique is believed to date from ancient Egypt.


Mortgage Bonds From New Mexico
A $167.3 million bond offering by the New Mexico Mortgage Finance Authority has been tentatively priced to yield a maximum 6.9 percent for a bond due in 2024 through underwriters led by Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company.
The tax-exempt issue includes serial bonds with shorter maturities, priced to yield from 3.5 percent in 1993 to 5.5 percent in 1997 and 6.3 percent in 2002.
For longer maturities, investors are offered a bond due in 2009 that is priced to yield 6.4 percent, but a sinking-fund provision gives the issue an average life of 5.5 years.


Southland Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


4-Year-Old From Senegal Adds to School's Mosaic
"WHEN are we going to get there?" N'Dack M'Baye, who is 4 years old and an immigrant from Senegal, was exuberantly impatient the other morning as she left her small apartment near Times Square.
She wore a pink flowered dress and a headful of braids threaded with pink, blue and yellow plastic toy whistles.
She was heading for the subway, uptown, to her first day of nursery school in America.
N'Dack, who speaks Wolof, the main language of Senegal, was accompanied by her parents and a family friend who was acting as translator.
She carried an orange plastic purse full of M&amp;M's -- for the new friends she hoped to make at school.
N'Dack, who has been here two years, already had dozens of friends; it's just that they are all about 25 years older than she, and their children, if they have them, are back in Senegal.


Pilgrim's Pride Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 28


These Days, Fignon Is Simply Charming
Who is the real Laurent Fignon?
With two victories in the Tour de France by age 23, his ability to race a bicycle is unquestioned.
But since those victories, his aloof personality has seemingly poisoned most of the cycling fans in his native France.


Back to Politics as Usual, Parties Dispute Urban Plans
Only a day after President Bush and Congressional leaders met to display a spirit of bipartisanship in dealing with the aftermath of the Los Angeles riots, Republicans and Democrats returned to their normal political maneuvering today and demonstrated that they remained far apart on urban policy.
Mutual appeals for unity began to fray even as Mr.
Bush and Congressional leaders moved ahead with modest programs.
Mr.
Bush announced a $600 million loan package to finance the rebuilding of businesses and homes in riot-damaged areas of Los Angeles, and the Democrats moved to advance an additional $822 million emergency appropriations package to the floor for a vote on Thursday.
The package would also provide aid for areas of Chicago affected by the collapse of a tunnel and subsequent flooding.


Just Try To Stop Them Now
They changed ownership after last season, lost their Stanley Cup winning coach during the regular season and their most valuable player during the playoffs.
But the Pittsburgh Penguins never ceased to persevere.
Tonight, their resilience paid off with a 5-1 victory over the Rangers that ended the Patrick Division finals in six games.


Electrochemical Industries Frutarom Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Clinton Hub Is Little Rock
Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas has decided not to move his national campaign headquarters to Washington, choosing instead to keep it off the beaten path in Little Rock, Ark.
As the campaign continues to prepare for the general election effort against President Bush, it has also begun to consolidate responsibilities and expand its staff.
Today, Mr.
Clinton announced that George Stephanopoulos, until now the deputy campaign manager, will become communications director, overseeing decisions on advertising, polling, policy formulation and scheduling.
He will be based in Little Rock.


Comverse Technology Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Less or More, Style Rules
THE scene is set in New York's SoHo area: Natural light floods the three room apartment, bouncing off the white walls and the white-painted wood floor.
In the center of the living room, a pair of steel and leather Mies van der Rohe stools are piled high with books; a bicycle is parked in front of the turn-of-the-century mantelpiece upon which brass candlesticks, some postcards, a potted orchid and a ceramic by Marc Leuthold, a young artist, are artfully, but not too self-consciously, arranged.


PRICE OF 486SX CHIP TO BE CUT BY MORE THAN HALF
The Intel Corporation will cut the price of its 486SX chip by more than half in the third quarter of this year.
The cut, which takes the 25-megahertz 486SX's price to $119, from $282, is intended to make that chip the standard for mass-market personal computers that now use the 386 chip, Intel said.


Two Prison Escapees Still Elude Capture


Reichmann Troubles Roil Canada
Canadians used to break down the wealthy into three categories: the rich, the superrich and the Reichmanns.
The Reichmann family business, Olympia &amp; York Developments, is the world's largest real estate developer, having altered skylines throughout Canada as well as in New York and London.
But in March it ran out of cash, and fear is rippling through many corners of the Canadian economy.


Accounts
*
Wieden &amp; Kennedy, Portland, Ore., said yesterday that it had withdrawn from the review for Mastercard International's $60 million account, to be decided in August.
That leaves five semifinalists: Lintas New York, the incumbent; Ammirati &amp; Puris, New York; Fallon McElligott, Minneapolis; Messner Vetere Berger Carey Schmetterer, New York, and Hal Riney &amp; Partners, San Francisco. *
Conran's Habitat, White Plains, moved its account in-house from Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Advertising, New York.
Billings were estimated at $4 million.


Madison Gas &amp; Electric reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


HOME IMPROVEMENT
PROPER pouring, finishing and curing are essential to any project using concrete, the mixture of cement, sand, gravel and water.
Correct mixing of these materials was covered in last week's column.
Pouring, finishing and curing are done in basically the same way, regardless of the project.
Constructing a narrow slab (up to five feet wide) for a walk or patio is described here; space does not permit describing how to build wider slabs, steps or footings, all of which are more complicated and usually regulated by local building codes.


Top Editor at Wall Street Journal Resigns
Norman Pearlstine, who as the top news editor of The Wall Street Journal presided over an aggressive expansion of the paper's scope and staff, said yesterday that he planned to resign from Dow Jones &amp; Company at the end of June.
Mr.
Pearlstine, who is 49 years old, said he planned to start a company that would invest and engage in a variety of media activities.
In an interview yesterday, Mr.
Pearlstine said that he had always enjoyed entrepreneurial opportunities, such as starting up the European edition of The Journal.


Methanex reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Hadco Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to May 2


Head of Lee Jeans Moves To Maker of Youthwear
Frederick J. Rowan 2d, the man who restored the Lee jeans business, is turning his attention to the younger set as the new president and chief executive of the William Carter Company, a maker of clothing for infants and children.
He replaces Robert J. Matura, who is stepping aside as part of an agreement made in 1988 when the Wesray Capital Corporation, a buyout company, took Carter, based in Shelton, Conn., private.
Mr.
Matura agreed to head the company until it had completed a recapitalization, which it did last year.


Books of The Times; The Facts and Feelings From Mary McCarthy
Intellectual Memoirs  New York 1936-1938  By Mary McCarthy  114 pages.
Harcourt Brace Jovanovich. $15.95.
In "How I Grew" (1987), the somewhat dry and dispassionate second volume of her memoirs -- the first was "Memories of a Catholic Girlhood" (1957) -- Mary McCarthy wrote this curious passage: "When you have committed an action that you cannot bear to think about, that causes you to writhe in retrospect, do not seek to evade the memory:
make
yourself relive it, confront it repeatedly over and over, till finally, you will discover, through sheer repetition it loses its power to pain you."


Scitex Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Atlas Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
The wages of most college-educated people have failed to keep up with inflation since 1989, two labor economists reported.
Such wages were once thought to be exempt from the wage stagnation afflicting most Americans for more than 15 years.  [ Page A1. ]
Retail sales climbed 0.9 percent in April, essentially offsetting a March decline that was bigger than first thought, Commerce Dept. figures showed.  [ D1. ]


Hispanic Rally Protests Effort By Hasidim for Co-op Grant
More than 1,000 Hispanic residents filled an old movie theater in the Williamsburg, Brooklyn, last night to protest an effort by a Hasidic organization to seek Federal money for converting two public housing projects into cooperative apartments.
As the spirited overflow crowd cheered and chanted, the rally's organizers angrily rejected an invitation received yesterday from the Hasidic group, the United Jewish Organizations of Williamsburg, to co-sponsor the application for the Federal grant.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  3 Americans Advance in Italian Open
Americans Jim Courier, Pete Sampras and Michael Chang moved into the final 16 of the Italian Open yesterday in Rome, trying to break a nine-year United States drought in the clay-court tournament.
But ninth-seeded Ivan Lendl, back after boycotting Rome for several years because of its rowdy fans, was eliminated by Marc Rosset of Switzerland, 6-4, 2-6, 7-6 (7-3).
Lendl claimed he lost his confidence after the chair umpire, Richard Ings of Australia, reversed a call during the tie breaker.
Lendl, who was leading by 3-1 at the time, dropped the next five points to lose the match.
Courier, top-seeded, breezed past Francisco Clavet of Spain, 6-2, 6-2.
Sampras, seeded second, drubbed Austria's Horst Skoff, 6-3, 6-4, and the fifth-seeded Chang beat Italy's Renzo Furlan, 6-1, 3-6, 6-3. (AP)


Pioneer Financial Services Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


CHRONICLE
Things started to get a touch tense Monday evening as waiters at the Whitney Museum American Art Award dinner were preparing to serve the cold praline souffle.
Everything was in place but the award itself.
A piece by RICHARD ARTSCHWAGER was to be presented to the Philip Morris Companies for 35 years of support to the arts.
There to receive it were MICHAEL A. MILES, the chairman and chief executive of Philip Morris, and HAMISH MAXWELL and GEORGE WEISSMAN, who had held those posts in the past.


Hispanic Culture Festival
Mayor David N. Dinkins will announce today that the largest festival of Hispanic culture ever to be mounted in New York City will take place in Manhattan on Sept. 6.
More than 850,000 people are expected to attend the festival, which will be conducted over a 30-square-block area from 34th to 42d Street along Broadway, Seventh Avenue and the Avenue of the Americas.
The entire festival area will be closed to traffic for the daylong event.


FFP Partners L.P.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 29


Reward Is Offered for Exxon Executive
The Exxon Company International today offered a reward for information leading to the safe return of its president, Sidney J. Reso, who has been missing since April 29.
In a brief statement released from its headquarters in Florham Park, the company said it would pay "a substantial reward" for the information.
No amount was specified.


Corrections
A chart on Tuesday listing box-office receipts for the top 10 films of the week, monitored by the Exhibitor Relations Company, included an erroneous figure from the company for "Deep Cover." The film, which had the ninth-highest gross over the weekend, totaled $11.8 million by Monday, not $10 million.


Horn &amp; Hardart Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 28


Southern Electronics reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


House Committee Pares Bush Defense Budget
The House Armed Services Committee today approved a $274 billion military budget bill for the fiscal year beginning Oct. 1, increasing spending for ballistic missile defenses.
The vote was 47 to 8.
Overall, the measure provides $7 billion less than the Bush Administration wanted, but it makes few major changes in the White House plan.


Corrections
An article on Sunday about the effects of the Los Angeles riots on President Bush's domestic policy referred incorrectly to Dr.
Louis W. Sullivan.
He is Secretary of Health and Human Services, not the Housing Secretary.


Sports of The Times; Rangers' Exit More Painful Than Usual
AS the Stanley Cup playoffs approached, Danny the Ranger Rooter remembered how someone once taunted him.
"That the Rangers would never win the Stanley Cup in my lifetime," he said cheerfully.
"But this year, I guess I'm about to die."


Calendar: Garden Tours And Terrace Lessons
Garden Education Horticultural Society of New York, 128 West 58th Street (between Sixth and Seventh Avenues); (212) 757-0915.


Nu-West Industries reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Government Agency Ferreted Out Names Of Its Gay Workers
A gay employee of the Federal Emergency Management Agency says he was pressured last year to provide a list of other homosexual workers to managers and security personnel, who maintained that they needed the information to help identify potential security risks at the agency.
The employee, Jerald E. Johnson, a 32-year-old management analyst, said agency officials held up clearance for him to participate in an international project until he identified agency workers who were rumored or he knew to be homosexual, an action he says he now regrets.


A.L. Labs reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Consolidated Enfield reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Consumer Prices Advance Only 0.2%
Inflation moderated in April as declining food and clothing costs and slower gains in housing and transportation held consumer price increases to a slim two-tenths of 1 percent, the Labor Department said today.
The modest gain in the Consumer Price Index -- the most widely used measure of inflation -- should give the Federal Reserve room for another cut in interest rates, economists said.


In Races for House, Incumbents Running Scared
Gary Franks knows he is a target.
As the first black Republican in Congress since the 1930's, Mr.
Franks expects Connecticut Democrats, along with the national party, to make a special effort to deny him a second term.
"I expect a very difficult race," said Mr.
Franks, a freshman Congressman whose district includes Waterbury and Danbury in the western part of Connecticut.
"I've had Jesse Jackson marching through my district, creating a distraction, and a lot of liberals want to get rid of me because I'm the only black conservative Republican."


The Strong Point Of Behavioral Taxes
To the Editor:
Alan D. Pekelner's response (letter, April 20) to my letter on conquering our water shortage (April 2) missed the point that my letter did not advocate net new taxation.
Rather, I proposed shifting some of the tax burden from the general taxpayer to guzzlers of our scarce water supply.
He attacked water taxes as regressive and an unnecessary burden.
To set the record straight, the proposal explicitly stated that these taxes "would allow the city to lower other aversive taxes on modest-income New Yorkers."
That is exactly the strongest point of "behavioral taxes," which achieve social ends (energy taxes powerfully lower energy use and its attendant air pollution; taxes on toxic substances reduce the danger resulting from their use; tobacco taxes lower cancer, heart disease, etc.).
Just as important, however, these taxes can provide dollar-for-dollar reductions in other taxes.
Every tax dollar paid at the gas pump allows for a dollar reduction in income taxes, property taxes, sales taxes or any other burdensome tax.
THOMAS O'BRIEN Director for Research Horizon Institute for Policy Solutions Charlottesville, Va., April 28, 1992


Conwest Exploration reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Along Road to Beatification, Controversy for the Church
For Msgr. Alvaro del Portillo, barely a day goes by without some controversy.
As prelate of the Roman Catholic organization called Opus Dei -- the Work of God -- the 78-year-old Spanish bishop is approaching what he sees as a spiritual high-point: the beatification of the group's Spanish founder, Msgr.
Jose Maria Escriva de Balaguer, by the Pope at St.
Peter's on May 17.


Thermo Process Systems reports earnings for Qtr to March 28


LOS ANGELES RIOTS SPURRING BIG RISE IN SALES OF GUNS
In the aftermath of the Los Angeles riots, Californians are buying firearms at the highest rate since the state began keeping records 20 years ago, and other states are reporting similar surges in gun sales.
In large part the rush to buy guns in California can be attributed to one of the more frightening messages to come out of the two days of arson, looting and violence in South-Central Los Angeles.
That message, that fear, is that the police might not be able to defend people during an outbreak of civil unrest.


Cone Goes Sidearm and Padres Go Deep
For all the additional runs and extended analysis, the game was a story of 138 pitches: the one David Cone hung to Gary Sheffield in the third, and the 137 Bruce Hurst subdued the Mets with over nine flawless innings.
Cone's pitch to Sheffield, a Laredo slider that nearly wound up in the north Bronx, meant three runs for the Padres.
And Hurst's cryptic collage of off-speed pitches meant the Mets wouldn't so much as be sniffing a comeback as they fell to the Padres, 7-0, at Shea Stadium.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Beausoleil  S.O.B.'s
Beausoleil has metamorphosed since it first emerged from Lafayette, La., in the mid-1970's.
It started out as a folky revival of Acadian (a k a Cajun) two-steps and waltzes, then added drums for a touch of rock and zydeco.
Its instrumental front line still consists of a fiddle and Acadian button accordion, with occasional counterpoint on acoustic guitar.
But now, Beausoleil's musical allegiances are all over the map.
Its first set on Tuesday night at S.O.B.'s included modal Celtic fiddle music and Cajun waltzes and two-steps, but the band also dipped into bouncy Tex-Mex norteno music (with lyrics in English, Spanish and Cajun) and a Caribbean-Creole hybrid in a song called "Island Zydeco." Like Gulf Coast bands with their minds on the dance floor, Beausoleil has pursued good-time music instead of purism.


Fuel Riots Erupt in Nigeria's Biggest City
Enraged by a gasoline drought in this major oil-producing country, gangs of militant anti-Government demonstrators skirmished with riot policemen today, leaving at least three people dead and hundreds hurt.
The street violence, the worst in years, was viewed by many here as possibly upsetting the schedule that Nigeria's military leader has offered for transferring power to elected civilians by next year.


Thomson Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Lands' End reports earnings for Qtr to May 1


Molson Cos. reports earnings for Year to March 31


Blue Shirts, Red Faces and No Cup


Sceptre Resources reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Cease-Fire Brings Bit of Calm but No Confidence to Sarajevo
A tentative calm settled today over Sarajevo, the capital of Bosnia and Herzegovina, after Serbian leaders who have pressed a military offensive across the republic responded to Western diplomatic pressure by announcing a five-day cease-fire.
The artillery, mortar and rocket fire that has rattled Sarajevo for much of the last month was mostly stilled after the cease-fire went into effect at 6 A.M.
The calm was broken only sporadically thereafter by gunfire from Serbian positions in the hills above the city.


With Eye on Riots, Dinkins Announces Loan Plan for Poor Areas
Spurred by the upheaval in Los Angeles, Mayor David N. Dinkins announced a new program yesterday to provide loans and subsidies for the creation of businesses in poor sections of the city.
Although the Neighborhood Retail Development Program was planned well before the outburst of fury after the Rodney G. King verdict, Mr.
Dinkins said in a written statement yesterday that "In the wake of the tragedies in Los Angeles, we realize more than ever how acute the need is for the city not only to build housing and not only to build retail strips, but to help build neighborhoods."


Republicans Pressed on Plans for Cuts
With only five days left for Gov.
Jim Florio to sign or veto a sales-tax rollback, the Republicans had promised to explain today their goals for the next fiscal year and how they would deal with a growing state budget gap.
Instead, after using two meetings to blast away at Mr.
Florio, calling him the "Harry Houdini of state government," Republican leaders found themselves jousting with reporters about when they would offer specific fiscal plans.


PHLCorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Youth Takes Big Swing Into the L.P.G.A. Spotlight
For most of the last decade, a select group of elite players has dominated the Ladies Professional Golf Association.
It was the rare tournament that wasn't won by Pat Bradley, Beth Daniel, Betsy King, Patty Sheehan or Nancy Lopez.
Those tried and true rivalries made the women's tour distinct from the PGA Tour, which was constantly being invaded by upstarts.


Robert Reed, Actor, Dead at 59; The Father of 'The Brady Bunch'
Robert Reed, who became a surrogate father to a generation as the head of an exceptionally large household on television's "Brady Bunch," died on Tuesday night at Huntington Memorial Hospital in Pasadena, Calif.
He was 59 years old and lived in Pasadena.
He died of bowel cancer, said Ann Haney, a family friend.


Stanley Interiors Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 29


Sage Revived By Executives
Spencer L. Hapoienu, formerly executive director of Sage Worldwide Inc., a retail and promotion services consulting division disbanded by Ogilvy &amp; Mather last year, has gone back into business under the Sage name in New York.
Mr.
Hapoienu is managing partner of the new Sage Worldwide, which will also focus on services like merchandising and consumer data bases.


Noo Yawk's Knicks Enraging Second City
When the Knicks' Xavier McDaniel slammed his right fist against the padded basket support in the first quarter of Game 5 of the Eastern Conference semifinals Tuesday night, that was great sports television.
The lunatic from New York loose in Chicago.
McDaniel was upset because he had been desposited on his rump by the Bulls' Bill Cartwright and no foul was called.
McDaniel freaked out and the neo-Knick haters across the Midway were happy to point out that New Yorkers might not whine, like Scottie Pippen, but they punch, then run amuck on the sideline until being gang tackled into a chair.


Gap Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 2


Boston Journal; The Young Are Given A Refuge In Music
Like many other young people in urban areas, Sanettra Ferguson, 17 years old, and Michael Thompson, 18, have seen their share of drugs and guns, and they have watched their friends die in street violence.
Unlike their peers, the two have found a refuge from the gangs and drugs that have invaded city schools and neighborhoods: music.


Caldor Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to May 2


Devcon International reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


North European Oil Royalty reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Tokyo Stocks Advance
Stocks closed higher in Tokyo on Wednesday after recovering early losses as strong bargain-hunting and arbitrage buying programs helped lift prices.
A firm yen and a strong bond market also strengthened market sentiment, brokers said.
The 225-issue Nikkei average rose 260.04 points, or 1.40 percent.


North Canadian Oils reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Babbage's Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 2


American Exploration Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Leucadia National Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Philadelphia Bombing Survivor Leaves Prison
Ramona Johnson Africa walked out of the state correctional institution for women at Muncy, Pa., today, seven years to the day after she fled a West Philadelphia rowhouse after it was firebombed by the police.
But Ms.
Africa, one of two people to survive the fire in the house, which was used as a headquarters by the radical back-to-nature group MOVE, said she was not celebrating.
"How can I," she asked reporters at a news conference today, "with so many members of my family dead, with so many still in jail?"


Crown Life reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Nokes's Slam Is Especially Grand
The baseball zoomed toward the empty right-field seats last night, and Matt Nokes watched it, admired it.
Erik Hanson's floating pitch never found the Seattle catcher's mitt because Nokes rose from his crouch, swung sharply and crushed the ball deep into the Bronx night.
With three Yankees perched on the bases in the second inning, it was more than a mere homer for Nokes.
It was his fifth career grand slam and his 100th homer, but it was even more than that.
The crucial hit had meaning, and that meant a lot to the struggling Nokes because he had been hitless in 17 at-bats with runners in scoring position and was batting .198.


Matthew Meyer, 87, Newspaper Executive
Matthew Meyer, the Scripps Howard newspaper executive who headed the ill-fated effort to merge and preserve three New York City dailies as The World Journal Tribune, died on May 7 at Bethesda Hospital in Delray Beach, Fla.
He was 87 years old and lived in Delray Beach.
He died of a stroke, his family said.


Abroad at Home; Public Keep Out
The Senate's ill-starred effort to investigate the leak of Anita Hill's charge against Judge Clarence Thomas ended last week.
But it should not be allowed to pass without notice of the nasty and dangerous precedent it tried to set.
I do not mean the attempt to make the two reporters who told the story disclose their sources.
That attack on the press has had plenty of attention, and anyway the press can take care of itself.


Trilon Financial reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Speaking in Tongues?
To The Home Section:
It struck me as peculiar that in Suzanne Slesin's article on the Italian Furniture Fair in Milan  [ "Italian Furniture Goes All Cuddly," April 16 ]  she quoted literate Milanese speaking half in Spanish and half in Italian.
The fully Italian form of the "mantra" chanted by visitors would have been "Che carina," not "Que carina." VINCENT R. TORTORA New York


Review/Dance; City Ballet Goes Back to Its Repertory
After weeks of "The Sleeping Beauty," the dancers of the New York City Ballet bounded back into the repertory on Tuesday night at the New York State Theater like eager young horses at the gate.
The emphasis throughout the varied program was on high sleek energy and even higher spirits.
The evening opened with George Balanchine's "Four Temperaments," a 1946 ballet that explores the principal human temperaments or humors.
The style of the performance was embodied in the airy, astringent and forceful dance of Peter Boal and Adam Luders, leading the Melancholic and Phlegmatic variations respectively.
There was less extra dramatic weight placed on the dancing than usual, but both men were persuasive in their interpretations, particularly in their expressive ports de bras.


Board of Education's Process May Be Untidy, but It Works
To the Editor:
"McCall and Fernandez Face a Board of Frustration" (news article, May 2) portrays the current seven-member New York City Board of Education as at best cantankerous and at worst paranoid to the point of paralyzing the very system we are entrusted to protect.
The primary source of these incorrect characterizations seems to be nameless "insiders" who describe us as being inept, opportunistic and possessing individual political agendas.
For years, the Board of Education was criticized as a collection of political appointees who merely rubber-stamped crucial decisions affecting a million schoolchildren and their parents.
It is indeed ironic that when a board is appointed that reflects the school population and that approaches its duties in a thorough and independent fashion, we find ourselves criticized anonymously for being too independent.


Cisco Systems reports earnings for Qtr to April 26


Topics of The Times; The Glory That Was Rail
America lost a monument of irreplaceable grandeur when the Pennsylvania Railroad demolished New York City's Pennsylvania Station three decades ago.
Its replacement is confined to a nondescript space under Madison Square Garden on the same site.
But now Amtrak is contemplating a brilliant redemption: Move the station across the street to the General Post Office.
The old station, with its two-block facade of granite columns, vast waiting room and glass-roofed concourse, celebrated the greatness of New York.
So might the Post Office building, which also spans two blocks.


Quiet Tibetan Influx; Devout, Exiled but Kept Out by U.S.
Pema Tsering's escape from Tibet began 30 years ago with a nighttime trek through the Himalayan mountains and ended three weeks ago on an Alitalia jet to Kennedy International Airport.
With hot buttered tea and steamed beef dumplings, New York's entire Tibetan community turned out to help him celebrate, fitting comfortably into a small East Side restaurant.
For the 500 Tibetans in the United States, Mr.
Tsering's arrival was a very big deal, the beginning of a wave of Tibetan migration to the United States that will ultimately quadruple their minuscule but passionate exile community.
It was made possible when Congress authorized 1,000 special visas for Tibetans.


Parker &amp; Parsley Petroleum reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


TV Venture Is Criticized For Promises to Investors
In promoting what it calls a revolutionary technology to provide interactive television, TV Answer Inc. has not been wasting time on subtlety.
"The force that created a million fortunes is about to do it again," proclaimed a headline in recent full-page newspaper advertisements.
The ads, which ran in The New York Times, The Washington Post and USA Today, also touted "the business opportunity of your lifetime" and the "biggest business opportunity since cellular" telephone licenses were awarded in the early 1980's.


R &amp; B Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 28


Derlan Industries reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Markel Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Loral Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Time Warner Refinancing
Time Warner Inc. reached an agreement with a group of 30 banks to refinance $6.2 billion of its debt at a higher interest rate.
Banks, led by Bankers Trust and Chemical Bank, agreed yesterday to provide the loan at an interest rate that floats 100 basis points, or 1 percent, higher than the London interbank offering rate.
The rate, known as Libor, is a benchmark rate for loans.


The U.N. Today
General Assembly COMMITTEE ON INTERNATIONAL TRADE LAW -- 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
General information phone: (212) 963-1234 Tours are conducted 9 A.M.-5:45 P.M.


Women Have Little to Lose in Reporting Rape; In Complete Control?
To the Editor:
The defense of the accused policemen in the Rodney King case was brilliant: make Mr.
King responsible for his own brutalizing.
Make Mr.
King responsible by making his actions control the actions of the police.
It worked.
Mr.
King, said one of the jurors, "was in complete control."
I wonder how this defense will work the first time we have a video in a rape case and the defense says: "The alleged victim was always in control. Notice what the rapist is saying: 'If you just relax and take it easy, you won't get hurt. If you get hurt, it will be all your fault.' " Again, blame the victim.
MYRON TAUBE Pittsburgh, May 2, 1992


Women Have Little to Lose in Reporting Rape
To the Editor:
"Survey Shows Number of Rapes Far Higher Than Official Figures" (news article, April 24) brought up the issue of why women don't report rape.
As a court watcher I have followed criminal sexual conduct cases in Ingham County, Michigan, for more than a year and have the following observations.
One reason women don't report the crime is the myth that all rape cases go to trial and the victim has to testify and will be intimidated and victimized again by defense attorneys cross-examining the witness.
The media helped perpetuate the myth in the televised trial of William Kennedy Smith in Florida last year.
This trial was not representative of what takes place in most rape cases in that a trial is not the typical way of handling such a case; indeed, most such cases do not go to trial.


ISM Information reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Atmos Energy Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


New Court Order Heightens Confusion on Redistricting
A day after a Federal court named a special master to draw new Congressional districts for New York State, the United States Supreme Court ordered yesterday that experts previously appointed by a state court must also be allowed to draft their own competing redistricting plan.
The Court's order brought new confusion to what was already one of the most contentious political issues in the state.
With less than two weeks before each plan is due, the order set off a race between the state and Federal courts and put renewed pressure on a deadlocked State Legislature to reach a compromise plan of its own.


Communists in Laos Steer Economy By Capitalist Lights, Not the Red Star
"Socialism remains the goal," said the former official, one of the old guard of Laotian Communism who began the struggle against France in the 1940's and continued it from mountain caves in the north and during the heavy United States bombardment until they took over this country in 1975.
"When will Laos be socialist?" he asked with a shrug.
"It may take 20 years, 50 years, maybe 100. I don't know."


Sentence and Fine In Gasoline Tax Case
David Bogatin, the nimble entrepreneur who pleaded guilty to tax evasion in what state authorities called one of the biggest gasoline bootlegging operations in the United States, was sentenced today to two and two-thirds to eight years in state prison and ordered to pay $3.1 million in restitutions and fines.


CBI Industries reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Robec Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Lebanese Leader Names New Prime Minister
President Elias Hrawi announced the appointment of a new Prime Minister today, one week after riots forced the previous Government to resign.
Mr.
Hrawi named Rashid Solh, a 66-year-old lawyer and Member of Parliament who was Prime Minister at the outbreak of the Lebanese civil war 17 years ago, to form a new Government after consultations with lawmakers over the last two days.


Whittle to Lay Off Workers And Focus on Electronics
Whittle Communications announced yesterday that it would lay off 8 percent of its 100 employees.
The move is part of a broad restructuring to focus on developing its electronic properties.
The staff reductions will be made predominantly in the print operations of the media company, based in Knoxville, Tenn.
But Chris Whittle, chairman and founder, said in an interview that none of the company's publications would be closed.


Morningstar Group reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Japan's Peacekeeping Role in Nobel Mold
To the Editor:
Why is The New York Times wrongheadedly determined that sending troops abroad for United Nations peacekeeping operations is the same as sending troops abroad in a traditional sense ("Japan's Better Example," editorial, April 20)?
Former Prime Minister Lester Pearson of Canada, creator of the operations, would have been deeply chagrined at this gross misrepresentation of the peacekeeping operations, and the Nobel Peace Prize awarded to the operations in 1988 would have been given wrongly if the assumption of your editorial were true.
Legislation to permit Japanese participation in United Nations peacekeeping operations has hardly "thrown Tokyo politics into needless turmoil," nor has it "spread anxiety through Asia." What the peacekeeping operations bill has done is to pull Japan's head from the sand of self-righteousness and self-satisfied "one-country pacifism" in which the Japanese public has indulged ever since World War II, and to awaken the public to the basic need for Japan to fulfill its duty to the international community.


Pop and Jazz in Review
'Cowboy Logic'  Rainbow and Stars 30 Rockefeller Plaza Manhattan Through June 6
In what may be the club's most audacious experiment in programming since it opened three years ago, Rainbow and Stars, the sleek cabaret atop what used to be the RCA Building, has brought in "Cowboy Logic," a revue of cowboy songs and poetry, for a four-week engagement.
The show, which features the country-pop singer Michael Martin Murphey; Waddie Mitchell, a storyteller and poet from Nevada who has appeared on the "Tonight" show, and Don Edwards, a Texan troubadour and guitarist, coincides with the establishment of Warner Western, a new record label devoted to Western music and folklore.
Is it possible to create a mythic, campfire-under-the-stars atmosphere in the heart of midtown Manhattan?
The revue's low-keyed opening-night show suggested that the grand setting and the folksy performers were not ideally matched.
"Cowboy Logic" is a rambling trailside musicale in which the three performers take turns singing and telling stories that connect their own lives to late-19th-century cowboy history and mythology.
It would probably be more stimulating heard on the radio than seen live.
Running through the material is a deep strain of fatalism, because, as Mr.
Edwards explained, "the cowboys lived with death all the time."


2 KINGS COMPETE FOR HOLY SHRINES
King Fahd of Saudi Arabia and King Hussein of Jordan, whose relations have remained tense since they took opposite sides in the Persian Gulf crisis, are locked in an emotionally and politically explosive dispute over the restoration of the Dome of the Rock and other sites in Jerusalem that are considered among the most sacred of Muslim shrines.
The Saudi King offered this week to pay all expenses of a major renovation plan for the Jerusalem sites, "including their continued maintenance."


Officer Faces Second Trial
One of four officers acquitted in the beating of a black motorist will be tried again, the Los Angeles District Attorney announced.
Page A20.


U.N. Rules Out A Force to Halt Bosnia Fighting
In a pessimistic report to the Security Council, the United Nations Secretary General today ruled out sending peacekeeping forces to end the fighting in Bosnia and Herzegovina and even raised the possibility of pulling back from the plan to station some 14,000 troops to keep the peace in Croatia because of new disputes there.
Serbian militias, accused of being the main instigators in the fighting, began a cease-fire this morning, and the Bosnian capital, Sarajevo, had its quietest day in the last 10.  [ Page A12. ]


Here's the Diploma, Folks. Folks?


Kraft Natural Cheese Shifted to Thompson
In the first change of agencies since refocusing on its cheese business, the Kraft U.S.A. unit of Kraft General Foods has shifted the Kraft Natural Cheese account to J. Walter Thompson Chicago from the Leo Burnett Company in Chicago.
A Kraft General Foods spokeswoman confirmed the change, reported in this week's Adweek, but declined to discuss billings.
Adweek estimated them at $5 million, but they were believed to have been lower recently.
The spokeswoman added that Burnett would be assigned a "new strategic development project," but would not discuss details.


Another Spirited Auction Brings $33.8 Million
The two-week spring round of evening auctions ended on a high note at Sotheby's last night in a two-and-a-half-hour sale of Impressionist and modern paintings, drawings and sculpture.
The sale totaled $33.8 million, less than the auction house's pre-sale estimate of $39 million to $54 million.
Of the 93 works up for sale, 79 were sold.
"We're very pleased; we've really rounded a corner," said Diana D. Brooks, Sotheby's president.
"Thank you, American collectors." Of the seven most expensive works up for sale, four were bought by Americans, one by a South American collector, one by an Asian dealer and one by a European dealer.


Brady (W.H.) Co. (O) reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Fistfights Mark Italian Parliament's Effort to Elect a President


Tiffany &amp; Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


PARENT &amp; CHILD
WHEN I was 4 years old, I saw a television commercial for a particular brand of instant pudding.
It looked so attractive, elegantly swirled in a crystal goblet.
I coveted that pudding and asked my mother to buy some.
She explained that it probably wouldn't taste very good.
I insisted that the commercial said it did, so it must.
Reluctantly, she bought the instant pudding and made some.
It was awful.
As I struggled to figure out why it didn't taste the way the television commercial said it would, my 4-year-old mind came up with the answer, which I gladly shared with my mother.
She had served it in a regular dish, not in a crystal goblet as they did on television.
That was the problem!


North American Ventures reports earnings for Qtr to March 29


President for Handy &amp; Harman
Frank E. Grzelecki was not looking for a full-time job when he was hired for some consulting work in 1988 by Handy &amp; Harman.
In fact, he was looking to acquire his own firm with a group of investors.
But Mr.
Grzelecki (pronounced grez-LECK-ee) liked what he saw at Handy &amp; Harman, and the New York-based company seems to have liked his work as well.
On Tuesday, he was named president and chief operating officer, broadening his responsibilities to include operations, planning and budgeting.
In his previous position as vice chairman, he ran Handy &amp; Harman's precious metals division.
Handy &amp; Harman refines, processes and fabricates precious metals.


Corrections
An article last Thursday about the announcement of a deal for the sale of American fighter planes to Finland misstated the history of such sales.
The United States sold fighter planes to Finland in 1939; the new deal is not the first between the two countries.


Canadian Marconi reports earnings for Year to March 31


Review/Dance; Love, Duty and Spectacle In 19th-Century Royal India
"La Bayadere," one of the most elaborate spectacles of 19th-century ballet, returned to American Ballet Theater's repertory on Tuesday night at the Metropolitan Opera House.
It received a performance that matched its grandeur of scale.
The choreography that Marius Petipa created for it in 1877 is inventive, varied and flamboyant.
And in Natalia Makarova's staging, this choreographic magnitude is enhanced by elaborate settings in a 19th-century manner by PierLuigi Samaritani.
The fantastic plot concerns love, duty, jealousy, crime, punishment and redemption.


Dibrell Brothers reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Consolidated Carma reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


CHRONICLE
LEONARD LAUDER, the president of the Whitney, and his wife, EVELYN, scurried into the dinner just in time to join the receiving line.
First, they had gone to the Columbia University School of Nursing's Centennial Dinner at the Pierre, where Mrs.
Lauder had received the Centennial Award for her work in fostering breast-cancer research and education and for her fund-raising efforts.


CHRONICLE
"I feel as if I've given birth to twins," RICHARD KAPLAN, the executive producer of "Prime Time Live," said jubilantly to DIANE SAWYER, an anchor of the program.
The two stood sipping drinks Tuesday evening on the terrace of Hickory Hill, ETHEL KENNEDY'S rambling house in McLean, Va.
Mr.
Kaplan had good reason to feel proud, since the program had just won two honors at the 24th annual Robert F. Kennedy Journalism Awards ceremony.
A crush of politicians, journalists and assorted Kennedys had turned up to mingle, and to congratulate the winners of the prizes, sometimes called the "poor man's Pulitzers." The winners included Jacquee Petchel and Andres Viglucci of The Miami Herald, Paul Conrad of The Los Angeles Times, Suzanne Kreiter of The Boston Globe, Minnesota Public Radio and The North Idaho College Sentinel.


Sea Containers Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Great American Communications reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Metall Mining reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Quotation of the Day
"Houston, I think we've got a satellite." -- CAPT.
DANIEL C. BRANDENSTEIN, the Endeavour commander.  [ A1:2. ]


Fay's Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to April 25


New York Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Retail Sales Rose 0.9% In April
Retail sales climbed nine-tenths of 1 percent in April, essentially offsetting a March decline that was bigger than first thought, Commerce Department figures showed today.
The report unsettled some economists who saw it as a sign that the budding recovery might have begun to wilt, but it reassured others that sales climbed, albeit from a lower starting point.


Scherer (R.P.) (N) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  NEEDLES FOR ADDICTS: CLEAN, LEGAL AND FREE
For the first time in two years, drug addicts will be able to legally get free clean needles in New York City as a group of public and private agencies try to measure whether such programs would slow the spread of AIDS.
The new effort, markedly different from a previous one, will use community workers to seek out addicts on the streets to distribute needles and offer access to social services and drug treatment.
A1.
MESSAGES FROM SOUTH AFRICA . . .
A Mayoral delegation returned from South Africa bearing a letter from Nelson Mandela, urging Mayor Dinkins not to lift New York's economic sanctions until an interim government is established, aides to Mr.
Mandela and city officials said.
B3. . . .
AND THE FORMER SOVIET UNION


Unions Often Put at Risk In Company Takeovers
A company that takes over another company usually acquires its union along with its workers.
But the dispute that has disrupted delivery of The New York Times shows how a new employer can disregard the wages and benefits that the union has won from the business's previous owner.
To unions, this prerogative is as menacing to their survival as the employers' widening use of permanent replacement workers to stop strikes.
Last month, 12,600 strikers at Caterpillar Inc. in Peoria, Ill., returned to work when management threatened to give their jobs to nonunion workers.


Boston Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Novo Nordisk reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Pay of College Graduates Is Outpaced by Inflation
Two labor economists reported yesterday that the pay of most college-educated people -- once thought to be exempt from the wage stagnation that has afflicted Americans for more than 15 years -- had failed since 1989 to keep up with inflation.
The findings, published by the Economic Policy Institute, a Washington research organization that often supports Democratic candidates, suggest that as many high-paying jobs vanish from the workplace, a bachelor of arts degree is becoming less of a ticket to a rising income -- a conclusion that other economists said was probably accurate.


Microsemi Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 29


Oncogene Science Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


American Vehicle Sales Down 0.3% in Early May
Sales of domestically made cars and light trucks fell three-tenths of 1 percent in early May.
But the sluggish results included a hopeful sign for the Big Three, which grabbed a larger share from Japanese transplant producers.
The nine foreign and domestic auto makers operating North American assembly plants sold 130,408 cars from May 1-10, a 2.9 percent drop from a year earlier.
Sales of light trucks assembled in North America rose 3.9 percent, to 87,497. from last year.
Over all, vehicle sales reached 217,905, compared with last year's sales of 245,871.


Tidewater Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


About the Weather
The New York Times has added an air quality index and an expanded extended forecast to its weather pages for the New York region.
The air quality index, which will appear as part of the Metropolitan Almanac Tuesday through Saturday, compares the previous day's air quality in selected areas with standards for each pollutant set by the Federal Environmental Protection Agency.


To Our Readers
Since Friday, distribution of The New York Times in parts of the New York region has periodically been disrupted because of a labor dispute affecting a wholesale delivery company used by the paper. (Article, page B1.)
The Times regrets the inconvenience to readers.


3 Astronauts, in Space Walk, Grab Errant Satellite
Three astronauts ventured into the vacuum of space Wednesday night, reached out with gloved hands and snared a wayward satellite.
It was the first time so many astronauts had gone forth into space together and the first time anyone had captured an orbiting satellite with nothing but their hands.
All previous salvage jobs and previous attempts on this mission had mainly used some type of hardware.


Lotus in Management Shift
The Lotus Development Corporation, the software maker, said today that it was consolidating the management of its development team.
John Landry, senior vice president for development and chief technology officer, and June Rokoff, senior vice president for development and formerly senior vice president for consulting and information services, will be co-managers of the company's development organization.


Growing
I was down on the farm in Maryland four days last week, watching the rain fall for three.
Not a downpour, mind you.
Just a nice steady drizzle that wouldn't let the ground dry out.
"If you can grab a big handful of soil and it makes a ball, it's still too wet to plant," said Tom Patterson, who farms about a mile up the road. (It's his horses who keep me in manure.) I envy him: His potatoes are already up.
Mine are sprouting on Grandmother's sideboard.
It's been chilly here, too, so everybody's behind.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.25-6.5
6.25-6.5
8.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.00
3.75
6.01
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.58
3.60
5.44
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.68
3.72
5.59
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.98
7.01
7.98
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.84
7.86
8.33
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.78
8.78
9.33
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.63
6.64
7.23
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Reviews/Dance; Philadelphia Troupe Offers a Social-Protest Work
Philadanco, founded in 1970 in Philadelphia by its director, Joan Myers Brown, has thrilled New York regularly with the bracing energy of its young dancers, and the newest visit certainly offers more of the same.
But the current overflowing program of seven pieces, which opened on Tuesday night at the Joyce Theater (175 Eighth Avenue, at 19th Street) also has a fascinating historical treat on view through the weekend.
The company has just revived "Southern Landscape," a 1947 work by the distinguished choreographer Talley Beatty.


NVR L.P.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Arkansas Best's Initial Offering
The Arkansas Best Corporation, a freight transportation concern based in Fort Smith, Ark., made an initial public offering of 15.7 million common shares yesterday through underwriters led by the First Boston Corporation.
The shares were priced at $14 a share, with 10.7 million shares being sold by Arkansas Best and the remaining shares being sold by Kelso Best Partners L.P., which currently owns about 80 percent of the company.
Kelso Best Partners has granted the underwriting syndicate an option to buy up to an additional 2,355,000 shares of the company's common stock it owns to cover overallotments.
After the offering, about 21.7 percent, or about 11.6 percent if the underwriters exercise their overallotment option in full, will be owned by Kelso Best Partners and approximately 11.5 percent will be owned by management.
The company's common stock will be traded on the Nasdaq National Market System under the symbol ABFS.


Needle Swaps To Be Revived To Curb AIDS
The Dinkins administration will permit drug addicts in New York City to receive clean hypodermic needles under an ambitious research effort announced yesterday intended to measure whether such an approach will slow the spread of AIDS.
The needle-exchange programs, which will begin June 1, will be financed by a private organization and the New York State Department of Health.
But they were made possible by a policy shift on the part of Mayor David N. Dinkins last November, who had previously opposed needle-exchange programs as encouraging illegal drug use.


Music Notes; Keeping Up with Meredith Monk
If Meredith Monk were a more conventional composer, the score of her opera "Atlas" would probably have taken its final form long ago.
The opera, which had its New York premiere at the Brooklyn Academy of Music on Tuesday night and which runs through Sunday, was first performed by the Houston Grand Opera 15 months ago; since then it has been staged at the American Music Theater Festival in Philadelphia and on tour in the Midwest and in Europe.
But as of a week ago, Ms.
Monk was still making changes.
Last Thursday she arrived at rehearsals intent on adding an entirely new section to the work.
She also added a new instrumental line.


Pantheon Buys Rights To Rushdie's Next Book
Salman Rushdie has sold the world English-language rights to his next novel to Pantheon Books, Sonny Mehta, the president of Alfred A. Knopf and overseer of Pantheon, announced yesterday.
The book, which is called "The Moor's Last Sigh," is to be delivered in December 1993 for publication in the fall of 1994.
A trade paperback edition is planned for one year later by Vintage.
The hard cover will be published simultaneously in England by Jonathan Cape, with the paperback by Vintage Books UK to come out a year later as well.


Sierra On-Line Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Ultra Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Teleglobe reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Seeking Limits to a Drug Monopoly
Congress is trying -- once again -- to rein in the profits that some companies are making on "orphan drugs," pharmaceutical products aimed at diseases affecting relatively few patients.
Backers of an amendment to the Orphan Drug Law have proposed that once an orphan drug reaches $200 million in revenues, it would lose the special tax breaks and seven-year monopoly protection that the Government grants companies to produce specialized drugs presumed to have only a limited market.


Corrections
An article on the Media Business page on May 4 about a libel lawsuit against Dow Jones &amp; Company and its reporter Bryan Burrough regarding his coverage of the American Express Company referred imprecisely to American Express's position on a campaign in 1988 to discredit Edmond Safra, the international banker.
American Express has acknowledged that "certain persons acting on behalf of American Express began an unauthorized and shameful effort to use the media to malign" him.
But the company says it did not set out to ruin Mr.
Safra's reputation.


Campbell Soup reports earnings for Qtr to April 26


Franklin Holding Corp. reports earnings for Year to March 31


Holnam Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Schultz Sav-O Stores reports earnings for Qtr to April 18





Executive Changes
CELLULAR COMMUNICATIONS INTERNATIONAL INC., New York, appointed William Cooper director of technology and engineering.
HAMILTON PROJECTS INC., New York, a marketing and licensing company, named Debra D. Joester president.


Technicolor, Then Fade to White
MY small garden is almost entirely innocent of deliberate color schemes, for the simple reason that I am a magpie gardener, someone whose main intent is to collect as many different plants as possible, cramming them into my patch of earth wherever I can find room.
Some lovely color combinations nevertheless result by pure serendipity.
A few years ago, annual Texas sage (Salvia coccinea) seeded itself amid a clump of boltonia Pink Beauty.
The tiny red flowers of the salvia looked like little firecracker explosions against the softer color of the boltonia.
Last year by pure accident, porcelain-blue brodiaeas bloomed against the chartreuse backdrop of golden feverfew's early June foliage, to stunning effect.
Without changing my ways as regards developing an overall plan for color, I have contrived to make certain that these two particular combinations now have a permanent place in my garden.


Responding to Rights Issues, West Suspends Aid to Malawi
As part of their new strategy of using economic assistance to promote democracy in Africa, the World Bank and leading Western donor nations today froze development aid to Malawi for 1992 and 1993 in response to the country's worsening human rights record.
In a statement, the World Bank said aid donors wanted "tangible and irreversible evidence of a basic transformation" in the way Malawi deals with human rights and basic freedoms.
The situation will be reviewed in six months to see if progress is made, it said.


Ampal-American Israel reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Enhance Financial Services Group reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Coslet Beaming Over Jets' Rookie Crop
Hedging his remarks with words like "preliminary" and phrases like "don't put these guys in the Hall of Fame yet," Jet Coach Bruce Coslet said today that the team had its best draft since he and General Manager Dick Steinberg took over two years ago.
"We're going to get some help," he said.
"I don't know how many will make the team, but it looks like more than usual."


Safeguards Were Dodged In Drug Case
A group of New York City police officers charged last week in a cocaine ring that reached from Brooklyn to Long Island devised careful strategies to outmaneuver supervisors, investigators and even suspicious fellow officers, Suffolk County investigators said yesterday.
The officers never took a step without first checking schedules of superior officers in their precincts or watching out for particular officers who they feared might be on to them, investigators said.
And they constantly altered the days and hours of their transactions to elude detection, said the investigators, who spoke on the condition of anonymity.


Clinton Wins in Two Primaries
With decisive victories in the Nebraska and West Virginia primaries on Tuesday, Gov.
Bill Clinton moved closer to the Democratic Presidential nomination, picking up 48 more delegates.
The Arkansas Governor now has 81 percent of the 2,145 delegates needed to secure the nomination.
Mr.
Clinton defeated former Gov.
Edmund G. Brown Jr. of California in Nebraska by better than a 2 to 1 ratio and in West Virginia with nearly three-fourths of the vote.


A Quarter-Century As a Theater Person In a Movie Town
A glittery fund-raising ball in Beverly Hills, celebrating Gordon Davidson's 25 years as the dominant force in Los Angeles theater, was canceled two weeks ago because of the city's riots and curfew.
Mr.
Davidson accepted the disappointment with a shrug but moved swiftly -- and characteristically -- to absorb the tragic events on the street into the heart of his current production, Shakespeare's "Richard II."
Mr. Davidson describes it as a "multi-cultural production."


Offshore Logistics reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Gerber Products reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


MCorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-15  U.N. PESSIMISTIC ON BALKANS
Citing continued warfare, Secretary General Boutros-Ghali ruled out peacekeeping forces for Bosnia and Herzegovina.
And he even raised the possibility of canceling plans to send 14,000 peacekeepers to Croatia.
A1
Violence subsided in Sarajevo as a cease-fire went into effect.
A12  TURMOIL IN NIGERIA
The worst street violence in years erupted as anti-Government protesters battled the police in Lagos.
A gasoline drought in the oil-producing nation set off the protests, which some believe could upset plans for the military to transfer power to civilians by next year.
A3  TYING AID TO REFORMS
Another African nation experiencing unrest, Malawi, was told by the World Bank and Western donor nations to show evidence of democratic reforms.
Development aid was frozen for this year and next.
A15  THE COST OF POLLUTION
In an effort to limit pollution and global warming, the European Community proposed that a stiff tax be imposed on all forms of fuel.
The plan sharpened the community's differences with the United States on environmental polices.
A5
Rio Journal: Trying to clean up in time for the Earth Summit.
A4  NEW PRIME MINISTER IN LEBANON
A week after riots forced the Cabinet to resign, President Hrawi named Rashid Solh as Prime Minister.
Mr.
Solh said he would work to bring about Israel's evacuation of its buffer zone in the south.
A11  TWO KINGS AT ODDS
King Fahd of Saudi Arabia and King Hussein of Jordan are in a bitter dispute over the repair and maintenance of Muslim shrines in Jerusalem.
Their relations have been tense since they took opposite sides in the Persian Gulf crisis.
A7  A COAL REGION'S PAIN
The funerals began in tiny villages in Pictou County, Nova Scotia, where 26 miners were trapped in an explosion.
Fifteen bodies have been recovered as hopes for a miracle fade.
A3  THE LAOTIAN MASK
The small, poor Southeast Asian country has done away with the trappings of Communism and opened its economy to investment and trade.
But officials defend the one-party state, and a former official says that "socialism is still the goal." A6  An ex-Defense Minister and a lawyer lead the Philippine vote count.
A10  A controversial Roman Catholic group prepares for its big day.
A12  North Korea returned what it says are the remains of U.S. soldiers.
A8  Britain seeks to continue border checks of European travelers.
A14  National A16-23, B12-13  SURGE IN GUN OWNERSHIP
The riots in Los Angeles, and the resulting fear that the police may not be able to protect lives or property during an outbreak of civil unrest, have led Californians to buy firearms at the highest rate in at least two decades.
Other states, too, are reporting a quick rise in gun purchases.
A1
Prosecutors will seek to retry one officer in the King beating.  A20
Washington's new unity on urban policy is already fraying.
A20  THE VALUE OF A COLLEGE DEGREE
Two labor economists reported that since 1989, the pay of most college-educated Americans had failed to keep pace with inflation.
The finding suggests that as many high-paying jobs vanish from the workplace, a bachelor's degree is becoming less of a ticket to a rising income.
A1  A HUNT FOR HOMOSEXUALS
A gay employee of the Federal Emergency Management Agency was pressured to provide a list of other homosexual workers to the agency's managers and security personnel, who contended that they needed the information to help identify security risks.
A1  NICE CATCH IN OUTER SPACE
Three astronauts from the shuttle Endeavour ventured into the void of space, reached out with gloved hands and snared a wayward satellite.
A1  PEROT'S 50-STATE QUEST
When Ross Perot began his foray into Presidential politics by declaring that he would run if his name were placed on the ballot in every state, his backers were drawn into a labyrinth of rules that are mind-numbing in their complexity, vary from state to state and, according to Mr.
Perot's aides and some scholars, are designed by Republicans and Democrats to thwart third-party candidacies like his.
A18
Bush's veto of a campaign finance bill was sustained.  A18  INCREASE IN DRUG USE
A new Federal report on hospital emergencies attributed to cocaine and heroin abuse shows a continuing rise that officials say emphasizes the need for greater treatment and prevention efforts.
And drug experts say the Administration's proposals for increasing treatment programs fall far short of meeting the needs of heavy drug users.
A16  STARTING OVER
The sole adult survivor of the Philadelphia police's firebombing of the radical group MOVE left prison after serving a seven-year term for riot and conspiracy.
A16  THE DEAFENING OF AMERICA
At a gathering of the American Acoustical Society, experts from a number of fields agreed that the nation was being deafened by noise and that the din seemed to be getting louder.
B13  Boston Journal: Fighting drugs and guns with music.
A16  Metropolitan Digest, B1 NEEDLE-EXCHANGE PROJECT
The Dinkins administration will permit drug addicts to receive clean hypodermic needles in a research effort to measure whether the move will slow the spread of AIDS.
Approval of the program represents a shift on the part of Mayor Dinkins, who had opposed needle-exchange programs in the past.
A1  DISTRICTING BATTLE, PART 2
As the New York State Legislature has struggled in vain to negotiate a Congressional redistricting plan, its ability to strike a deal has been stymied by a series of thorny political decisions.
And as the district lines have remained undrawn, the process has ended up in the hands of two different courts.
A1  Business Digest, D1  The Home Section C1-12  Less or more, style rules.
C1  What's so funny?
Ask the young.
C1  Sand, cookies and a hearty taste of life.
C1  Arts/Entertainment C14-22  Theater man in a movie town.
C17  Spring art auctions.
C17  Sports B15-21  Basketball: Knicks need big game from Ewing.
B15  Column: Anderson on the Rangers.
Dead Again.
B15  Hockey: Penguins eliminate the Rangers.
B15  Obituaries B14  Robert Reed, an actor.
Editorials/Op-Ed A24-25  Editorials A24  The Los Angeles law: use it.
Deep doubts about a death.
Spare the horses in N.Y.C.
Topics: Meddle, medal.
Letters A24  William Safire: V.P. morning line.
A25  Anthony Lewis: Public keep out.
A25  Linda DiVall: Women of the year.
A25  Joseph A. Califano Jr.: Don't blame L.B.J.
A25


Stuart Entertainment Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Tax-Exempt Yields Decline In Reverse of 3-Week Trend
Yields offered by money market funds monitored by IBC/Donoghue's Money Fund Report were down in the latest week, with tax-exempt yields falling for the first time in a month.
In the week ended Monday, the yields on tax-exempt money funds were down after rising steadily the last three weeks.
Analysts at Donoghue's said greater demand for fixed-income securities had lowered interest rates throughout the market, driving prices there higher and yields lower.


T.W.A. Hopes to Cut Costs With Short-Term Jet Deals
Carl C. Icahn, the chairman and chief executive of Trans World Airlines, has found what he hopes is a solution to one of the airline industry's perennial problems -- what to do with extra airplanes in the winter when traffic drops.
In an unusual move, Mr.
Icahn is leasing airplanes for very short periods over the summer and will turn them back to their owners in the winter.


An Ex-Communist in the Capitalists' Den


Unit Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


INSIDE
Retail Sales Climb Back Up
A nine-tenths of 1 percent gain in April retail sales cheered some analysts but not others, as the rise only offset a March decline.
Page D1.
/* //* //* //* //* //* //*


I.B.M. Cites Brisk Sales For New PC Software
I.B.M. said yesterday that it has shipped 200,000 copies of the new operating software for its own and compatible personal computers since the software was introduced a little more than six weeks ago.
It also estimates that it has distributed an additional 200,000 copies electronically and through licensing arrangements.
The number, which would put the company ahead of some estimates that it would sell between two and four million copies of the OS/2 operating system program this year, was disclosed by I.B.M. executives yesterday during an all-day briefing held for reporters and industry analysts at the Marriott Marquis Hotel in New York on its personal computer business.


Alydeed May Give Preakness the Zip It Needs
Racing people searching for some speed in the Preakness, after one of the slowest runnings of the Kentucky Derby, may have found the missing dash: Alydeed, highly touted even though he did not run in the Derby, zipped five furlongs this morning in 582/5 seconds in the best workout of the day at Pimlico Race Course.
Alydeed, a grandson of Alydar who came out of Canada and won three of his four starts, delivered his snappy workout with Craig Perret in the saddle, where he will be Saturday for the second race in the Triple Crown series.
The colt, owned by Kingshaven Farm and trained by Roger Attfield, became one of the hot candidates for the Preakness when he won the Derby Trial with speed and authority at Churchill Downs two and a half weeks ago.


Victoria Financual Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


U.S. Intec Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Don't Blame L.B.J.
Abraham Lincoln was President more than a century ago, and a Republican, so the Administration couldn't blame the Emancipation Proclamation for the riots in Los Angeles.
Instead, the White House press secretary, Marlin Fitzwater, and President Bush laid much of the blame on Lyndon B. Johnson and his domestic programs.
Asked to identify which programs the Administration was talking about, Mr.
Fitzwater snapped, "I don't have a list with me." Which could be on the Administration hit list?


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Third-Party Candidate; Perot Encounters Maze of Ballot Rules
It is easier, the Bible says, for a camel to go through the eye of a needle than for a rich man to go to heaven.
For Ross Perot, a very rich man who is thinking about running for President, getting on the ballot in all 50 states is only slightly less tricky.
The Dallas billionaire moved closer to accomplishing that feat today when election officials in Maine certified that his volunteers had collected enough names to place Mr.
Perot's name on the ballot in that state.
State officials validated the signatures of 5,906 registered voters on petitions, comfortably more than the minimum of 4,000 names needed.


Hughes Supply reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Mayflower Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


The Los Angeles Law: Use It
Stirred by the Los Angeles riot, politicians grope for ways to create jobs for angry inner-city residents.
Jack Kemp, the Housing Secretary, pushes to give tax breaks and regulatory relief to companies that put their plants in ghettos.
Two Democratic Senators, Paul Simon and David Boren, propose giving public sector jobs rather than handouts to long-term welfare recipients.
Though the sponsors deserve credit for groping, their proposals are neither new nor particularly practical.
But Congress need not despair.
It has already enacted a law that can give hope, and work, to alienated poor people in wastelands like south-central Los Angeles.
It is called the Family Support Act of 1988 and all it needs is the money it was meant to have from the start.


A Goal for the Game: Helping the Children
At a Little League game in a small Pennsylvania town recently, kids -- Italian, Irish, Puerto Rican and African-American -- played on green fields under high skies, their only cares in the world being how to run, catch and throw like the major leaguers they so obviously mimic.
A few days later, in a conversation with a major leaguer, another vivid but vastly different picture of life for American youths was etched.
Darryl Strawberry of the Los Angeles Dodgers talked of children who cannot, do not, play.
For the fields are too often killing fields because of gang-related and drug-related violence.


Mandela Presses Dinkins Not to Lift City Sanctions
A mayoral delegation returned from South Africa yesterday with a letter from Nelson Mandela urging Mayor David N. Dinkins not to lift New York's City's economic sanctions until an interim government is established in South Africa, associates of Mr.
Mandela and city officials said yesterday.
The letter is critically important to Mr.
Dinkins's decision because the Mayor, who has been under increasing pressure from big business and banks in New York to move quickly on the sanctions, has steadfastly maintained he would take his cue from Mr.
Mandela, the African National Congress president.
Mr.
Dinkins was to meet with the delegation last night and will make an announcement this afternoon about the city's policy, aides said.


F.A. Tucker Group reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


T/SF Communications Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Continental Airlines reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Royal Dutch/Shell Group of Cos. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Home Video
Goldwyn Via HBO
Now that "Fantasia" has settled in as the No. 1 video best seller of all time (with about 14.1 million copies distributed), along comes another Disney title that could demote it to No. 2 by the end of the year.
Dealers report very strong demand building for "Beauty and the Beast," which is to be released on Oct. 30 at $24.99.
Surveys indicate consumer interest in "Beauty and the Beast" is much higher than it was for "Fantasia," said Tania Steele of Disney.


Campbell's Net Up 19.8% In 3d Quarter
The Campbell Soup Company said yesterday that its earnings rose 19.8 percent in the third quarter.
But analysts said much of the gain came from cost-cutting, not real growth.
William Leach, an analyst with Donaldson, Lufkin &amp; Jenrette, said the quality of Campbell's earnings was far weaker than the reported gain indicated.
"How they got there was not entirely satisfactory," he said.


Comcoa Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to April 19


Prices of Treasury Securities Up
Prices of Treasury securities moved higher yesterday as suspicions grew among credit market participants that the Federal Reserve Board is on the verge of lowering short-term interest rates.
The Fed raised eyebrows in the markets when it chose to add reserves to the banking system at a time when the overnight rate on bank loans in the Federal funds market was trading at 3 15/16 percent, above the widely perceived target of 3.75 percent.


Devon Energy reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


State-O-Maine reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29


What's So Funny? Ask The Young
EVEN in the schoolyard, the adult world of the White House is a favorite target of ridicule, with the Vice President the butt of many jokes.
"Like Dan Quayle said, 'The mind is a terrible thing not to have,' " said 11-year-old Clarissa Wolf of Public School 9 on West 84th Street in Manhattan.
She paused for effect.
"He should know!"


Hospital Visits Show Abuse Of Drugs Is Still on the Rise
A new Federal report on hospital emergencies attributed to cocaine and heroin abuse shows a continuing rise that officials say emphasizes the need for greater treatment and prevention efforts.
But drug experts say that the Bush Administration's proposals for increasing drug treatment programs would fall far short of meeting the needs of the more than six million heavy drug users in the nation.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Media; Wave of Future Education Gives Clinton a Bumpy Ride
Two-way satellite technology is the rage among candidates who want to prove they are friends of education.
But if the goal is to practice politics at the same time, the cutting edge is not always the place to be.
Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas, who has spend much of his political career carving out a niche as an education expert, discovered that today.
The Democratic Presidential candidate came to Portland Community College to participate in a state-financed, two-way satellite communications network that linked him with 30 schools around the state for a question-and-answer session.


WHERE TO FIND IT
FOR some, it's sentiment.
For others, it's esthetics.
And for a few, it's a clever way to save money.
"Brides get married in antique wedding gowns for all sorts of reasons," said Marguerite Morgan, a textile conservator whose specialty is reviving and altering old wedding gowns for new brides.
For years brides have married in classic gowns worn by their mothers, grandmothers and even great-grandmothers.
But the practice became particularly popular in the late 1980's, said Mrs.
Morgan, who has restored antique clothing for more than a decade.
"It's since fancy weddings became popular again," she said.


Ackerley Communications reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Power Financial reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Rio Journal; Cleaning the Environment for Environmentalists
With 30,000 visitors environmentalists, journalists and heads of state -- expected here next month for a global ecological summit meeting, Rio de Janeiro is unrolling a traditional third-world welcome mat: a new road to the airport.
Skimming past slums and swamps, the eight-lane highway is part of a $1 billion face lift for a city that hopes to reverse its fading fortunes by playing host to the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development from June 3 to June 14.
It is the first such gathering since an "Earth Summit" in 1972 in Stockholm.


Sand, Cookies And a Hearty Taste of Life
THE classroom is filled with blocks, toys, a sand table and books with titles like "Pig Pig Grows Up." The students like to paint and sing songs and go to the playground, but the uncontested highlight of the day is snack.
If the cookies fail to meet the taste test, they are certain to be rejected with an emphatic "Yuck!"
Not what most people would consider higher education.


Noisy Night Life
To The Home Section:
Your reporter James Servin obviously bought the whole public relations package for his piece on Industria  [ "Studio! Life Style! Empire?" April 16 ] .
What he fails to mention about this operation that is photo studio by day and occasional disco by night is that those Studio 54-style parties with thousands of guests carrying on until 4 A.M. have residents of this otherwise quiet neighborhood up in arms.


Bell Boosts Pirates In Atlanta Slugfest
Pirates 11, Braves 10
ATLANTA, May 13 (AP) -- Jay Bell's ninth-inning homer lifted Pittsburgh to an 11-10 victory over the Atlanta Braves tonight.
Bell had four runs batted in and four of the Pirates' season-high 21 hits.
He drove a 2-1 pitch from Alejandro Pena (0-4) into left for his first homer of the season.
Stan Belinda (2-0) gave up the game-tying homer to Terry Pendleton in the eighth inning but held the Braves scoreless in the ninth for the victory.


Numac Oil &amp; Gas reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Health-Care Chain Places Debentures
National Healthcorp L.P., Murfreesboro, Tenn., one of the nation's largest long-term health-care chains, says it has privately placed $30 million of 6 percent convertible subordinated debentures with the 1818 Fund L.P.
Proceeds from the private sale of the debentures will use the proceeds to build additional health-care centers in the Southeast and finance other related health-care properties.


TPI Enterprises Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Republic Waste Industries reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Crownx reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


COMPANY NEWS
AON CORP., Chicago, an insurance holding company, announced that its subsidiary Aon Risk Services Inc. had agreed in principle to acquire Wexford Underwriting Managers Inc., San Francisco, a provider of workers' compensation insurance.
Terms were not disclosed.
APPLE COMPUTER INC., Cupertino, Calif., signed distribution agreements with Romanian Computer Systems and Bulgarian Business Systems.


F.A.O. Schwarz Appoints a New President
John Eyler, the former head of the Hartmarx Corporation's specialty retail division, yesterday was appointed president and chief executive of F.A.O.
Schwarz, something akin to being crowned king of Toyland.
The coronation is scheduled for June 1, when Peter L. Harris, who was part of the investment group that bought the famed toy retailer in 1985, departs for San Francisco, where he is moving his family.


Review/Film; A Black Cast in a Present-Day 'Earnest'
By pushing the concept of nontraditional movie casting toward its outer limits, Kurt Baker's all-black film version of Oscar Wilde's "Importance of Being Earnest" deserves credit for breaking new ground.
The film, which opened today at Anthology Film Archives, features a distinguished cast that includes Obba Babatunde as Lane, Daryl Roach as Jack, Wren T. Brown as Algernon, Chris Calloway as Gwendolyn, Lanei Chapman as Cecily and Ann Weldon as Lady Bracknell.
Although the setting has been moved up to the present, Wilde's epigrammatic dialogue has been left largely intact.
The most obvious contemporary references come from the mouth of Lady Bracknell, who disapproves of rap music while lauding jazz.
One scene is set on a patio alongside a very contemporary swimming pool, and the wardrobes are very up to date.


Noise Experts Agree: America Is Land of Battered Eardrums
From its subways to its spacecraft, America is being deafened by noise, and even as European nations take legal steps to mute their machinery, the din in the United States seems to be getting louder, experts gathered here say.
At a meeting of the American Acoustical Society, physicists, audiologists, engineers, architects and specialists from many other fields concerned with acoustic problems exchanged hundreds of papers on the taming or exploitation of sound.


Review/Television; Onscreen Journalism: Show Biz Or News?
What's it going to be, journalism or entertainment?
Perhaps a judicious blend of both?
Oh, forget it.
Let's have some unembarrassed fun.
There you have, more or less, the evolution of attitudes toward a ticklish issue long dogging television news in its various guises, an issue no less troubling today.
Just a couple of decades ago, coming out of the legendary age of Edward R. Murrow, television news anchors and correspondents were still somewhat sheepish about having to wear makeup to deliver what was essentially, except for periodic documentaries, a headline service.
Would the public, let alone their colleagues in print journalism, take them seriously?
Fret, fret.


Bridge
Nine star-studded teams, four in the open series and five in the women's series, began play here today in selection trials.
The winners of the two groups when play ends Sunday will represent the United States in the World Team Olympiad in Salsomaggiore, Italy, in August.
One player here is smarting after a narrow defeat Saturday in the Westchester-New Jersey division final of the Grand National Teams, played in Scarsdale, N.Y.
Larry Cohen of Little Falls, N.J., was teamed with Marty Bergen of Farmingdale, L.I., Luella Slaner of Scarsdale, N.Y., Ethan Stein of Irvington, N.Y., Steve Weinstein of Upper Montclair, N.J., and Fred Stewart of Accord, N.Y.
In part because of the diagramed deal, they lost by three imps to Warren Rosner of New City, N.Y., Steve Sanborn of Manhattan, Ron Gerard and Chuck Lamprey, both of White Plains, who advanced to the national final in Toronto in August.


President of Columbia Recalls Rushdie's Plight
Sounding a somber call to duty amid the merriment of commencement, Michael I. Sovern, the president of Columbia University and its affiliated schools, asked graduates and their families yesterday to remember the plight of the novelist Salman Rushdie and not shirk "our responsibility, our duty, to speak out" to support free speech against repression.
Mr.
Sovern's remarks came during Columbia's 238th commencement.
He spoke from the steps of Low Library, where in December Mr.
Rushdie made his first public speech since he went into hiding in 1989 after Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini ordered his assassination.


Arctco Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


French Assembly Supports European Union
In a victory for President Francois Mitterrand's pro-European policies, the National Assembly today approved constitutional changes necessary before France can ratify the European Community's new treaty on economic and political union.
The vote -- 398 in favor to 77 against, with 99 abstaining -- also brought the governing Socialist Party a domestic political lift since the main Gaullist opposition party was so badly divided on the issue that it was forced to allow its legislators to vote as they wished.


Corrections
A chart in Business Day on Tuesday about sales growth at selected wineries misstated the period covered by the data.
It was 1990 to 1991.


Cara Operations reports earnings for Qtr to March 29


Front-Runners Are Nip and Tuck As Philippine Returns Trickle In
Former Defense Minister Fidel V. Ramos held a slight lead today in incomplete, unofficial returns from the Philippine presidential election, but his chief opponent continued to claim victory.
Confusion over the results, still trickling in after two days of counting, prompted the nation's Elections Commission to ban news organizations from reporting most unofficial vote counts in the race to succeed President Corazon C. Aquino.


United Fire &amp; Casualty Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


ICN Biomedicals reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Knicks Looking for Ewing to Regain Scoring Touch
Earning respect from the Chicago Bulls is not enough for the Knicks.
Besides, they have already done that.
Before the Knicks began their four-of-seven-game Eastern Conference semifinal against the heavily-favored Bulls, few people thought the series would reach a Game 6.
But here were the Knicks today, down by 3 games to 2 and preparing for the sixth game Thursday night at Madison Square Garden.
They have tuned out the skeptics and turned in a heartfelt performance that has tested the talent, as well as the character, of the National Basketball Association's defending champions.


Trade Talks With Chile Are Planned
The Bush Administration said today that it would seek to negotiate a free-trade agreement with Chile after a free trade pact with Mexico and Canada is completed.
American officials say that establishing a bilateral free-trade pact with Chile could be the first step toward setting up a free-trade bloc with all of South America.


Chyron Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Women Have Little to Lose in Reporting Rape; Trust Your Instincts
To the Editor:
When I was about 8 years old I asked my father if, when he was in the Air Force, he practiced ditching planes.
His response: "Sweetie, you can't really practice ditching an airplane." A similar principle is at work when we talk, as Jane E. Brody does, about ditching a rapist ("How to Outwit a Rapist: Rehearse," Personal Health, April 29).
While it is necessary to educate women of all ages about the significant risk of being raped and to encourage behaviors and attitudes that might lower that risk in individual cases, it is deceptive to suggest that a woman can "rehearse" a rape situation.
This reinforces the all-too-prevalent idea that the woman who is raped just didn't take sufficient precautions and that therefore she must bear some blame.


Howell Industries reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Navigators Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Ben B. Bodne, 88, Who Owned Algonquin Hotel for 4 Decades
Ben B. Bodne, who was smitten with the Algonquin hotel on his honeymoon and returned to buy it, owning it for 41 years, died on Tuesday at St.
Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital Center in Manhattan.
He was 88 years old and lived in the landmark Algonquin, at 59 West 44th Street in midtown Manhattan.
He died of natural causes, his family said.


Lowe's Companies reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


BRIEFS
Debt  *
American Express Co. is offering $200 million of 8.625 percent debentures due May 15, 2022, at 99.097, to yield 8.71 percent, through Salomon Brothers.
Callable in 10 years, the debentures are rated A-1 by Moody's Investor's Inc. and AA- by Standard &amp; Poor's Corp. *
Baker Hughes Inc. is offering $100 million in 8 percent 12-year notes at 99.36, to yield 8.084 percent, through Lehman Bothers.
The noncallable notes are rated A-3 by Moody's and A- by S.&amp; P.


ICN Pharmaceuticals Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Europe Proposes Taxes on Fuels Tied to Warming
Sharpening its differences with the United States on environmental policies, the European Community proposed today that a high energy tax be imposed on all forms of fuel to limit pollution and global warming.
The proposal, which is one of the community's most ambitious fiscal and environmental moves so far, appears to be intended as the calling card the 12-nation group will present at the Earth Summit meeting in Rio de Janeiro next month.


Spare the Horses -- and New Yorkers
If City Councilman Noach Dear has his way today, New Yorkers will have a whole new reason to complain about midtown traffic.
He wants to take the carriage horses out of Central Park, where they belong, and put them back into traffic, where they do not.
Why?
Because he's more concerned about the welfare of one of the city's smallest businesses than about the countless New Yorkers for whom midtown traffic is already a nightmare.


Rangers: 52 Years Of Futility and Still Counting
What's a 53d year, more or less?
Perhaps not much in the stubborn purgatory of New York City hockey.
But for the Rangers, champions of the regular season in 1991-92 and non-winners of the Stanley Cup since 1940, tonight marked a shattering finish to a spring that was supposed to beget something completely different.


SUPERCOMPUTER MAKER'S EARNINGS BELOW PROJECTIONS
Cray Research Inc. said its 1992 earnings would fall below projections and could be below those of 1991, when the company earned $113 million, or $4.15 a share, on revenue of $862.4 million.
Cray attributed the drop to increased competition and higher component costs.
Cray said it still expects revenue to grow by about 10 percent this year and anticipates a substantially improved year-end order backlog.
Cray shares closed yesterday at $38.50 on the New York Stock Exchange, down 50 cents.
While Cray once had the supercomputing market nearly to itself, it now faces several competitors.


Prosecutor Seeks Retrial of Officer in King Beating
District Attorney Ira Reiner said today that he would seek a retrial of one of the four police officers acquitted in the videotaped beating of Rodney G. King.
Mr.
Reiner said he would press for a trial in an urban setting, instead of the mostly white suburban county where the first trial was held.
The district attorney said he would ask a judge on Friday to approve a new trial for the officer, Laurence M. Powell, on the charge of using excessive force as a police officer.
It was that charge that deadlocked the jury that acquitted Officer Powell and three co-defendants on April 29 of assault and related charges.
Second Trial Likely
"The vast majority of the time, when we go into court to seek a retrial, the judge grants it," said Sandi Gibbons, a spokeswoman for Mr.
Reiner.


Events: Art and Design, To See, Study and Buy
Works by Students  Puck Building, 295 Lafayette Street at Houston Street; (212) 636-3464.
The annual exhibition of works by architecture and design students from Pratt Institute will be held from 9 A.M. to 5 P.M. on Tuesday and Wednesday.
Free.
A History in Folk Art  Japan Society Gallery, 333 East 47th Street; (212) 752-3015.
Japanese ceramics, furniture, baskets, signs, textiles, masks and tools will be on exhibit through July 2 (closed May 21 to 28).
Hours: 11 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Tuesday through Sunday.
Suggested contribution: $2.50.
Design Classes  Fashion Institute of Technology, Seventh Avenue at 27th Street; (212) 760-7715.
Courses covering aspects of the fashion industry start May 27.
On May 20, the institute is holding an open house for high school students considering careers in art and design.
Advance registration is required: (212) 760-7675.
Furnishings  Jacob K. Javits Convention Center, 11th Avenue at 34th Street; (212) 686-6070.
The International Contemporary Furniture Fair, which features not only furniture, but also lighting and a a wide range of other accessories, will be open to the public on Wednesday from 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Admission: $10.
Warehouse Sale  Pace Collection, 11-11 34th Avenue, near 12th Street, Long Island City, Queens; (718) 721-8201.
The company is holding its annual warehouse sale from 9 A.M. to 7 P.M. today and Saturday, and 9 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Sunday.
Admission free.
Staten Island Antiques  Alice Austen House Museum, 2 Hylan Boulevard (north of the Verrazano-Narrows Bridge), Rosebank section of Staten Island; (718) 816-4506.
An antiques and collectibles fair will be held from 10 A.M. to 5 P.M. on Saturday and Sunday.
Admission, including museum entrance, $2.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Campaign Finance; Senate Sustains President's Veto Of Bill to Limit Election Spending
The Senate voted today to uphold President Bush's veto of a bill limiting Congressional campaign spending, as all but two Republicans voted with him.
The 57-to-42 vote was nine short of the two-thirds majority required by the Constitution to override a veto.
Two Democrats and 40 Republicans voted with Mr.
Bush.
Fifty-five Democrats and two Republicans voted to override.
One Democrat was absent.


Marsh Supermarkets Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 28


American Oil &amp; Gas reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Piedmont Management reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


INSIDE
Retail Sales Climb Back Up
A nine-tenths of 1 percent gain in April retail sales cheered some analysts but not others, as the rise only offset a March decline.
Page D1.
Turmoil in Nigeria
Anti-Government demonstrators battled the police in protests set off by a gasoline drought in Africa's major oil-producing nation.
Page A3. 1940! 1940! 1940!
The chant that has haunted the Rangers since they won their last Stanley Cup grew a year older.
Page B15.


Mor-Flo Industries reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


INSIDE
Retail Sales Climb Back Up
A nine-tenths of 1 percent gain in April retail sales cheered some analysts but not others, as the rise only offset a March decline.
Page D1.


Aegon Insurance Group reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Scios and Nova Pharmaceuticals to Merge
Scios Inc. and the Nova Pharmaceutical Corporation said today that they had agreed to merge in a stock swap valued at about $180 million.
Executives at both companies said the merger would combine complementary strengths.
But analysts were critical of the deal, which they said merely united two relatively weak companies.
Stocks Decline
Shares in each company fell 12 percent today.
In over-the-counter trading, Scios stock closed at $11.625, down $1.625, while Nova shares were off 62.5 cents to close at $4.50.


KOREA RETURNS 15 IT CALLS U.S. DEAD
In another apparent overture to the United States, North Korea today returned 15 bodies that it says are those of American servicemen listed as missing in action in the Korean War.
In a simple military ceremony here on the frontier between North and South Korea, North Korean soldiers handed over the coffins containing the bodies to a United Nations honor guard.


A Dispute in the Public Relations Industry
THE president of the Public Relations Society of America has taken stances on two contentious issues involving members of the industry's largest trade organization, not all of whom have welcomed her intercession.
In a letter now being sent to members, the organization's president, Rosalee A. Roberts, wrote about the criticism of Hill &amp; Knowlton for its creation of a public relations campaign to build support for the Government of Kuwait among Americans.


Triangle Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


DOCKET
Rates for Drivers in Pool Rise
Auto insurance rates rose 12.6 percent yesterday for several hundred thousand New Jersey motorists in the state-run insurance pool for high-risk drivers, because of action by the State Supreme Court.


Grab-Bag Defense to Close In Westchester Murder Trial
The defense is expected to rest Thursday in the Carolyn Warmus murder trial, completing a grab-bag defense aimed at convincing the jurors that the wrong person is on trial -- for the second time.
The final defense witness is a New Jersey metals expert who told the jury that an illegal handgun silencer that a prosecution witness said he built -- and that prosecutors say was sold to the defendant, Ms.
Warmus -- would never have functioned well enough to use in a shooting.


Sonesta International Hotels Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Accel International reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Federal Industries reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


BF Realty Holdings reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Starrett Housing Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Review/Music; Another Voyage Into the New At 6th Bang on a Can Festival
Bang on a Can.
The name conjures up something on the edge of primitivism: aggressive percussive noises; assaults with sonic weapons.
It is a classic avant-garde name in its implied rejection of ordinary instruments and mainstream music, in its promise that shock and alarm will awaken a somnolent world.
David Lang, a founder of the annual festival, which opened with three concerts on Tuesday night at the New York Society for Ethical Culture (2 West 64th Street), once gave the name a more innocent spin.
It was invented, he said, simply "so people would ask us about it."
In the last five years, there has been less and less need to ask.
A series of recordings bearing the festival's rubric is being released by Composers Recordings Inc., and the festival has commissioned 12 works.
And while Bang on a Can does have a polemical edge that grows out of downtown music, its sixth edition is actually uptown, just a block from Lincoln Center.
The festival seems to be not doctrinaire but exploratory, leaning away from academic composition and toward styles of Minimalism and the avant-garde.


Hathaway Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


El Paso Refinery reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Knicks Protest Jackson's Remarks
The National Basketball Association said yesterday that it was looking into comments by Coach Phil Jackson of the Chicago Bulls following a formal complaint filed by the New York Knicks president, Dave Checketts.


Districting Accord in Albany Detoured by Political Details
As the New York State Legislature has struggled in vain to negotiate a Congressional redistricting plan, the devil has been in the details -- the political details.
The Democratic-majority Assembly and the Republican-dominated Senate have agreed in principle on which incumbents should be forced to run against each other as the state's Congressional delegation shrinks to 31 seats from 34.


Market Place; Artful Valuations In a Bankruptcy
TO an investment banker, valuation can be an art.
Consider the case of the Salant Corporation, a clothing company known for such brands as Perry Ellis, Manhattan and John Henry.
It is now in bankruptcy, and creditors are being asked to accept a reorganization plan that assumes shares in the company are worth $25 each.


Topics of The Times; Meddle, Medal, Mettle
When Anne-Imelda Radice took on her new job as acting chairwoman of the National Endowment for the Arts, she made her priorities clear.
She wanted "to regain the confidence of the American people" and "to preserve the arts endowment."
If Ms.
Radice's veto this week of two grants strongly recommended by the agency's 26-member advisory panel is any guide, the people whose confidence she'd most like to restore are those most interested in constricting, not preserving, the arts.


Canada Town Grieves Again For Its Miners
This was the day the funerals began in the villages nestled here in the black hills rocked by a coal-mine explosion early Saturday.
The blast, at the Westray mine, trapped 26 underground.
Only two weeks ago, Westray was named the safest mine in the nation by the Canadian Institute of Mining and Metallurgy.


Trans World Music reports earnings for Qtr to May 2


Success Has Not Spoiled Melges's Folk-Hero Style
It has been seven years since Buddy Melges sailed like a waterbound politician from one end of Lake Michigan to the other in search of funds for his 1987 Heart of America campaign to challenge Australia for the America's Cup.
In 1992, Melges, the alternate helmsman for Bill Koch's America
defense, is riding a golden chariot compared to the covered wagon of his Heart of America days.
But it hasn't seemed to make a difference in the Melges style.


HAL Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Deep Doubts About a Death
Unless a court or Gov.
Douglas Wilder intervenes, Roger Coleman of Grundy, Va., will be executed next Wednesday night despite deep doubts about his murder conviction.
Indeed, an unusually strong case can be made, if the courts will hear it, that Virginia is trying to execute the wrong man for a brutal 1981 rape-murder.
That's the risk of extreme injustice a state runs when it demands the irreversible penalty for murder.
The risk was compounded in the Coleman case last year when the Supreme Court denied him a hearing because his lawyer had appealed a day late.


COMPANY NEWS: Cellular Safety First; The Life You Save May Be on the Phone
Owners of car cellular phones, sit up straight.
Don't take your hands off the wheel.
And pay close attention.
This is National Cellular Safety Week, May 12 to 18.
More than 7.6 million people in the United States have cellular telephones, perhaps 4 million of them in automobiles.
But ever since these wireless phones became popular in the mid-1980's, they have presented people who receive calls from cars with a problem: never commanding the full attention of the driver, nor, in the interests of safety, really wanting to.


Perini Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Icot Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to April 25


Abandoned Alzheimer's Patient Off to New Home


Senate Rivals Focus Attacks On Ferraro
After months of marked gentility, the New York Senate campaign took on a new edge of combativeness yesterday as Geraldine A. Ferraro's chief rivals for the Democratic nomination sharply challenged her on subjects from her personal finances to her position on military spending.
What was billed as a candidates' debate on environmental issues quickly turned into an occasion for City Comptroller Elizabeth Holtzman and State Attorney General Robert Abrams to needle Ms.
Ferraro, the former Congresswoman and Vice Presidential candidate, on a range of other topics.
In doing so, they seemed to confirm that they accept polls showing Ms.
Ferraro as the front-runner and that they view her as a threat.


Girl's Plan to Save for College Runs Afoul of Welfare Rules
Working part time at a community center, Sandra Rosado saved $4,900 to go to college and to escape the web of welfare that is all her family has known since they moved here 12 years ago.
But her thrift and industry have led to a bureaucratic nightmare for Miss Rosado and her family.
First state officials, who discovered her savings account, told her mother to spend the money so the family could remain eligible for the Aid to Families with Dependent Children program.
Then Federal authorities ordered the mother, Cecilia Mercado, to repay $9,342 in benefits she received while her daughter's money was in the bank.


Review/Film; In Thailand, A Prostitute With a Heart That's Cold
"The Good Woman of Bangkok," Dennis O'Rourke's comparatively austere documentary feature opening today at the Cinema Village 12th Street, is about a pretty 25-year-old Thai prostitute named Yaiwalak Chonchanakun, called Aoi.
In addition to being the subject of the film, Aoi was the 43-year-old Mr.
O'Rourke's paid lover during its production.
The result of this collaboration is a very personal, complex movie, the nature of which changes as one watches it.
"The Good Woman of Bangkok" is possibly more of a horror story than Mr.
O'Rourke realizes: a mixture of willful naivete, good intentions and post-colonial exploitation.
Behind it all is a middle-aged white man's randiness, which comes to look as careless as it is selfish.
The director describes his work as "documentary fiction," not because AIDS is never mentioned but because he has shifted the chronology of some of the events in an effort to give the film dramatic shape.


CHRONICLE
SEEMA BOESKY says in a television interview that she never suspected her husband, IVAN, the convicted stock speculator, of doing anything illegal on Wall Street but sued him for divorce when she learned he was cheating on her with another woman.


With Zero to Go On, Franco Amazes
The earned run average is 0.00.
And according to John Franco, the zeros add up to a lot, the totals high in significance and promise.
"I wanted to show everyone I still have it," Franco said.
"And so it ain't a bad start."


Foreign Affairs; Letter From Germany
Bill Clinton will not be happy to hear what German political and business leaders say about him.
Nor will George Bush be thrilled.
German thinking on these two men is almost a non sequitur: We still very much need U.S. leadership, presence and strength.
We're worried about America sinking economically and turning inward.
We don't think Bush will do anything to turn this situation around.
But we're against Clinton.


City Council Gives Horses Freer Rein
After intense lobbying by the horse-drawn carriage industry, the City Council voted yesterday to allow carriage drivers to operate their rigs around much of Manhattan and not just through Central Park.
The vote, to amend a 1989 law that restricts the carriages to the park for most of the day, followed months of battling that pitted the tiny carriage industry against animal lovers and those who feared that expansion would create traffic hazards.


Witch Hunt at FEMA
In a cruel reminder that officious gumshoes still roam Washington, the Federal Emergency Management Agency coerced a gay employee into identifying eight other gay workers.
The agency, which oversees disaster relief and civil defense, has humiliated its employee and brought shame on itself.
Yet it stoutly defends the mischief.
Jerald Johnson, a government management analyst who is gay, disclosed his sexual preference when he asked FEMA for a security clearance.
He told security officers that his life style should be no problem since other gays held clearances and did their jobs well.
The officers asked for names.
Rather than provide them, Mr.
Johnson withdrew his application for a clearance.


King Verdict Shows Uncertainty of Jury Trials
To the Editor:
The reactions to the recent verdict in the Los Angeles police officers' case have raised profound questions with respect to the jury system in America.
Most Americans became aware of the case a year ago when television stations played the tape showing the officers hitting Rodney King.
When I observed the tape it seemed to me the officers were unjustifiably assaulting Mr.
King, and I anticipated that they would be indicted and probably convicted.
Therefore, I was surprised at the outcome of the case but I knew, from many years of experience as a lawyer and as a state and Federal trial and appellate judge, that no matter how clear a case may appear to the public, there is always an element of uncertainty at a jury trial.


Census Reveals a City of Displacement
A grim statistical silhouette of poverty and displacement is emerging from new Census Bureau data, which show the inner-city black population of Los Angeles jostling for living space with a vast inflow of Hispanic and Asian immigrants.
This pattern, occurring across the Los Angeles basin, is strikingly evident in the neighborhoods of South-Central Los Angeles that exploded in violence and flames two weeks ago.


Shimoda Journal; Festival for a Truism: Japan Opens Doors Slowly
With fireworks and floats, an American military band and an American warship looming in the harbor, the people of this quaint port are about to celebrate one of the most befuddled moments in their history: the establishment of relations between Japan and the United States more than a century ago.
These are difficult times in the relationship between the United States and Japan, when every attempt to ease the tension seems only to emphasize the undercurrents of suspicion on both sides.


Joy Mixes With Sadness at N.Y.U. Graduation
Although purple-robed graduates blew bubbles, bounced beach balls and danced in the fountain, there was a note of sadness at New York University's 160th commencement ceremony, which was held yesterday in Washington Square Park.
Dr.
L.
Jay Oliva, the president of the university, began the ceremony with a moment of silence for five people who were killed last month when a car ran out of control through the park.


Willard K. Rice, 86, A Retired Stockbroker
Willard K. Rice, a retired international stockbroker, died on May 6 at the Mary Manning Walsh nursing home in Manhattan.
He was 86 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died of kidney failure, his family said.


Review/Theater; Diversities of America In One-Person Shows
SOME actors create their own one-person shows because their souls are on fire.
Some do so because the world around them is in flames.
Anna Deavere Smith and Ron Vawter, two exceptional actors performing two very different solo shows on downtown stages right now, are so possessed by talent and a sense of mission that they fall into both camps.
Ms.
Smith, a Stanford University drama professor who is young and black, seems to pack all the inflammatory national passions rekindled by the Los Angeles riots into her piece at the Joseph Papp Public Theater, "Fires in the Mirror: Crown Heights, Brooklyn and Other Identities." Mr.
Vawter, a longtime New York actor who now has AIDS, seeks to examine the very nature of homosexual identity in America in "Roy Cohn/Jack Smith," his Performance Garage show about two notable gay men who were both AIDS casualties of the 1980's.


Riots' Ground Zero: Street of Hopelessness
At the crossroads where the violence began with a racial beating two weeks ago, and where it came full circle with a showy arrest before dawn on Tuesday, the return to the routines of life today seemed a sign of returning hopelessness.
Surrounded by burned-out buildings, the people who live here spoke with anger about a society that writes them off as hoodlums and gangsters and responds with more arrests to what they see as their cry for help.
Onset of Violence
"If you're a poor person, nobody listens to you," said Charles Johnson, 55 years old, as he boarded a bus to his work as a house builder.
"I know it's my neighborhood that's burning, but if I've got to do this to make you listen, I've got to do it. A lot of people are crying out, reaching out."


Ex-Prosecutor Asserts U.S. Frustrated B.C.C.I. Inquiry
A former Federal prosecutor testified today that his efforts to pursue an investigation against the Bank of Credit and Commerce International were delayed and frustrated by his superiors at the Justice Department, raising further questions about the Government's handling of the case.
Dexter Lehtinen, the United States Attorney in Miami until January, said that in 1991 when his office was building a tax case against B.C.C.I., it needed a judge's order to obtain B.C.C.I. documents in about 10 foreign countries.
To take that step, attorneys in the field must receive approval from the Justice Department in Washington.
"But we never got permission and it was never explained," Mr.
Lehtinen said.


For Children
'A Visit to My Studio'  Center for Imaginative Writing 5 Union Square West, seventh floor Manhattan (212) 691-6590 Recommended ages: 5 to 7 Tomorrow
Max is a white West Highland terrier who slightly resembles a rabbit.
His older sister, Ruby, looks just like him.
In "Max's Dragon Shirt," a 1991 book written and illustrated by Rosemary Wells, Max and the domineering Ruby traipse to a department store to buy Max some pants, but he is obsessed with a dragon shirt at the store.
Once there, he accidentally drops ice cream on the coveted shirt, forcing him to buy it and forgo the pants.
The moral: Never underestimate the will of a younger sibling.


COMPANY NEWS
CVB FINANCIAL CORP., Ontario, Calif., a bank holding company, and its subsidiary Chino Valley Bank, agreed to a plan for CVB to acquire Fontana First National Bank through a merger with Chino Valley.
The resulting bank will be known as Chino Valley Bank.
INTERNATIONAL FLAVORS AND FRAGRANCES INC., New York, declared a regular quarterly cash dividend of 68 cents a share on its common stock payable on July 9, 1992 to stockholders of record on June 25, 1992.


Art in Review
Jose Maria Sicilia  Blum Helman Gallery 20 West 57th Street Manhattan Through May 30
This show is a welcome departure for a young Spanish artist known for his imposing, often lugubrious oil paintings.
The single large work is composed of 48 parts, each of which is a three-foot-square black-and-white photographic transparency coated with beeswax.
Randomly ordered, the photographs are hung edge to edge around the gallery wall in two parallel horizontal rows.


Art in Review
Matthew McCaslin  Museum of Modern Art 11 West 53d Street Manhattan Through June 2
Matthew McCaslin's "Tribute to a Moment" is one of the Museum of Modern Art's "Projects," although it is not in the space usually reserved for that series.
Instead, it occupies an inconspicuous alcove to the left just past the ticket counters.
The directions are worth having, since the work could easily be mistaken for an electrical repair job in progress.


BRIEFS
Debt  *
CSX Corp. is offering $200 million of 8 5/8 debentures due May 15, 2022, at 99.143, to yield 8.68 percent, through Lehman Brothers.
Noncallable, the notes are rated A-3 by Moody's Investors Service Inc. and BBB by Standard &amp; Poor's Corp.
*
Integra Financial Corp. is offering $100 million in 8.5 percent subordinated notes due in 2002, at a price of 99.765, to yield 8.535 percent through Lehman Brothers.
The securities are rated Baa-3 by Moody's and BBB by S.&amp; P.


Corrections
The Home Video column yesterday misidentified Marlene Dietrich's co-star in the film "Morocco." He was Gary Cooper, not Cary Grant.


Gorbachev Asks U.S. Congress to Seize 'Historic Moment' and Aid Russia
Mikhail S. Gorbachev pleaded for economic recovery aid for Russia before the leaders of Congress today, hearing warm personal praise but no guarantee that special help will be forthcoming.
"This is a historic moment and a historic opportunity," the former Soviet leader declared, addressing Senate and House members in a special gathering in Statuary Hall.
"It should not be allowed to slip by."


Review/Film; Glover and Gibson Together Again: 'Lethal Weapon 3'
Richard Donner's "Lethal Weapon 3" opens when Detective Sgts.
Martin Riggs (Mel Gibson) and Roger Murtaugh (Danny Glover), the Los Angeles Police Department's two most tireless cutups, accidentally blow up a building while trying to defuse a car bomb.
It ends when they burn down a housing project that, in real life, was an unfinished memento of the savings-and-loan debacle in Lancaster, Calif.
In between, Riggs and Murtaugh become involved in a comic armored-car heist and more or less stumble across a vicious former cop, Jack Travis (Stuart Wilson), who's now running an underground supermarket dealing in stolen guns, armor-piercing bullets and drugs.


Knicks Discover 100 Ways to Force 7th Game
They will play Game 7 on Sunday because the Knicks were determined to keep playing on.
Holding the Chicago Bulls scoreless for the first 6 minutes 10 seconds of the final quarter, New York steamrolled its way to a emotional 100-86 victory last night in Game 6 of their deadlocked four-of-seven-game playoff series before a deafening capacity crowd (19,763) at Madison Square Garden.


Jagr's Edge Is Tied to History
The number on his back, 68, is unique in the National Hockey League, but that isn't the only distinctive thing about Jaromir Jagr.
There is also the mop of hair flowing from the back of his helmet and flopping in the man-made breeze.
It is a hairstyle that might remind people of the year 1968, four years before Jagr was born in Kladno, Czechoslovakia.
His number, Jagr said, "is about history in Czech."


Sports of The Times; The Knicks Postponing The Party
HOLD off the carpenters.
Tell the electricians to stay in touch.
Madison Square Garden is still not available.
As soon as the so-called winter sports are finished, work crews are supposed to prepare the main hall for the Democratic National Convention.


Cable Can't Take the Place of Public Television
To the Editor:
Conservative voices are threatening to sell off the Corporation for Public Broadcasting to the highest bidder in retaliation for a proposed Federal financing increase ("Conservatives Call for PBS to Go Private or Go Dark," front page, April 30).
The columnist George Will and Laurence Jarvik of the Heritage Foundation are among those who propose that PBS has become a service to the liberal-minded economic elite, and claim that cable television is more than capable of assuming the role of educator.
They stand on faulty ground, and ignore the weighed benefits of public television.
While PBS is at times an outlet for the liberal voices of our society, the majority of the channel's regular programming -- from the "MacNeil-Lehrer NewsHour" to "Crossfire" -- offers a range of political perspectives.
Many of the shows, from "Nova" to "The Electric Company" to "Mystery!" are purely intelligent programming without political bias or commercial interruption.


Corrections
A chart yesterday showing the status of Ross Perot's effort to get on the Presidental ballot in all 50 states misstated the deadline for submitting petitions in Michigan.
The deadline is July 16, not May 12.


After a Change of Seasons, McGwire's Fortunes Have Turned Golden
It defies explanation, so Mark McGwire just smiles, says he has never experienced anything like this and hopes to leave it at that.
But no one does.
Since the start of spring training, when he walked into the Oakland Athletics' camp with a new look and a succinct self-analysis about last season -- "I stunk" -- McGwire has been simply incredible.


Cup of Tea With a Splash of Serenity
KNOW you're busy.
Ultra-rushed.
Americans are.
Can't waste time.
Everything's high-speed, no, hi-speed: faxed mail, jet vacations, E-Z Off-On roads, portable phones, speed-dialing, microwaves, news minutes, express lanes, abridged audio books, fast-FAST acid relief.
This Jiffy Lube world needs A.T.M.'s and P.I.N.'s for those too rushed for banks; tanning parlors for those unable to await dawn; fast-food restaurants that cook your food before you leave home, and life's latest necessity, nail salons for people far too busy to file their own.


For Hard-Hit Cos Cob, Library Is Worst Loss
It has been a difficult decade for residents of this historic village along Long Island Sound.
First there was the highway bridge that collapsed in 1982, leaving months of messy traffic problems, compounded by bureaucratic gridlock, in its wake.
Then there was the fire that destroyed much of the cherished local elementary school, and the debate that followed over whether it really needed to be rebuilt.


New Claims For Jobless Benefits Rise
Initial claims for state unemployment benefits rose by 10,000, to 424,000, in the week that ended on May 2, the Labor Department said today, reflecting the fragile state of the economic recovery.
The running four-week average of new filings -- viewed as a more accurate gauge of the labor market -- also rose for the first time since late March, to 411,500 from 409,500.


INSIDE
Wider TV Holdings Backed
The Federal Communications Commission proposed doubling the number of television stations that a single company may own.
Page D1.
U.S.
Accused in Bank Inquiry
A former Federal prosecutor testified that superiors at the Justice Department had impeded his efforts to investigate the Bank of Credit and Commerce International.
Page D1.
Carriage Drivers' Victory
The New York City Council voted to allow carriage drivers to operate their rigs around much of Manhattan, not just Central Park.
Page B1.
Knicks Force Seventh Game
The Knicks beat the defending N.B.A. champion Bulls, 100-86, tying their series and setting up a deciding game on Sunday in Chicago.
Page B11.


Police Hold 2 in Brooklyn Robbery and Shootout
Two men disguised as Hasidic Jews who tried to rob a law office in Brooklyn were arrested yesterday, the police said, following a shootout with the police and a search of the community by 75 officers using police dogs and helicopters.
One suspect was arrested moments after the robbery attempt when he was shot by an officer coming to the aid of his partner, who was being fired on while reloading his revolver.
The other suspect was arrested two hours later as he tried to blend in with people in the waiting room of a maternity ward at a nearby hospital.


BUSINESS DIGEST
International
Olympia &amp; York filed for the equivalent of bankruptcy protection in Toronto after three months of negotiations with lenders.
The possibility that the company's office towers in Toronto might be seized by bondholders pushed the Reichmanns to seek court protection.  [ Page A1. ]  The filing is unlikely to cause much further harm in the U.S. property market.  [ D6. ]  The Reichmann brothers are as legendary as they are mysterious.  [ D6. ]
Efforts to pursue an investigation against B.C.C.I. were delayed and frustrated by Justice Dept. officials, a former Federal prosecutor testified, raising further questions about the Government's handling of the case.  [ D1. ]


Bullpen Fails Braves Again
Pirates 4, Braves 3
ATLANTA, May 14 (AP) -- Jeff King hit a two-run single off Marvin Freeman in the ninth inning as the Pittsburgh Pirates rallied past Atlanta, 4-3, tonight and sent the Braves to their fifth loss in six games.


White House on Conflicting Paths As It Agrees to Protection for Owl
The Bush Administration issued a plan today to restrict logging on 5.4 million acres of ancient forest that is home to the northern spotted owl, but at the same time it moved to narrow the protection for endangered animals and plants.
The complicated and contradictory actions came after years of scientific study and angry political struggles in the Pacific Northwest over the balance between economic development and the preservation of rare species on Federal land.


Study Sees No New Transmissions Of H.I.V. by Health-Care Workers
Tests of more than 15,000 people have found no new cases in which patients were infected with the virus that causes AIDS from treatment by health-care workers, Federal health officials reported yesterday.
The only known such transmission of H.I.V., the virus that causes AIDS, involves five previously reported cases in the practice of a Florida dentist, Dr.
David J. Acer of Stuart, who died of AIDS.
One of Dr.
Acer's patients was Kimberly Bergalis, who died last year of AIDS at the age of 23.
She had harshly criticized public health officials for allowing Dr.
Acer to practice.


Market Place; Head of Fund Has Soft Spot For Macy's
MAYBE it has something to do with his father's years of running a chain of clothing stores.
Or perhaps it was that first summer job when he worked for a brokerage firm perched in the heart of New York's garment district.
Whatever the reason, Michael Price, a mutual-fund manager, has a soft spot for the rag trade.
All told, he has losses of $74 million because of investments in Alexander's Inc. and, more significantly, R. H. Macy &amp; Company sideswiping the otherwise shining performance of his three mutual funds.


Rule on Hoaxes In Broadcasts
Declaring that practical jokes on radio and television are no laughing matter, the Federal Communications Commission today adopted a rule to fine a broadcaster up to $25,000 if a station knowingly broadcasts false information about a crime or a catastrophe.
The rule comes in the wake of several recent incidents in which radio stations put out false alarms.
In January 1991, during the Persian Gulf war, an FM radio station in St.
Louis told listeners a nuclear attack was under way and broadcast what sounded like the warning tone of the Emergency Broadcast System.
The F.C.C. said the hoax must cause public harm to subject a station to a fine.


Yacht Racing; Man Goes Overboard, But America   Closes In
A heavier dose of wind than usual turned the America's Cup race course today into a breezy sparring field of boats and men.
While America
led the way around the course, its victory was laced with potentially serious mishaps and included a man overboard.
But as America  crossed the finish line 1 minute 4 seconds ahead of its opponent, it was Italy's Il Moro di Venezia that was in need of a lifesaver.
For the victory moved the Americans into a 3-1 lead in the four-of-seven-race series.
A victory on Saturday by America
will end the Italian challenge.


REAL ESTATE GIANT IN CANADA ENTERS BANKRUPTCY FILING
Olympia &amp; York Developments Ltd., the world's largest real estate development company, whose office towers have altered skylines in New York, London and throughout Canada, filed for the equivalent of bankruptcy protection in a Toronto court last night after three months of negotiations with lenders failed, bankers and other people close to the company said.
Olympia &amp; York is the biggest company ever to file for bankruptcy protection in Canada.
Analysts and bankers have long expressed a fear that if the company was forced to file for bankruptcy, the world's financial and property markets would be roiled.
The entire Olympia &amp; York empire, which is owned by the Reichmann family of Toronto, has debts in excess of $18.5 billion and has been trying to restructure about $12 billion of debt.
Could Hurt Banks
Office rents, building prices and bank balance sheets in the United States already reflect such a weak property market that Olympia &amp; York's bankruptcy filing is unlikely to cause much further harm, real estate and banking experts said yesterday.
In New York, the company's most prominent property is the World Financial Center on the southern tip of Manhattan.
But the financial problems could have an impact on some major banks in Europe, Canada and Japan as well as some New York banks, including Citicorp, J. P. Morgan &amp; Company and Chemical Bank.
Those American banks have already reserved for potential losses but investors could drive down stock prices.  [ Page D6. ]


Art in Review
Zoe Leonard  Paula Cooper Gallery 155 Wooster Street SoHo Through June 3
In the carefully modulated black-and-white photographs here, Zoe Leonard explores the familiar split between culture and nature, analysis and feeling.
On one side of the divide are pictures of museum displays of women, the most horrific of which presents the head of a bearded woman, complete with lace collar, preserved under a bell jar in a French museum.


Economic Scene; Issues Entwined, Home and Abroad
THE explosion of violence in Los Angeles and its spread to other cities have done what economic arguments and moral preachments had failed to do: force the nation's attention on its festering problems of race, poverty and jobs.
What sort of explosion will it take to make the nation see that it cannot neglect its international responsibilities?
America cannot choose to deal with either its domestic or its international problems; the two are bound together in this post-cold-war era.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, a brief biographical outline in Business Day on May 7 with an article about Sean O'Keefe, the Defense Department comptroller, misstated his graduate degree.
He received a master's in public administration from the Maxwell School of Citizenship and Public Affairs at Syracuse University.


The Art Market
The two most important weeks of the spring auctions in New York ended on Wednesday night, and the mood was one of great relief.
Given the current economy, things could have been worse -- much worse.
After the slump of the last 18 months, the market for Impressionist, modern and contemporary art -- the bread and butter of both Sotheby's and Christie's, the world's largest auction houses -- began inching its way back to life.
While total sales were less than the auction houses' estimates, the number of new bidders and the enthusiasm in the salesrooms showed a marked change since the November sales.
"It came as almost a shock," said Christopher Burge, president of Christie's in New York.
"But the message is clear: it's still a delicate market. Buyers are looking hard at estimates. And people must not be too optimistic about prices' rising in the near future. The same low figures must continue."


DELAY ON ORDERS FOR NEW VIDEO TELEPHONE SYSTEM
A.T.&amp; T. said yesterday that it would not be able to meet its May deadline for producing its new videophone and that it might be late two months or more.
The company announced in January that it would begin selling a mass-market videophone -- called Videophone 2500 -- for $1,500 each.
Even at $3,000 a pair, they are one-tenth the cost of more advanced $30,000 systems aimed at the corporate market.


King Verdict Shows Uncertainty of Jury Trials; Jurors Make Mistakes
To the Editor:
William Safire objects to the alleged public and media post-trial inquisition of the Rodney King jury and the demand that the jury face world opinion ("Trashing Our Justice," column, May 4).
As a journalist, Mr.
Safire should know better; that in a highly controversial matter, the public and the press indeed have an obligation to express their opinion.
No one suggests the King jury be tried for a perversion of justice, but the videotape of the incident graphically depicts that Mr.
King was being punished not because at the time of his beating he was a threat to the several police officers present, but because he resisted arrest in the first instance.
It is, of course, not the function of the police to punish offenders.


Richard Derr, 74, A Longtime Actor On Stage and Film
Richard Derr, a veteran stage and screen actor who starred on Broadway in plays by Herman Wouk, Elmer Rice and Christopher Fry, died on May 8 in St.
John's Hospital in Santa Monica, Calif.
He was 74 years old and lived in West Hollywood, Calif.
He died of pancreatic cancer, said Lee Hale, a friend.


EXXON IS EXPECTED TO ELIMINATE 1,500 U.S. JOBS
The Exxon Corporation is expected to announce a restructuring today, and analysts said it might eliminate 1,500 jobs at its Exxon USA unit.
Exxon reported last month that its profits fell 40 percent in the first quarter, and Lawrence G. Rawl, Exxon's chairman, noted at the time that the company's domestic profits had slipped to 25 percent of earnings, compared with 50 percent in earlier years.
On Tuesday, Exxon announced that it was stopping retail sales in the Los Angeles area and would not accept its own credit card in California, Nevada, Oregon and Utah effective Sept. 1.


The Hand That Shakes Digital Up
At the Digital Equipment Corporation, the financially troubled computer maker, power struggles have long been a way of life.
But if the clash involved Kenneth H. Olsen, Digital's founder and president, the outcome was always a foregone conclusion.
Last year, John Rose, a 16-year Digital veteran who spent several years leading the company's catch-up efforts in the personal computer market, was stunned to discover that Mr.
Olsen had created a competing group that was pursuing a vastly different strategy for the company.


Fed Easing Is Seen as Less Likely
Prices of Treasury securities were mostly lower in slow trading yesterday, as chances faded for any reduction soon in short-term interest rates by the Federal Reserve Board.
The reason the market shifted its opinion about an imminent Fed move was a report late yesterday showing that money growth surged in the week ended May 4.


Mexico Ordering Changes For State-Run Oil Company
Faced with growing public anger over Petroleos Mexicanos's responsibility for explosions that killed at least 205 people last month in Guadalajara, President Carlos Salinas de Gortari has ordered the state oil monopoly to restructure, officials said today.
At a meeting on Wednesday, the officials said, Mr.
Salinas gave the director of Pemex, as the company is known, and the Secretary of Mines and Energy 30 days to draw up a plan to modernize the huge enterprise more quickly.
Pemex provides about a quarter of all Government revenues and controls every aspect of the oil industry from drilling to gas stations.


Clean Needles for Health
It took time, persuasion and evidence.
But Mayor David Dinkins gradually dropped his long-held opposition to providing addicts with clean needles, clearing the way for new needle-exchange programs in New York City.
The programs will initially be modest; still, results elsewhere demonstrate that clean needles can save lives -- including the lives of infants who would otherwise be born with AIDS.
Intravenous drug use is the leading cause of new AIDS cases in New York City.
The vast majority of children with AIDS were infected by mothers who used intravenous drugs or had sex with men who used intravenous drugs; most drug-related AIDS cases involve blacks and Hispanics.


2 Big-Party Candidates Concede in Manila
The presidential nominees of two of the largest political parties in the Philippines conceded defeat today as partial returns continued to show a tight race between a pair of candidates from outside traditional politics.
The battle between the front-runners -- former Defense Minister Fidel V. Ramos and a former immigration chief, Miriam Defensor Santiago -- seemed unlikely to be decided for several more days because of a glacially slow vote count.


The Mysterious World Of the Reichmann Brothers
The Reichmann brothers are as legendary as they are mysterious.
And they are as private as their giant real estate empire, the largest privately owned development company in the world.
Even as their empire teetered on the brink of bankruptcy in recent months, they were still reluctant to give their bank lenders all the information they demanded about the company.
Last night the main company of the empire finally succumbed, filing for bankruptcy in Toronto.


Paper Brinkmanship Times and Drivers Are Joined in Fear Both Would Lose All-Out Labor War
As The New York Times and a wholesale newspaper-delivery operation sit down for crucial negotiations that could end their nine-day dispute with a newspaper truck drivers union, each participant has potent strengths and real vulnerabilities.
The principal weapons of The Times and the wholesaler, Imperial Delivery Service, are substantial financial resources, a far superior legal position and the apparent will to use the law if necessary to force major change in the workplace, regardless of what the union does.


New Commercials Aim at Executives
Two airlines and a mobile communications company are introducing advertising campaigns aimed at business executives.
"Alitalia first. The rest is easy" is the theme of new work for Alitalia Airlines, the first by D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles in New York since it won the Italian carrier's account.
The goal is to increase Alitalia's low awareness levels among business travelers, said Bill Gangi, a managing partner and group creative director at the agency.


TV Weekend; Blythe Danner's Turn As the Troubled Mother
Ambitious new made-for-television movies are very much in evidence this weekend.
The networks dabble, as is their wont, in crime and in aliens from outer space.
Over on pay cable, Showtime is offering what it chooses to call an erotic drama; an equally apt label would be soft porn.
"Cruel Doubt" (which runs for four hours on NBC beginning at 9 P.M. this Sunday and Tuesday), based on Joe McGinniss's best-selling book, focuses on the same real-life crime that was explored three weeks ago in CBS's "Honor Thy Mother." Following a vicious bedroom attack that leaves her second husband dead and her badly battered, a North Carolina woman named Bonnie Von Stein is faced with the chilling possibility that her own 19-year-old son, Chris Pritchard, is deeply implicated.


Money Fund Assets Off
The assets of the nation's 596 money market mutual funds decreased by $2.83 billion, to $494.70 billion, in the week that ended Wednesday, the Investment Company Institute said yesterday.
Those of the 219 institutional funds decreased by $379.6 million, to $178.85 billion.
The assets of the 286 general-purpose funds were down by $1.47 billion, to $174.94 billion.
The 91 broker-dealer funds decreased by $978.8 million, to $140.91 billion, the institute said.


Filing Is Expected to Affect Banks More Than Property
Office rents, building prices and bank balance sheets in the United States already reflect such a weak property market that the bankruptcy filing of Olympia &amp; York Developments Ltd. is unlikely to cause much further harm, real estate and banking experts said yesterday.
But the filing is more likely to affect several major New York banks than the area's real estate investors, some experts said.


Rostenkowski Is Subpoenaed in Post Office Inquiry
Federal prosecutors have subpoenaed the expense records of three Democratic Representatives, including Dan Rostenkowski of Illinois, as part of a criminal investigation of the House post office, Congressional leaders said today.
The subpoenas provided the first indication that the Federal grand jury inquiry had broadened its focus to include the activities of House members.
Until now it had centered on accusations of embezzlement and drug dealing by low-level employees at the House post office.


2 Boston Agencies Announce Merger
Two Boston agencies, Arnold Fortuna Lane and Cabot Communications, said yesterday that they had merged through an acquisition of Cabot by Arnold Fortuna.
The new agency, Arnold Fortuna Lane &amp; Cabot, becomes New England's second-largest shop, with estimated billings in excess of $140 million.
The agency will be headed by Ed Eskandarian, chairman and chief executive at Arnold Fortuna.
William H. Monaghan and Carolyn C. Smith, former partners at Cabot, become executive vice presidents, and Charles F. Kieffer 3d, another former Cabot partner, becomes chief financial officer.
For the time being, the agencies will work from their current offices.


About the Weather


Review/Film; This Time Round the Mongol Hordes Are Women
Riding camels, a band of Mongol women crosses the desert.
These warriors bear large bows and arrows, and they are dressed to kill, in long shimmering robes of pastel green, vivid rose or royal blue.
But they don't mean any harm.
They simply stop the Trans-Mongolian railroad on its tracks, abduct seven foreign women, and take them on an adventure that is part anthropological study, part fancy costume party.
"Johanna d'Arc of Mongolia," which opens today at Le Cinematographe, is a witty, matriarchal, multi-cultural epic, running 2 hours and 45 minutes.
It was written, directed and sumptuously photographed in Mongolia by the Ulrike Ottinger, a German who is usually regarded as a "difficult" avant-garde film maker.
But while "Johanna d'Arc" is eccentric, it is also perfectly accessible, as long as a few missing narrative threads and lapses of logic don't bother you.


On Healthy Indoor Air, and Avoiding Suits
Shortly after an insurance company moved some of its employees into a building on Myrtle Street in Hartford, Conn., the workers began to complain of sinus infections, sore throats, runny noses, skin irritation and headaches.
In the next seven years some said they had developed asthmatic bronchitis or other chronic illnesses.
Last year the company moved its offices.
But at the same time 140 employees filed Connecticut's first class-action lawsuit involving indoor air quality against the building's owner.
The employees' lawyer, Louis N. George, contends that the building has poor air quality because of a lack of ventilation and unsatisfactory heating and air-conditioning design.


Clinton Picks Up Brown 1-800 Idea
The 800 number has come to the Clinton campaign.
Borrowing a page from the playbook of former Gov.
Edmund G. Brown Jr. of California, Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas now has his own toll-free telephone number.
Callers get a short recorded message from the candidate ("This is Bill Clinton. Thanks for calling.") and are offered the opportunity to receive a copy of a brochure providing details of Mr.
Clinton's economic plans.


Baryshnikov to Dance With City Ballet
Mikhail Baryshnikov will appear in June with the New York City Ballet, performing in George Balanchine's "Duo Concertant" and a new solo by Mark Morris, Peter Martins said yesterday.
Mr.
Martins, the company's artistic director, said Mr.
Baryshnikov "has had a standing invitation to dance as a guest since he left American Ballet Theater." Mr.
Martins added: "He's always said no, but this time he changed his mind. So we agreed on a solo that Mark Morris will premiere in Boston on June 2 and on 'Duo Concertant.' " Mr.
Baryshnikov will take over Mr.
Morris's role in the ballet, which is danced to George Gershwin's "Three Preludes."


ASTRONAUTS MAKE A NEW SPACE WALK AFTER RESCUE FEAT
Buoyed by their last-minute triumph in capturing an errant satellite, astronauts of the shuttle Endeavour took a fourth walk in space Thursday, staying out almost eight hours to rehearse constructing NASA's planned 350-foot space station.
And as the satellite they saved on Wednesday blasted toward its correct orbit, aerospace experts praised and debated the high-stakes rescue that featured history's first satellite capture by astronauts using nothing but their gloved hands.


On Stage, and Off
Ruing a Skipped Award
The producers of the four Tony-nominated Broadway musicals were not pleased with the decision this week by the New York Drama Critics Circle to skip a best musical award.
The critics say the thinking behind the decision, which was upheld 12 to 7, is that neither "Crazy for You," nor "Jelly's Last Jam" had a completely new score, and that "Falsettos" had been nominated before, in its Off Broadway incarnations.
But the discussion about "Crazy for You," which uses much of the score of the 1930 Gershwin musical "Girl Crazy," with additional Gershwin songs and a new book, is what that show's producers, Roger Horchow and Elizabeth Williams, were most concerned about.
They started to receive calls saying that Edwin Wilson, the drama critic of The Wall Street Journal, had led the charge against "Crazy for You." Mr.
Horchow and Ms.
Williams say they were both surprised because it was general knowledge in the theater that Mr.
Wilson had wanted them to hire him to write the book for the show. (Five of the 19 critics who attended would discuss the meeting, on condition of anonymity. One agreed that Mr. Wilson led the attack, two remembered Douglas Watt of The Daily News joining him in the opposition and the remaining two recalled only Mr. Wilson's participation in the opposition to "Crazy for You.")
Mr.
Horchow says: "Edwin Wilson called me several times when a mutual friend told him we had the rights to 'Girl Crazy,' and wanted a new book. He said he wanted to write the book. Out of courtesy, Elizabeth saw him and he said if we got somebody who wasn't doing it right, he could be a co-writer. I was quite surprised, frankly, when The Wall Street Journal allowed him to review the play." Raymond Sokolov, Mr.
Wilson's editor, says: "All of this comes as news to me. Ed Wilson strikes me as an honorable and ethical person." Mr.
Wilson gave the show a mostly favorable review; he had reservations about the book, saying "logic remains in short supply."


New Mozambique Ordeal: Drought Comes Atop War
Armando Sitoe cupped in his calloused hands a root that he dug up and some nutlike kernels that he scavenged from the wilderness near his dusty village at Chicualacuala.
The root would be shaved and boiled to brew a strong tea for his family.
The kernels would be eaten, despite their bitter taste.
It was only crop that the barefoot 62-year-old farmer could harvest this year.


South Africa Is One Issue Away From Accord
On the eve of the second major round of negotiations on South Africa's future, a deadlock over a small but crucial detail has threatened prospects for a new transitional government that would include black leaders.
The dispute involves the percentage of votes that would be required during the transition to enact provisions of a new constitution ending white minority rule.
Because decisions at this stage are reached by consensus and many proposals under discussion are interlocked, it is difficult to move ahead on one front without progress on others.


L.I. Rattled as a Jet Detour Becomes a Flight Path
It all began two years ago, when David N. Dinkins, the Mayor of New York and a tennis buff, pressed the Federal Aviation Administration to steer aircraft away from the United States Open tennis tournament in Flushing Meadows-Corona Park so that players could concentrate and fans could hear the whack of gut hitting ball.
It has now led to daylong sorties of aircraft thundering over the sprawling contemporary home of Robert and Sandy Weintraub and thousands of their neighbors in this enclave of wealth and privilege beyond the city line.


Loneliness in a Long-Running Pitch
An advertising character known for his loneliness is also becoming known for his longevity.
This week, Maytag and its agency, the Leo Burnett Company, are celebrating 25 years of appearances by the lonely repairman -- that ever-ready yet never-needed Mr.
Fix-It -- in the appliance maker's commercials.
That quarter-century star turn makes the repairman the longest-running live ad character on network television, Burnett says, and certainly one of the longest-running pitchmen of any kind.


METRO DIGEST
COMMOTION OVER PLANE NOISE
The original idea was to stop aircraft from disturbing the action on the tennis courts at the United States Open.
Then Queens officials decided to ask the Federal Aviation Authority to continue diverting planes from La Guardia Airport over Nassau County.
Now politicians are arguing about whose constituents deserve noise and whose deserve peace and quiet.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY  THE MAYOR'S OFFER ON SANCTIONS


At the Bar; A small claim turns into a brouhaha over welfare, individual rights and judicial freedom.
The fight between Judge Eugene Kenny and Debbie Rivera began in a Jersey City courtroom.
Then it went before the state's Chief Justice, Robert N. Wilentz.
From there it moved to the airwaves, to the newsstands and to the supermarket checkout counter.
Now it is once more back in court, this time in Newark.
Along the way, a small claim against a Union City check-cashing store has grown into an allegory about welfare, individual responsibility and judicial freedom.
Ms.
Rivera, a 27-year-old unwed, unemployed mother of three, has become a symbol of the underclass.
And Judge Kenny, who spent his long legal career in obscurity, has become a folk hero -- first in New Jersey and now through the unlikely auspices of The National Enquirer, thoughout the country.


COMPANY NEWS: Breaking the Ice; From Olympic Gold To Advertising, at Last
After Kristi Yamaguchi won a gold medal for figure skating at the Olympics, there was reported resistance to hiring her for commercial endorsements because of her Japanese heritage at a time when Japan-bashing was in vogue.
But that resistance may be starting to melt.
In Ms.
Yamaguchi's first big deal signed since she won the medal at the Winter Olympics in Albertville, France, the Hoechst Celanese Corporation said yesterday that it had chosen Ms.Yamaguchi as the spokeswoman for a brand of acetate fibers that are made into apparel.


Pay-Per-View Triplecast Won't Pay Own Way
Officials of the Olympics Triplecast, the NBC-Cablevision Systems pay-per-view cablecast of the Summer Games from Barcelona, Spain, confirmed yesterday what has long been conjecture: The three-channel experiment will not make money.
"We've never expected break even," Tom Rogers, the president of NBC Cable, said of the $200 million it will cost to produce and market three simultaneously operating channels, each of which will air events live from 5 A.M. to 5 P.M. daily and will be repeated from 5 P.M. to 5 A.M.


New 'Hands-On' Handley Spells Out Line Changes
One year ago today, Ray Handley walked into General Manager George Young's office and was offered the job of coaching the Super Bowl champion Giants.
"The organization was hoping it would be a nice, smooth handoff," Handley recalled yesterday.
"But in a lot of situations, I was in a no-win situation. I got into some of it by not being my own man."


Many Golfers Irate Over Plan To Computerize Sign-Up System
It could be 3 A.M. on a rainy Saturday, and a long line of cars would already be snaking through the darkness toward the gates of the Dunwoodie Golf Course in Yonkers and the four other public golf courses in Westchester County.
These golfers have already reserved their tee times, so why are they arriving so early?
To make sure they get the same starting time the following week by taking part in a sign-up system that has evolved with refinements over many years.


Review/Film; Cabeza de Vaca's Journey To 16th-Century Mexico
"Cabeza de Vaca" was shown as part of last year's New Directors/ New Films series.
Following are excerpts from Vincent Canby's review, which appeared in The New York Times on March 23, 1991.
The film -- in Spanish with English subtitles -- opens today at the Village East Cinema, Second Avenue and 12th Street in Manhattan.
Nicolas Echevarria's "Cabeza de Vaca" is a historical film that can probably be best appreciated by those who already know the story of the 16th-century Spanish explorer Alvar Nunez Cabeza de Vaca.
The style of the Mexican film is sometimes straightforward, sometimes pageantlike and sometimes hallucinatory.
It's not especially difficult to follow, though it is less informative than evocative of times and events unknown.


Critic's Choice; 9th Avenue Food Festival
The neighborhood once known as Hell's Kitchen will stoke the cooking fires this weekend as it celebrates the 19th annual Ninth Avenue International Food Festival.
Weather permitting, up to a million nibblers are expected to stroll through the gastronomic gantlet from 37th Street to 57th Street in Manhattan.
The fair runs from 11 A.M. to 7 P.M. tomorrow and Sunday.
Food from more than 30 countries will be served on the milelong route.


Connecticut Contractor To Make Bridge Repairs
To the Editor:
In his April 17 letter, E. Magnus Oppenheim said the Triborough Bridge and Tunnel Authority should have contracted with a company from New York City or with a company from the New York metropolitan area for repairs to the Verrazano-Narrows Bridge rather than with Greiner Engineering, whose headquarters are located in Irving, Tex.
The contract in question is between the T.B.T.A. and Greiner Inc. of Wallingford, Conn., approximately 90 miles from New York City.
Greiner also has offices in Albany, N.Y., California, Colorado, Michigan, Florida, Maryland and Arizona.


Grand Jury Inquiry Reportedly Shifts to Robb
Senator Charles S. Robb of Virginia has been notified by Federal prosecutors that he is a target of a grand jury investigating the illegal taping of a telphone call by his long time rival, Gov.
L.
Douglas Wilder of Virginia, The Washington Post reported today.
The report, which cited unidentified sources, is the first indication that the grand jury inquiry has shifted to the Democratic Senator, who had previously been informed that he was not under scrutiny.


The Spoken Word
READING WITH BRUNCH, New York Botanical Garden, 200th Street and Southern Boulevard, Bedford Park, the Bronx.
An event with Avery Corman, Laura Cunningham, Frank Gilroy and other Bronx-born writers who will read from their own work.
Sunday at noon.
Admission: $35.
Reservations: (212) 220-8724.
PANEL DISCUSSION, Brooklyn War Memorial Auditorium, Cadman Park, Cadman Plaza West, Brooklyn Heights.
"Exhibiting in Brooklyn," a panel discussion on art in Brooklyn, by representatives of Brooklyn exhibition spaces, including Charlotta Kotik, curator of 20th-century art at the Brooklyn Museum, and Eleanor Moretta, director of the Schafler Gallery at the Pratt Institute.
Sponsored by Artists Talk on Art.
Tonight on 8 P.M.
Admission: $4 ($2.50 for students and the elderly).
Information: (212) 385-2862.


Critic's Notebook; Les 1,001 Mysteres of the Cannes Film Festival
There is no real looking glass through which one passes upon arriving here, but the effects can be felt just the same.
Certainly they are effects that Alice would understand.
A television set tuned to an English-language channel at night will be speaking French by morning.
A banana in a kiosk on the Croisette costs $5.
A mailbox in the Cannes International Film Festival's festival's press headquarters could be opened with a key in previous years, but it has been outfitted with a magnetic sensing device that uses the journalist's ID card.
So now it doesn't open at all.
The contents (which must be removed each day through the back of the box by a head-shaking French official) are a pound or two of junk mail, but wastebaskets do not exist.
Traffic flows smoothly in front of the Palais des Festivals, but it flows four lanes deep in alternating directions, which makes it miraculous that so many live, unhurt pedestrians have successfully crammed themselves into the area.
The carpet lining the main stairway of the Palais adds a ceremonial element, plus some additional confusion: some days it is red and some days it is blue.


Diner's Journal
A Serving of Jazz
Jazz buffs may want to check out the new music series at Andiamo, the Italian restaurant at 1991 Broadway, at 67th Street.
Different types of international jazz combos are featured Mondays through Saturdays at 8:30 P.M.
At Sunday brunch (11:30 to 3 P.M.), blues bands entertain.


Failure of the New Order; Yugoslav Carnage Poses Painful Questions For Western Alliance and United Nations
With the outside world in effect relegated to the role of bystander during the violent dismemberment of Bosnia and Herzegovina, painful questions are being asked about how the combined efforts of Western Europe, the United States and the United Nations failed a crucial test of post-cold-war security.
Could the carnage in Yugoslavia have been prevented?
Can it be stopped?
Will it happen elsewhere?


U.S. Comment on Old Issue Inflames Israelis
At her regular news briefing the other day, the State Department spokeswoman, Margaret D. Tutwiler, affirmed United States support for an old United Nations resolution, going back to 1948 and governing the right of Palestinian refugees to return to Israel.
On one level, there was nothing remarkable in what she said.
It was simply a restatement of a 44-year-old position, and her comments got scant attention in the American press.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The President; Bush Uses Fishing Demonstration To Speak About Urban Problems
President Bush ventured into Southeast Washington today to the fringes of a poor neighborhood to plant a tree, cast a fishing line with schoolchildren and express concern for the urban agonies that exploded in Los Angeles two weeks ago.
It was the fourth time in a week that Mr.
Bush had toured troubled urban areas, starting in Los Angeles on May 7 and moving to Philadelphia on Monday, Baltimore on Wednesday and just a few miles from the White House today to an area known as Anacostia.


Review/Art; Spanish Revolts and Revelations
LINING the hall outside "Antoni Tapies in Print," at the Museum of Modern Art, are several works by other important European artists of the postwar era that set the stage perfectly for this large exhibition.
The graffitilike imagery and roughly textured surfaces of Jean Dubuffet; the raw elegance of Lucio Fontana's punctured canvases; the symbol-laden and mystical aspects of Joseph Beuys's art: all of it is to be found in Mr.
Tapies's prints.
The trouble is that by the end of the exhibition, when one passes back through the hall, Mr.
Tapies seems an often less potent purveyor of these qualities than his colleagues.


MICROSOFT WIDENS USE OF OPERATING SYSTEM SOFTWARE
The Microsoft Corporation said yesterday that it would offer its operating system programs in an integrated package of Microsoft Windows version 3.1 with MS-DOS version 5 specifically for I.B.M.'s PS/2 computers.
Microsoft's announcement comes after the International Business Machines Corporation said that it would bundle its own operating system, OS/2, with certain PS/2 models that have traditionally used MS-DOS, with or without Windows.


The Prime of 'Wall Street East'; A Renaissance May End Downtown Brooklyn's Dark Ages
The time passed long ago when the streets of downtown Brooklyn bustled with trolleys and elevated trains, when the Dodgers had their business office at Montague and Court Streets and when Brooklynites, in fedoras and white gloves, swarmed the penny arcades, stately theaters and grand old department stores like Namm's and Frederick Loeser's.
But now, after decades of deterioration turned it into a gritty, fading remnant of itself, downtown Brooklyn has regained a bit of the verve that, to some, once made it the center of the center of the world.
A New Business Hub


Review/Theater; A Garcia Lorca Tragedy of Blood Lust and Death
The revolutionary legacy of Federico Garcia Lorca endures in his poetry and in his three poetic tragedies.
The first of the three plays, "Blood Wedding," surges with passion and earth wisdom, both of which are captured in Melia Bensussen's vivid production at the Joseph Papp Public Theater.
Using a lyrical translation by Langston Hughes, Ms.
Bensussen explores the heart of this tale of barrenness and blood lust.
Beneath the surface calm, all is turbulence, as fate and the masterly hand of the playwright drive the characters to their shared catastrophe.
Inspired by a true story, Garcia Lorca wrote of acts of violence that destroyed several families.
As in Ibsen's "Peer Gynt," a man steals a bride on her wedding day, but with Garcia Lorca the marriage thief pays the ultimate price.


Traffic Alert
TOMORROW
Because of the Ninth Avenue Food Festival, Ninth Avenue will be closed between 37th Street and 57th Streets, from 10 A.M. to 7 P.M.
Because of the Central Christopher Street Fair, Christopher Street will be closed between Seventh Avenue South and Hudson Street, from 11 A.M. to 8 P.M.


Iacocca Delivers a Fiery Swan Song
Lee A. Iacocca, in his last address as chairman of the Chrylser Corporation at its annual shareholders meeting today, mused that he might want to man a battle station in the trade war against the Japanese after he retires.
"We're still far from having fair access to the Japanese market and far from getting a fair shake in our own market," he said.
"There's a little progress now, and the proof of the pudding is that in April the Japanese market share in total went down four full points."


Cuomo Calls for Federal Effort To Contain Health-Care Costs
In an address aimed as much at the Presidential candidates as at the medical school graduates sitting before him, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo yesterday called on the Federal Government to contain health-care costs and provide universal medical insurance.
At a Carnegie Hall ceremony, he told graduating members of the New York University School of Medicine's class of 1992 that the nation's poor, elderly and unemployed would never receive adequate health care unless the Government intervened.
"Even if they did all New York State is doing, states acting alone could not tame the health-care monster," he said.
"It is no longer a question of choice. We must have a national plan."


Riots Continue in Nigeria Over Shortage of Gasoline
Young anti-Government demonstrators skirmished with riot police officers again today, and looting and vandalism was reported throughout the capital.
Few Nigerian workers seemed to join in the violence, which began last week as a protest against a gasoline shortage.
But Lagos, Nigeria's biggest city, with a population of about five million, remained virtually paralyzed.
Few buses or cabs were operating; schools, offices and stores closed early.


Leading Burmese Dissenter Urges a Change
Daw Aung San Suu Kyi, the jailed Burmese democracy campaigner who won the 1991 Nobel Peace Prize, called for change in her country beyond "token gestures" today in her first public statement to the West since she was put under house arrest in 1989 by the Burmese military Government.
In a speech accepting an award from the International Human Rights Law Group that was read tonight in Washington by one of her two sons, Mrs.
Aung San Suu Kyi said without naming her jailers that "fears and suspicions generated by deception, injustice and lack of respect for human dignity cast long shadows across societies fractured by the violation of human rights."


Books of The Times; It Gets Bigger, Weirder and Tenser
Sex, Death and God in L.A.
Edited and with an introduction by David Reid Illustrated. 356 pages.
Pantheon Books. $23.
"In the strange new post-modern imperium we live in," writes David Reid in the introduction to this new anthology, "Los Angeles, at the very least, has become the American city the world watches for signs and portents."


Graves Can't Operate The Remote Control
The embodiment of all evil, Adam Graves, is bouncing from foot to foot in the hellish bowels of the Pittsburgh Civic Arena, his red tie flapping, the collar points of his white shirt curling.
He apologizes.
"I'm so nervous."
Perhaps he was merely possessed when he swung his stick at Mario Lemieux.
This 24-year-old now hides behind a pathetic playoff beard -- a smear of dark blond hair under his sharp nose, a whisper of fur on his chin -- and begs for understanding with those large, guileless blue eyes.
He says, "At least in a game the nervousness is focused, there's an outlet."


Restaurants
La Boheme is an eccentric little spot that has endured over the years both because of the charm of its owner, Paris Dulac, and its reliably pleasing food at honest prices.
It's not a place you go to for gastronomic revelations; rather, it's a place for sustenance and casual good times.
Situated on narrow Minetta Lane and convenient to Greenwich Village theaters and nightspots, La Boheme has a rough-edged cabin-in-the-woods look.
The long rectangular dining room has plank floors, wood-and-stucco walls, stacks of firewood and closely arranged tables that are draped with Provencal fabric and butcher paper.
The most peculiar design element here is the test-tube-shaped lights that dangle from looped wires along the ceiling, lending a festive air to the space.


Judith Brown, 60, Figurative Sculptor; Worked in Metals
Judith Brown, a sculptor of figurative works in steel, died on Monday at her home in Manhattan.
She was 60 years old.
She died of pancreatic cancer, said her daughter, Leslie.


John W. Devine, 63, A Former Magistrate
John W. Devine, who retired in 1991 after serving 20 years as a United States Magistrate in Trenton, died April 27 at his home in West Trenton, N.J.
He was 63.
Judge Devine died of natural causes, his son, John F. Devine, said.


Cooper and Moorer, and the Future
The fight is between heavyweights MICHAEL MOORER and BERT COOPER.
The battle is for future considerations in the heavyweight title picture.
Sure, there is a title at stake tonight -- the World Boxing Organization's vacant heavyweight crown.
But in today's market, W.B.O. titles are deflated, and the winner of the 12-round Moorer-Cooper match at the Taj Mahal in Atlantic City will hardly be considered the heavyweight king.


Lyle Alzado, 43, Fierce Lineman Who Turned Steroid Foe, Is Dead
Lyle Alzado, the Brooklyn-born former lineman whose fierce play for the Los Angeles Raiders made him the apotheosis of ferocity and who later became a self-styled symbol of the dangers of steroid abuse, died yesterday at his home in Portland, Ore.
He was 43 years old.
Dr.
Thomas DeLoughery said Mr.
Alzado died of complications of a rare form of brain cancer, which was diagnosed a year ago and which the athlete attributed to his years of taking massive doses of steroids to build and maintain a formidable physique.


The Name Game in Macedonia
The United States has rightly distanced itself from the aggressor gang now running Serbia, but it still won't recognize the peacefully inclined former Yugoslav republic of Macedonia.
Greece insists that only its own northernmost province is entitled to that name.
For Washington to continue to honor Greece's harsh demands invites territorial claims on Macedonia from outside and disintegration from within.
What's in a name?
To Athens, it's part of a plot to grab the glory that was Greece, and some of its territory as well.
Greece wants the new nation to call itself the Republic of Skopje.
But the tiny new state has the right to call itself whatever it wants.
And it's absurd to think of this defenseless nation of two million Slavs, Albanians and Turks as a threat to Greece.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Courier, Sampras Gain
Jim Courier and Pete Sampras, the top two seeded players, continued their march yesterday toward a possible all-American final in the Italian Open in Rome along with fifth-seeded Michael Chang.
The top-seeded Courier overpowered Sergi Bruguera of Spain, 6-3, 6-2, to reach the quarterfinals, while No. 2 Sampras beat Goran Prpic of Croatia, 6-2, 6-7, (7-5), 6-3, and Chang eliminated defending champion Emilio Sanchez of Spain, 6-1, 7-5.
Also reaching the quarterfinals were eighth-seeded Petr Korda of Czechoslovakia, Carl Uwe-Steeb of Germany, Christian Miniussi of Argentina, Carlos Costa of Spain and Jaime Yzaga of Peru.


King Verdict Shows Uncertainty of Jury Trials; Prosecutorial Appeals
To the Editor:
William Safire, no mollycoddler of criminals, defends the American jury by arguing "Where else is a person accused of a crime better protected from the powerful state or the angry mob?" ("Trashing Our Justice," column, May 4).
It is quite true that one accused of a crime deserves strong protection, in the form of a presumption of innocence.
Nevertheless, the Rodney King verdict suggests the need for changes in the American system of criminal procedure.


Intel Stock Drops as Chip Competition Intensifies
Shares in the Intel Corporation dropped sharply today after the company's announcement on Wednesday that it would slash prices on its 486SX chip by more than 50 percent.
The drop in Intel stock also reflected today's announcement by Texas Instruments Inc. that it would enter the market with a 486-compatible chip through a cross-licensing agreement with the Cyrix Corporation of Richardson, Tex.


Gorbachev, Addressing Congress, Pleads for Aid


Jazz and Trail Blazers Win to Advance to Conference Finals
Jazz 111, SuperSonics 100
SALT LAKE CITY, May 14 (AP) -- The Utah Jazz advanced to the Western Conference finals tonight for the first time as Karl Malone scored 15 of his 37 points in the fourth quarter in a 111-100 victory over the Seattle SuperSonics.
Malone also had 13 rebounds for Utah, which wrapped up the four-of-seven-game series in five games by scoring the last 10 points in the final two minutes of the game.
The victory ran the Jazz's mark at the Delta Center to a National Basketball Association-best 43-4, including seven straight home playoff victories.


Preakness Turns Into Jewel With Some Flaws
Fourteen colts were entered today for the Preakness at Pimlico Race Course on Saturday, but only seven of them ran in the Kentucky Derby.
The early favorite, Lil E. Tee, ran in the Derby and won it in exceptionally slow time at exceptionally long odds.
The second choice, Alydeed, didn't run in the Derby and has raced only four times anywhere.
He also has never raced beyond a mile, has never won going around two turns and has never carried more than 120 pounds.
To add to the consternation, when post positions were drawn this morning, Alydeed got the No. 12 slot near the outside flank of Saturday's race, the second jewel in a seemingly flawed Triple Crown.


Don't Pressure Ukraine on Nuclear Arms
To the Editor:
"Nuclear Backsliding in Ukraine" (editorial, May 4) argues that the United States should exert pressure on Ukraine to transfer all its nuclear warheads to Russia and to sign the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty, now that the tactical nuclear weapons have been transferred to Russia.
The issue of strategic nuclear weapons in Ukraine -- and in Belarus and Kazakhstan -- was treated at a recent international conference in Estonia.
The Ukraine, Belarus and Kazakhstan representatives argued that the strategic nuclear weapons on their territory could not be removed without adversely affecting them; that these weapons were the most significant components of the Soviet military security system, and that they are continuing to provide security to their new republics.
They believe retention of these weapons is legitimate since all the republics, not just Russia, are the legal successor states to the Soviet Union.
Thus, they see the strategic weapons on their territory as legitimately theirs, with agreements with Russia calling for joint formulation of nuclear policy.


Ben B. Bodne, 88, President and Owner Of Algonquin Hotel
Ben B. Bodne, who was smitten with the Algonquin hotel on his honeymoon and returned to buy it, owning it for 41 years, died on Tuesday at St.
Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital Center in Manhattan.
He was 88 years old and lived in the landmark Algonquin, at 59 West 44th Street in midtown Manhattan.
He died of natural causes, his family said.


Colt's New Chief Likes to Fix Businesses
Before Ronald C. Whitaker was hired as the new president and chief executive of Colt's Manufacturing Company, he had to pass muster with the many owners and guardians of the troubled gun maker in Hartford: the State of Connecticut pension fund, the Creditanstalt bank of Austria, private investors, the United Automobile Workers union, the company's board and a bankruptcy judge.
Mr.
Whitaker, whose appointment was announced yesterday, now faces a similarly tough challenge: modernizing the company's outdated manufacturing processes.
Industry experts attributed Colt's troubles in recent years to excessive debt, the loss of military and police orders and an outdated line of revolvers that have lost appeal among consumers who prefer semiautomatic weapons.


Jackson Journal; Again, Hope Fails at a Shopping Mall
When the Jackson Mall first opened more than 20 years ago, it was the most celebrated monument to retailing in Mississippi.
Shoppers from as far as Alabama and Louisiana flocked here to the department stores and trendy boutiques of what was then the largest mall within a 400-mile radius.
But today the 53-acre mall, in what is now the city's black community, is mostly shuttered, its vast parking lot empty, a symbol of the decay that plagues the nation's inner cities.
A plan that would have converted at least a part of the Jackson Mall to industrial use recently collapsed amid a debate that had economic, political and racial overtones, and that, to many, underscored this community's deep racial polarization.


3 More Get Maximum Sentences In Slaying of Tourist From Utah
The three defendants convicted last month of the 1990 subway murder of a Utah tourist were sentenced to 25 years to life in prison yesterday by a judge who castigated them for what he called their cowardly attack and who assured the dead man's family that New Yorkers would never forget their murdered son.
Justice Edwin Torres turned to the family of Brian Watkins, seated in the first row of State Supreme Court in Manhattan, and said, "I speak for every New Yorker when I say we are with you in your interminable grief."


For Rams Pitcher, Control May Mean Walking Away
In the sixth inning of what could be his final game as a pitcher for Fordham University, Jim McDermott stood on the mound today and had a sudden thought: "This could be the last time I play organized sports."
McDermott's college career, which began as a football recruit on an academic scholarship, might end just as his pitching skills are beginning to develop.
He won for the ninth consecutive time this season despite allowing five earned runs in the ninth inning of a bizarre 11-9 victory over LeMoyne in the Eastern College Athletic Conference baseball tournament.


Genoa Spruces Up to Remember Native Son
As part of the 500th-anniversary celebration for its most famous son's arrival in America, this Mediterranean city, where Christopher Columbus was born, is preparing for an Expo fair that will celebrate ships and the sea.
Today, though, a day before the fair's opening, it seemed more as if it were celebrating power drills and asphalt as construction workers fought heat, wine and lunch breaks to be ready on time.


Pro Bono Accounts
*
New York City Columbus Quincentennial Commission to Della Femina McNamee Inc., New York.


Art in Review
Andy Warhol  Pace/MacGill Gallery 32 East 57th Street Manhattan Through June 13
The mysterious workings of celebrity were at the heart of Andy Warhol's art, and portraits of celebrities make up the bulk of this exhibition of the Polaroid photographs Warhol took between 1971 and 1986 as the basis for his silk-screen paintings.
Made with an inexpensive camera with a fixed focus and blinding flash, the portraits reduce their subjects, from Arnold Schwarzenegger and Deborah Harry to Edward M. Kennedy and Martha Graham, to the same small size, about that of baseball trading cards.
This democracy of celebrity is further reinforced by the standardized poses in which Warhol arranged his sitters, as well as the bare walls against which they appear.


CHRONICLE
Interest has surged in the Save Our Cities march on Washington since the violence that swept Los Angeles two weeks ago after the acquittal of four policemen in the beating of Rodney G. King.
Organizers said yesterday that the number of buses reserved has doubled, to more than 900, and that thousands of marchers are expected on Saturday.
"The march has become a great unifying force," said OSBORN ELLIOTT, who heads the Citizens Committee for New York and shares the chairmanship of the Washington march with Mayor RAYMOND L. FLYNN of Boston.
He said more than 600 of the buses are to leave from New York City.
The United States Conference of Mayors called for the march in August, at Mr.
Elliott's suggestion.


Archer to Light Barcelona's Flame
A Spanish newspaper yesterday leaked the biggest secret of this summer's Olympic Games -- the name of the man who will light the Olympic flame at the opening ceremony in Barcelona.
El Periodico said a disabled Spanish archer, ANTONIO REBOLLO, would shoot a flaming arrow from the floor of the Olympic stadium up to a 100-foot-high pedestal, lighting a gas burner that will fuel the Olympic flame.


On My Mind; The Absent Americans
The chance was lying there for weeks -- the opportunity for the United States to make a gesture in support of a people it had betrayed.
It was a chance important politically, and important morally, and cost-free.
No announcement has been made yet, but the United States has taken its decision.
It has refused.


Intense Fighting in Sarajevo Traps 350 From U.N. Staff
The most intense battle in more than 40 days of fighting for control of Sarajevo erupted today around the United Nations peacekeeping force that has its headquarters in the city.
It trapped 350 United Nations military and civilian personnel in the basements of three buildings.
And it also postponed a decision by the world organization's Secretary General to begin evacuating most of the staff to Belgrade and Zagreb.
The United Nations force, which has been overseeing a cease-fire between Serbs and Croats within what had been old Yugoslavia's Republic of Croatia, had set up its headquarters in the capital of Bosnia and Herzegovina largely in the hope that its presence might discourage the kind of ethnic warfare that has since flared.


Review/Art; Restating and Adapting Images of China's Past
If visitors to "Challenging the Past: The Paintings of Chang Dai-chien" at Asia Society initially assume they've wandered into a group show by mistake, they're not exactly wrong.
This Chinese artist, who lived from 1899 to 1983, spent the better part of his career imitating, adapting and sometimes simply forging a wide range of old Chinese art, while also picking up motifs from 18th-century Japanese prints, fifth-century Indian frescoes and 20th-century Western abstraction along the way.
Chang was prodigious both as an artist and as a person.
He is said to have produced over 30,000 works in various media, and many of them are marked with the specific date rather than just the year.
His devotion to ancient Chinese art was profound (he spent more than two years at the Buddhist caves of Dunhuang copying the murals) and his knowledge of its themes and historical styles was encyclopedic.
His very practice of reiterating and transforming images from the past placed him in the tradition of the literati, the amateur scholar-artists for whom the perpetuation of visual culture is an esthetic principle.


Review/Art; Body, Body Everywhere, Whole and Fragmented
It's not news that the human figure has returned to late-20th-century art.
After all, the early 1980's brought to prominence Neo-Expressionists like Julian Schnabel, who blithely painted portraits across craggy surfaces made of broken crockery.
The decade also gave rise to cool-handed artists like Richard Prince, currently the subject of a major show at the Whitney Museum of American Art, who photographed images of the sleek fashion models and macho cowboys found in magazines.
Between the two extremes, activity was also fast and furious, and wildly varied.
And it still is.
The fact that the body has become a canvas of conflict is hardly surprising in an age of AIDS, racial riots and new and bitter battles over the rights of women and gays.
This weekend evidence of such body consciousness seems especially visible at a number of Manhattan galleries, from midtown to the heart of SoHo.


Bridge
Many of the world's best players began battling here Wednesday night for the right to represent the United States in the 1992 world team championships in Italy in August.
In one of the open series semifinals, a group that included two Manhattan experts, Edgar Kaplan and Brian Glubok, led by 16 imps after 48 deals of a scheduled 128 against a team led by Steve Robinson of Arlington, Va.
In the other semifinal, a group including David Berkowitz of Old Tappan, N.J., and Larry Cohen of Little Falls, N.J., led at the same stage by 14 imps against a squad including Michael Rosenberg of Manhattan.
In the women's series, a favored team was eliminated after qualifying play this afternoon.
Lynn Deas, Beth Palmer, Carol Sanders, Betty Ann Kennedy and Kathie Wei, all of whom have won world titles, and Helen Utegaard were ousted, leaving four teams to continue.


SEARCH SUSPENDED AT CANADIAN MINE
If there are any heroes after the Westray mine explosion five days ago that trapped and apparently killed 26 men, they are the 100 draegermen, who, through rockfalls and water, poisonous carbon monoxide and volatile methane gases, had searched for life and then for the bodies 1,100 feet underground.
The search was temporarily suspended today after the draegermen, or special rescue teams, found a 16th body.


Dietrich Is Remembered as a Fighter


Joffrey Ballet Cancels Its Los Angeles Season
The Joffrey Ballet has announced the cancellation of its season at the Wiltern Theater in Los Angeles.
The opening of the season, which was to have run from May 8 to June 7, had already been postponed until May 22, shortening it by two weeks.
A spokeswoman for the Joffrey said the company had decided to cancel completely because of the recent turmoil and general economic situation in the city and because of patrons' resistance to program changes necessitated by a shortened season.


Blood, Sweat And Fears For the Bulls
They thought it was over, maybe.
They thought, or wanted to believe, the Knicks had committed flagrant fouls once too often and tested their championship resolve for the last time.
They thought they were ready to shake off the blows, wipe off the blood and head home to Chicago to heal their assorted wounds.
"That's their best shot, we took it," Cliff Levingston shouted at Scottie Pippen between the third and fourth quarters of the Knicks' 100-86, series-tying victory last night over the Chicago Bulls.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.25-6.5
6.25-6.5
8.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.00
4.37
5.89
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.59
3.58
5.41
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.70
3.68
5.59
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.99
6.98
7.99
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.86
7.84
8.33
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.81
8.78
9.40
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.63
6.63
7.22
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Georgia Jury Gets Child Abuse Case
After four weeks of testimony, jurors here will try to decide if Faye Yager, the head of an underground network for abused children, is a rescuer stepping in where the justice system has failed or a vigilante subjecting children to her own form of abuse.
But if Mrs.
Yager is the one on trial, the defense has managed to turn the trial into a searing glimpse of horribly abused children left unprotected by the courts.
It has raised the question: If Mrs.
Yager's underground was not there to protect the children, what would be?


Morty Manford, 41, a Lawyer And Early Gay-Rights Advocate
Morty Manford, an assistant New York State attorney general and an early gay-rights advocate, died yesterday at his home in Flushing, Queens.
He was 41 years old and died of complications from AIDS, his family said.


House Backs an Aid Package For Chicago and Los Angeles
The House struggled today to pass legislation providing $822 million in disaster-relief grants and small-business loans to Los Angeles and Chicago, the one step in urban aid it could agree on.
The vote was 244 to 162.
Although the Bush Administration supported the bill, 110 Republicans voted against it and only 44 voted for it.
Among Democrats, 199 were in favor and 44 were opposed.
One independent voted yes.


Study Finds a Liquid Diet Works (But Not for the 50% Who Quit)
The first scientific evaluation of a commercial weight-loss program using a very-low-calorie liquid diet shows that participants who stick with the six-month program lose a significant amount of weight quickly.
And 60 percent of the lost pounds stay off for at least a year for those who complete the program.
But nearly half those who were enrolled in the diet program dropped out before completing the 26-week regime and only one in five who stayed until the end managed to maintain their entire weight loss for at least one year.





Subway Felonies Decline In First 3 Months of Year
Serious crime in New York City's subways continued to decline significantly during the first three months of this year, the transit police reported yesterday.
The police said that felonies declined by 13.9 percent in January, February and March compared with the first three months of 1991.
Sharp reductions were recorded in most categories of serious crime, including robberies, assaults and larcenies.


Pop/Jazz; 2 Veterans of the Road Sing Of Contented Losers' Tales
"Split and Slide," a song written by Butch Hancock, is the kind of tale that folklore is made of.
It chronicles the rise and fall of two crazy characters from West Texas whose exploits and misadventures take them through small towns, into sleazy gambling joints, up and down mountains and in and out of love; at one point they try to rob a bank and wind up being hauled away on the back of a garbage truck.
Split and Slide are contented losers: no matter how many times they fail to get ahead, they're always happy to try again.
At the end of one chapter of the saga, they're back to playing music in their dumpy hometown cafe, plotting a new way to escape out the swinging screen door.
Mr.
Hancock and Steve Young, two Southern singers and songwriters who will perform tonight at CB's Gallery in Manhattan and tomorrow night at Maxwell's in Hoboken, N.J., are a kind of real-life Split and Slide.
Both have been playing country-folk music troubadour style for more than 20 years; neither has had much commercial success and neither seems to care greatly.
Mr.
Hancock grew up in Lubbock, Tex., and lives in Austin, where he has his own store, performance space and gallery called Lubbock or Leave It, a kind of modest mecca of Austin folk culture.
Mr.
Young has been recording solo albums since 1969 and has lived in Georgia, Alabama, Los Angeles, Nashville and now Austin.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-13  OLYMPIA &amp; YORK BANKRUPTCY
The world's largest real estate development company filed for the equivalent of bankruptcty protection in Toronto after months of negotiations with bankers.
A1  WATCHING BOSNIA FALL APART
News analysis: As the world helplessly watches the dismemberment of Bosnia and Herzegovina, policy makers ask why Western Europe, the United States and the United Nations failed such a crucial test of post-cold-war security.
A1
Ferocious fighting in Sarajevo traps a United Nations unit.
A12  DROUGHT SAPS MOZAMBIQUE
A drought has devastated crops across southern Africa, but the suffering seems particularly severe in Mozambique, which is already bleeding from a guerrilla war.
More than 1.8 million of its people already depend on relief aid for survival.
A1  GORBACHEV COURTS CAPITOL HILL
On the eve of his return home, Mikhail Gorbachev addressed leaders of Congress and pleaded for economic aid for Russia.
The former Soviet leader received warm praise but no guarantee of special help.
A3
Mr.
Gorbachev's heady U.S. trip elicits a jaded shrug in Moscow.
A3  DEADLOCK IN SOUTH AFRICA
A deadlock over a small but crucial detail -- the percentage of approval needed for constitutional amendments -- threatens prospects for a transitional government in that would include black leaders.
A11  U.S.
COMMENT INFLAMES ISRAEL
A comment on Palestinians' rights that seemed like a restatement of United States policy has had the effect of a low-megaton bomb in Israel.
It may even help Prime Minister Shamir and his rightist party.
A13  SEARCH HALTED IN CANADIAN MINE
The hunt for bodies in the Westray mine explosion was temporarily halted after rescue teams found the 16th victim.
If there are any heroes after the blast, they are the 100 draegermen, who searched through rockfalls and water and poisonous gas for life and then for bodies.
A13  WHEN PERRY'S DARK SHIPS SAILED
Shimoda Journal: At a time of mutual suspicion between the United States and Japan, a quaint port is about to commemorate the moment when the two countries established relations.
A4  Members of a German public-sector union reject a wage pact.
A7  Columbus's native city -- Genoa -- plans to celebrate ships and sea.
A9  National A14-18, B7-8  ANOTHER STROLL IN SPACE
Buoyed by their last-minute triumph in capturing an errant satellite, astronauts of the shuttle Endeavour took a fourth space walk, embarking on a rehearsal for the building of a 350-foot space station.
As they did so, areospace experts both praised and debated the high-stakes satellite rescue.
A1  CONFLICTING SPOTTED-OWL MOVES
The Administration issued a plan to restrict logging on millions of acres that are home to the Northern spotted owl, then proposed legislation that would ultimately defeat that plan.
A1  ONE STREET IN LOS ANGELES
The block where the Los Angeles riots began two weeks ago is the same block where police officers returned on Tuesday to arrest one of four black men accused of the brutal beating of a white truck driver.
Now the people on that block are resuming their everyday lives, and for many of them a constant is hopelessness.A1
New census data reveal a grim Los Angeles inner city.  A16
The House voted aid for Los Angeles and Chicago.  A16
Bush toured another troubled urban area, in Washington.
A17  HOUSE POSTAL INQUIRY WIDENS
Federal prosecutors investigating the House post office have subpoenaed the expense records of three Democratic lawmakers, including Representative Rostenkowski, chairman of the Ways and Means Committee.
A14  FOLEY SHIFTS ON PAY AMENDMENT
House Speaker Foley said he had changed his mind and now recognized as the 27th Amendment to the Constitution the 203-year-old proposal limiting pay raises for members of Congress.
A14  RESCUER OR CRIMINAL?
After weeks of testimony, a Georgia jury will try to decide if the head of an underground network for abused children is a rescuer stepping in where the justice system has failed or a vigilante subjecting children to her own form of abuse.
A14  CLINTON ON EDUCATION
At a public college in East Los Angeles, Governor Clinton urged Federal college tuition assistance, job training for high school dropouts and for graduates who choose not to go on to college, and allowing parents to choose which public school their children will attend.
A17
Perot's father once asked for help in getting him out of the Navy.
A17  Jackson Journal: A mall's failure and racial overtones.
A14  No new cases of AIDS transmission by health care workers.
A18  Law Page B20  Four children fight to keep their home.
Metropolitan Digest, B1 SPREADING THE NOISE
A diversion of flights from La Guardia Airport away from Flushing Meadows, suggested by Mayor Dinkins to ease the noise for tennis players during the United States Open, has riled residents of the Great Neck peninsula of Long Island.
The change of route has tested the patience and political resources of people who live where they do to escape the noise and distractions of the city.
A1  PUNISHED FOR SAVINGS
A Connecticut student, working parttime, saved $4,900 to go to college and escape the web of welfare that is all her family has known for the last 12 years.
But her industry has become a bureaucratic nightmare for her family, which is being asked to repay the Federal Government for benefits received, and illustrates a major flaw of American social policy -- a rule that limits a welfare family's assets.
A1  Business Digest, D1  Weekend C1-28  Theater: One-person shows.
C1  Art: Tapies at the Modern.
C1  Word and Image: Essays about Los Angeles.
C26  Sports B11-18  Basketball: Knicks force a seventh game.
B11  Column: Vecsey on playoffs.
B11  Hockey: With season over, Rangers look to Lindros.
B11  Obituaries D20  Lyle Alzado, former pro-football player.
Editorials/Op-Ed A28-29  Editorials A28  Heroes and Murphy in space.
Name game in Macedonia.
Witch hunt at FEMA.
Clean needles for health.
Letters A28  A. M. Rosenthal: The absent Americans.
A29  Leslie H. Gelb: Letter from Germany.
A29  Edward N. Luttwak: The riots -- underclass vs. immigrants.
A29  Henry E. Simmons: Cheaper health care (for the rich).
A29  Robert Plunket: Would she spank me?
A29


At the Movies
Among the Lepers
Patrick Swayze was in a contemplative mood, relating his latest movie, "City of Joy," to the Los Angeles riots, planning a small new film about professional dancers, putting his career in perspective.
"In 'City of Joy,' " he said, "people hang onto joy in their lives and some kind of dignity against the adversity they have to live through." In Roland Joffe's film, Mr.
Swayze stars as a disillusioned American doctor named Max Lowe.
Adrift in Calcutta, he is badly beaten, and taken by an impoverished Indian to a clinic where he is enlisted to treat lepers.


Quotation of the Day
"We always end up in jail. We do a little something and we go to jail for a long time. It's not like the white people. They just railroad the black people for some crazy reason, like we are animals or something." -- ANTHONY DAWSON, an unemployed, 20-year-old black resident of South-Central Los Angeles.  [ A16:1. ]


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Challenger; Clinton Offers National Education Plan
Saying that the struggle to improve economic and social conditions in America has been impaired by failing to make education a top priority, Gov.
Bill Clinton today called for a renewed commitment to schools and job training.
In a speech delivered at a distressed public college in East Los Angeles, Mr.
Clinton outlined an education plan that called for Federal college tuition assistance, job training for high school dropouts and graduates who choose not to go on to college and legislation that would allow parents to choose which public school their children will attend.


Doyle Top Choice Of Art Directors
Doyle Advertising in Boston was the leading winner at the 71st annual Art Directors Club Awards, presented last night in New York.
Doyle won five gold medals for print advertisements, and five gold medals for photography, for advertising for the Dunham Company, a Brattleboro, Vt., footwear company.
Rolling Stone magazine won three gold medals for illustration and graphic design.


Variety at the Top as 4 Share L.P.G.A. Lead
A struggling superstar, two winless veterans and the youngest phenom in women's golf tied for the first-round lead today at the Mazda Ladies Professional Golf Association Championship.
Betsy King, the winner of 25 tournaments but none since last July, non-winners Alice Ritzman and Donna Andrews, and 20-year-old Brandie Burton each shot three-under-par 68's at the difficult Bethesda Country Club.


Sounds Around Town
Absurdist at Work
Swamp Dogg, Tramps, 45 West 21st Street, Manhattan, (212) 727-7788.
One of the more eccentric eccentrics of rhythm-and-blues, Swamp Dogg howls some fairly funny songs, laced with a sense for social injustice.
His latest album is called "Surfing in Harlem," so his sense of the absurd is fairly well tuned, too.
He once thanked Ronald Reagan for making it possible for him to write 20 to 30 songs a day while driving his taxi.
Shows tomorrow are at 8:30 and 11 P.M.; tickets are $12.50.
Piano and Rhythm
Chris Anderson, Bradley's, 70 University Place, Manhattan, (212) 228-6440.
Chris Anderson has been an underground favorite for decades, a pianist with a hard touch and more than a few knotty ideas.
He'll be backed by Ray Drummond and Kenny Washington, and it's a rare chance to hear one of jazz's best pianists on a good piano and with a gorgeous rhythm section.
Shows on Sunday are at 10 P.M., midnight and 2 A.M.; there is a $12 cover and an $8 minimum.
Haitian Influence
Tabou Combo, S.O.B.'s, 204 Varick Street, Manhattan, (212) 243-4940.
One of the great Haitian-American bands, Tabou Combo knows exactly what a dance floor is for.
Intricate percussion lines coil and unfurl with guitar figures, and call-and-response singing spurs dancers on.
Shows tonight are at 11:30 P.M. and 1 A.M.; the cover charge is $16.


Tokyo Stocks Off Sharply
Japanese stock prices plunged today, amid arbitrage selling, profit-taking and investors' concern about corporate earnings and banks' exposure to bad loans.
The Nikkei index of 225 stocks closed at 18,074.27, down 730.33 points or 3.88 percent.


Accused Officer Was Spared Drug Test in '88
Supervisors of Michael Dowd, one of the six New York City police officers charged last week in a conspiracy to buy and sell cocaine, learned of an allegation in 1988 that the officer was using crack, police department officials said yesterday.
But Officer Dowd's supervisors did not submit him to a drug test because they believed they needed additional evidence, police officials said.
Although Mr.
Dowd had a spotty record and had been disciplined at least four times, his infractions occurred before the crack allegation was known.
Because of that, said the officials, who spoke on the condition of anonymity, his supervisors lacked what the department calls "reasonable suspicions" to test him.


Accounts
*
Shady Brook Farms, Harrisonburg, Va., to Messner Vetere Berger Carey Schmetterer, New York, for the turkey product company's $4 million account, previously at Warwick Baker &amp; Fiore, New York.
Messner bested two other New York agencies in a review in which Warwick declined to participate; they were Ammirati &amp; Puris and Ketchum Advertising. *
Cineplex Odeon Corp., Toronto, to Grey Entertainment &amp; Media, New York, as the movie theater chain's first agency handling trade marketing for on-screen advertising and promotion programs.
Billings were not disclosed.
Also, Grey's public relations unit, GCI Group, New York, will handle Cineplex's corporate image account.
Billings were not disclosed.


Sounds Around Town
The Serene Shirley Horn
Shirley Horn Trio and the Barry Harris Quartet, the Blue Note, 131 West Third Street, Manhattan, (212) 475-8592.
Shirley Horn's quiet, meditative singing and impressionistic pianism marked by thoughtful pauses and surprising tempo changes imbue everything she performs with a sense of hard-won serenity.
Barry Harris, one of the masters of the be-bop repertory, will dig deeply into the obscure corners of the legacies of Thelonious Monk, Bud Powell and Tad Dameron.
Show times: 9 and 11:30 tonight through Sunday.
There is a $22.50 music charge and $5 minimum at tables; a $15 admission to the bar.
Waldo and Jelly Roll
"This Jelly Is Au Currant," Michael's Pub, 211 East 55th Street, Manhattan, (212) 758-2272.
Timed to coincide with the Broadway show "Jelly's Last Jam," this celebration of the songs of the jazz pioneer Jelly Roll Morton and his contemporaries features Terry Waldo on piano, Ellia English on vocals, Lou Green on trumpet and Joel Helleny on trombone.
Ms.
English sings earthy renditions of songs associated with Bessie Smith and Ma Rainey, and the numbers by Mr.
Waldo, who conceived the revue, range from James P. Johnson's "Charleston" to Morton's "Shreveport Stomp." Shows are at 9:15 and 11:15 tonight and tomorrow.
There is a $20 cover charge and a two-drink minimum.


F.C.C. Plan To Ease TV Owner Rule
In the latest move in its campaign to relax restrictions on broadcasters, the Federal Communications Commission today proposed raising the number of television stations nationwide that a single company may own and allowing a company to own more than one station in a single market.
The proposals would allow some of the nation's biggest broadcasters to get bigger.
Perhaps more importantly, they could fuel the rise of new mini-networks -- on the model of Fox Television -- and even prompt ABC, NBC and CBS to set up additional networks of their own aimed at narrowly defined segments of the population.


Review/Dance; A Role Debut In 'Firebird'
Ulysses Dove's "Serious Pleasures," presented by American Ballet Theater on Monday night at the Metropolitan Opera House, is a ballet for opening and closing doors, pegs to hang bodies on, paths of sharp light, and nine men and women lost in a world made lonely by the sexual revolution.
Or so it seems.
Mr.
Dove's new piece is somewhat less propulsive and more overtly thoughtful than his recent dances for the Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater.
The dance is filled with combative encounters for men and women, with more tender male duets and no female duets.
The women get to toss their long hair about in the light.
Everyone charges full speed across the stage, often in floor-skimming bourrees, with pauses in which the men hang like golden Christs from the pegs.
But for all the activity, an air of profound emptiness hangs over the proceedings.


Dinkins Set To Lift Curbs On Pretoria
Mayor David N. Dinkins said yesterday that at the request of Nelson Mandela, New York City is prepared to lift sanctions against South Africa, provided that the country establishes an interim government that will draft a new constitution for a new nonracial Government.
Mr.
Dinkins's announcement, which came after a mayoral delegation returned Wednesday from a three-day trip to South Africa, gives support to the African National Congress at a time when it is holding talks over the setting up of such an interim government.
And it allows the Mayor to try to address business executives who have been pressing him to lift the sanctions, which prohibit the city from contracting with companies that do business in South Africa.


Tax Credits of $8.5 Billion Received by 22 Drug Makers
The General Accounting Office said yesterday that 22 American drug makers received $8.5 billion in Federal tax credits in the 1980's under a plan designed to increase employment in Puerto Rico.
But, the report said, the tax credits were more than double the amount the companies spent on employee payrolls in Puerto Rico.
The report by the Congressional agency, in addition to raising questions about the wisdom of the tax-credit program or its application, is expected to add fuel to Congressional attempts to limit the steep increases that have been made in recent years in prices of prescription drugs.
A tax credit exempts business income from taxation.


Run It, Not Buy It
To the Editor:
There are two reasons why Ross Perot's millions should be a liability in his possible candidacy for President.
One is that the office should not be for sale to the highest bidder.
The other is that it should not be expensive to run for office.
Mr.
Perot says, "I am buying  [ the Presidency ] " for the American people (news story April 24).
But we already own the Presidency, Mr.
Perot.
What we want is a President who can run the Government, not buy it.
RENA G. KUNIS Bellerose, Queens, April 24, 1992


Guy Henle, 71, Editor Of Consumer Reports
Guy Henle, former executive editor of Consumer Reports and House Beautiful magazines, died on Monday at his home in Scarsdale, N.Y.
He was 71 years old.
He died of cancer, his family said.


Art in Review
Shirley Jaffe  Holly Solomon Gallery 724 Fifth Avenue (near 57th Street) Manhattan Through May 30
The American painter Shirley Jaffe left New York for Paris in 1949 and has lived there ever since.
Although she was originally affiliated with the so-called New York School, her early gestural style changed over time to the kind of large, airy geometric abstractions this show comprises.
Ms.
Jaffe's work has been compared to that of Matisse and Stuart Davis, although neither comparison is exact.
Her paintings don't possess Davis's jazzy chromatic panache.
Their fresco-like colors are alert but never sharp, and they are toned down to a degree that sometimes stops just short of pastel. (She also makes wonderful use of earth colors, and one painting here consists largely of a rich chocolate brown.) Nor does Ms.
Jaffe emulate Matisse's relaxed and seemingly effortless approach to technique.
Apparently using small brushes, Ms.
Jaffe covers every inch of her paintings with short, meticulous strokes.
Mondrian worked his surfaces in a similar way, although in a far smaller space, and the effect is to lock the colored forms into the ground so that a kind of vibrant stability rather than movement is exercised.


CHRONICLE
LINUS PAULING, the Nobel laureate, said yesterday that doctors discovered that he had prostate cancer in December, but that he is now recovering.
The 91-year-old scientist said he believes that large doses of vitamin C and other vitamins saved him from cancer for 20 years.
"I never contended that you can control a disease completely forever, but improved nutrition can shift the mortality curve," Dr.
Pauling said in a telephone interview from his office in Palo Alto, Calif.


LeMond Takes Lead And Role Of Favorite
Greg LeMond has won the world's most important bicycle race, the Tour de France, three times.
But in the three previous years of the Tour Du Pont and its predecessor, the Tour de Trump, he has not come close.
That may soon change.
Today, the 30-year-old LeMond, from Wayzata, Minn., survived two ruthless climbs and took the overall lead in the Tour Du Pont.
After eight days and 790 miles of racing, LeMond leads Atle Kvalsvoll of Norway by 13 hundredths of a second.
Cycling historians could not recall this close a battle so late in a major race.


Review/Opera; Toward Tibet and Enlightenment
Judging from Meredith Monk's opera "Atlas," which received its New York premiere at the Brooklyn Academy of Music on Wednesday night, reaching spiritual enlightenment involves taking risks.
It means balancing on an ancient man's long beard, strung across the floor.
It means braving an office desk, which can lead ordinary seekers of truth into treacherous betrayal and frenzied swings of hands and head.
It means facing ice demons with footlong fingernails.
It means fleeing orange-jump-suited gun-toting soldiers, two of whom shout nonsense syllables into megaphones.
It means sitting around a campfire in the lotus position.
It may also mean watching three and a half hours of a Minimalist opera that is meant to be profound and funny and engaging, but instead turns into a parody of its own weighty ambitions and ritualistic style.


Heroes, and Murphy, in Space
Those three space-suited astronauts did more than salvage a communications asset Wednesday night.
They saved the space program from ignominious, prime-time failure.
Their triumph showed that the space agency's "can do" spirit has bounced back from years of demoralization caused by the Challenger accident.
But as Americans applaud the astronauts' feat, they also need to observe the underlying lesson of this cliffhanger.
It did not prove, as space enthusiasts claim, the importance of sending humans into space instead of robots.
Instead, it proved almost the opposite -- that costly manned flights should not be used to rescue replaceable satellites.


Could Lindros Help Rangers Fill Their Empty Cup?
Neil Smith said today he was proud of the Rangers' accomplishments and of their regular-season championship.
The general manager said that his team already was the best club in the National Hockey League and that there probably wouldn't be that many dramatic changes before next season.
But at the same time, Smith hinted that he would chase after Quebec draftee Eric Lindros in a potential mega-transaction.
He said that he needed to think some more about his coaching situation and that he could not even guarantee that Mark Messier would retire in a Ranger uniform.


Gorbachev's Tux? Moscow Could Care Less
Mikhail S. Gorbachev's heady swing through the United States has drawn something akin to an ironic shrug among his compatriots.
The few newspapers that have given the visit any notice at all have done so largely in passing: a couple noted briefly that he received the Albert Schweitzer award, while Kuranty reported that he was now appearing in a tuxedo, which he staunchly refused to do as Communist Party leader and Soviet President.


Executive Changes
BEST WESTERN INTERNATIONAL INC., Phoenix, the lodging chain, named William S. Watson to the new position of senior vice president of worldwide marketing.
COASTAL CORP., Houston, an energy holding company, named James A. King executive vice president.


Matsumi Kanemitsu, 69, Artist Who Worked in Four Mediums
Matsumi Kanemitsu, a painter closely associated with the New York Abstract Expressionist school, died on Monday at his home in Los Angeles.
He was 69 years old.
He died of lung cancer, said Nancy Uyemura, a friend.


Nassau Plans to Borrow To Cover Budget Deficit
Torn, like many other local governments, between crippling service reductions or wrenching tax increases, Republicans and Democrats in Nassau County have reached a consensus to do neither: they want to sell up to $100 million in bonds instead.
Under the plan, the county will ask the State Legislature for permission to borrow up to $100 million for at least five years, shifting the burden of the county's current fiscal problems to future taxpayers, perhaps in a less recession-ravaged era.


Keith Funston, Head of Big Board Through '50s Revival, Dies at 81
George Keith Funston, who proclaimed himself a "salesman of shares in America" while leading the New York Stock Exchange through a period of rapid expansion and revival of influence in the 1950's, died in his sleep yesterday morning at his summer home in Greenwich, Conn.
He was 81 years old and lived most of the year in Sanibel, Fla.
He died of a heart attack, his wife said.


COMPANY NEWS: A Human Factor, of Sorts; New NCR Teller Machine Offers Banking by Video
For those who miss the human contact they had before the advent of the automated teller machine, bankers have come up with a novel idea: a human.
Well, a picture of one, at any rate.
On Monday, the NCR Corporation will introduce a new generation of teller machine that will permit a customer to have a video-conference with a bank employee.


Records Weren't Taken, Says King's Spokesman
A spokesman for Don King said yesterday that two agents from the Federal Bureau of Investigation entered King's Manhattan office on Thursday with subpoenas for certain members of King's staff and for certain documents pertaining to the promoter's boxing empire.
But the spokesman, John Solberg, denied reports that records were confiscated.
The visit by the agents took place amid new charges of financial chicanery directed at King by the promoter's former chief financial officer, Joseph A. Maffia.


Arts Panel Protests The Denial Of 2 Grants
In protest against the rejection of two strongly recommended grants to college museums this week, the seven members of a peer panel of the National Endowment for the Arts said yesterday that they were suspending consideration of grant applications.
On Tuesday, Anne-Imelda Radice, who became acting chairwoman of the arts endowment on May 1 after John E. Frohnmayer was dismissed, announced that she had refused consent on two $10,000 grants recommended to her by the endowment's advisory body, the National Council on the Arts.


Letter: On Lizzie Borden; The Murder Weapon Mystery
To the Editor:
According to a report from George Washington University (Campus Life, April 26), Prof.
James E. Starrs hopes to dig up the bodies of Abby and Andrew Borden to compare the chips on a hatchet with the wounds inflicted by the hatchet when they were slain in Fall River, Mass., in 1892.
The professor is bound to be disappointed.
The hatchet to which he has access is not the one that did in the Bordens.


Classical Music in Review
New York Philharmonic Avery Fisher Hall


Wife of Missing Executive Reports Message
The wife of Sidney J. Reso, the high-ranking Exxon executive who disappeared last month from his home in Morris Township, N.J., said last night that she had received a message from those who she believes are holding her husband captive.
In a four-paragraph plea for her husband's release, Patricia Reso appealed for information on his health.


Manila Candidate, Charging Fraud, Calls Protests
Miriam Defensor Santiago called today for mass demonstrations across the Philippines to protest what she said was "wholesale electoral fraud" that could rob her of the presidential election.
The anti-corruption candidate announced the demonstrations as her chief opponent, former Defense Minister Fidel V. Ramos, held a negligible lead over Mrs.
Santiago in the slow count of the nearly 27 million votes cast on Monday.


ORION BACKED IN DISPUTE WITH SHOWTIME
A judge yesterday upheld Orion Pictures' argument in a major contractual dispute with Showtime, the pay television service owned by Viacom Inc.


New Tyson Trial Denied; Appeal to Start
A judge's decision to deny MIKE TYSON a new trial clears the way for an appeal of the former heavyweight champion's rape conviction, Tyson's attorney said yesterday.
"There's no surprise there," said ALAN M. DERSHOWITZ of Marion Superior Court Judge PATRICIA GIFFORD's denial of a new trial in Indianapolis.
"Now, it frees us up to move without any barrier on the appeal."


Exxon to Trim 1,000 White-Collar Jobs
Exxon U.S.A. said yesterday that it would cut more than 1,000 white-collar jobs, mostly managers, professionals and support staff, by Aug. 1.
The jobs represent about 5 percent of the company's employees and 10 to 12 percent of the salaried workers.
Fewer than half the cuts will be accomplished through layoffs, said a company spokesman, Henry Beathard.
The company expects some employees will accept a severance bonus on a voluntary basis, and others will be transferred to other Exxon division.


A Punch Overshadows the Pedaling
The big news from the Tour Du Pont bicycle race today should have been Phil Anderson's third stage victory in five days or Greg LeMond's strong finish to keep the overall lead.
Instead, it was Michel Zanoli's punch to the face of Davis Phinney as the cyclists approached the finish at 40 miles an hour, an infraction that resulted in Zanoli's ejection from the tour and that might have kept Phinney from winning the stage.
Zanoli, a 24-year-old Dutchman, rides for the American team Motorola.
At 6 feet 6 inches, he is the tallest rider in international cycling.
The 32-year-old Phinney, from Boulder, Colo., rides for the American team Coors Light.
At 5 feet 9 inches, he gives away nearly a foot to Zanoli.


Sports of The Times; What Are The Rules, Exactly?
New York is basking in the glow of celebration and pushing forward.
Chicago, on the run for much of its seven-game series with the Knicks, has finally run out of running room.
The defending-champion Bulls have been backed into a corner and if the situation weren't so desperate it would be embarrassing.


Reichmans' Bankruptcy Move: Seeking the Best of Two Legal Systems
By filing for court protection in the United States a few hours before doing so in Canada, the Reichmann brothers mounted what many saw as a clear attempt to harness the best of both countries' legal systems to retain control of their empire.
Lawyers and others involved said they were not surprised that the Reichmanns, who own Olympia &amp; York Developments Ltd., had sought bankruptcy protection in the United States for 5 of the 29 entities that also filed in Canada.


Why I'm Not Marching in Washington
New York City should receive more Federal funds.
But you will not see me marching in Washington today to make that point.
What's more important is that while the city would benefit from additional Federal finances, its largest problems lie closer to home.
With a budget of $30 billion, the city ought to have properly maintained, clean streets -- with more police officers on them -- safe and effective schools and health care for the needy


Yeltsin Angrily Assails His Critics and Gorbachev
In an emotional outburst, President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia accused his political opponents today of trying to discredit him, and Mikhail S. Gorbachev of breaking his word.
Speaking at a news conference at the end of a one-day meeting of the Commonwealth of Independent States, Mr.
Yeltsin responded vehemently and at length to charges from some legislators that he was drunk when he arrived here Thursday night.


Free Exam for Fighting Skin Cancer
As summer approaches, dermatologists are issuing cautions about the dangers of sunning and the growing rate of skin cancer.
In a nationwide effort, hospitals and clinics will offer free skin examinations at the end of this month.
The screenings, which will take place on May 30 and 31, are part of the American Academy of Dermatology's skin cancer detection and prevention month.
Physicians across the country want to stress the importance of detecting skin cancer in its earliest stages, when most cases are considered curable.
In the last seven years, almost half a million Americans have been screened, and close to 3,600 cases of the most serious form of the disease, malignant melanoma, have been diagnosed.


Bank Stocks Decline Little on O.&amp;Y. Filing
Bank stocks suffered little carnage in the wake of Thursday evening's bankruptcy filing in Canada by Olympia &amp; York Developments Ltd.
But in their nonchalance about the financial troubles of the world's biggest real estate developer, investors could be ignoring potentially dangerous developments in the real estate market down the road, several experts said.
Despite a $500 million exposure to the troubled real estate developer, Citicorp fell only 37.5 cents a share, to $19.625.
Chemical Banking, which has an exposure estimated at up to $250 million, fell only 50 cents a share, to $37.50, and J. P. Morgan, which is owed less than $50 million, fell 62.5 cents, to $55.


Leading the Olympia &amp; York Team
THE REICHMANS


Managua Journal; Mayor Cleans Up City, but Some Don't Like Him
To anyone who has not seen Managua in the two years since the Sandinistas lost power, the first reaction is inevitably surprise at how clean, scrubbed and orderly the Nicaraguan capital appears.
The city is still grimly poor, dusty and steamy hot, the downtown still a shell left by an earthquake 20 years ago, but it is no longer covered with revolutionary graffiti.


11 Closings: The Impact Rumbles In Region
Standing on the Bronx corner where he has parked his hot-dog cart for 14 years, Vassilios Koulikordis had a view of the Alexander's closing that was much too close for comfort.
Early yesterday, he watched a stream of employees -- people who buy his hot dogs, sodas and pretzels -- walk up blankly to the row of metal gates at the store on the Grand Concourse, the anchor to the bustling and healthy Fordham Road shopping center.
Some hugged.
All were stunned.


FARAWAY FLOWERS
Flowers are gifts that are always in season, though there is a greater variety available in spring and summer.
Here are some efficient ways to send them.
DISTANT DELIVERIES


Revolt in Capital of Azerbaijan
Thousands of anti-Government protesters seized the Parliament, the presidential palace and the state television today after a brief battle with forces backing Azerbaijan's newly restored President.
Joined by renegades from the Azerbaijan Army, supporters of the nationalist opposition coalition known as the Popular Front shot their way into the Parliament, where an assembly dominated by former Communists voted overwhelmingly on Thursday to reinstate Ayaz Mutalibov as President.


Big Canadian Developer Trying To Confine Bankruptcy Damage
After fighting a losing battle to avoid bankruptcy in Canada, Olympia &amp; York Ltd., the world's largest real estate developer, pressed its lenders yesterday to allow it to keep control of its prized properties in New York and London.
Olympia &amp; York's strategy is to try to retain as much of its empire as possible to lay a foundation for a restructured and financially viable company, all accomplished without the complexities and risks of a lengthy bankruptcy proceeding in the United States, which could take control of Olympia &amp; York out of the hands of the Reichmann family of Toronto.


Warriors in Circulation Battles Fight for Different Views of the Future
It was after midnight on a recent night in East Farmingdale, L.I., when a lone nonunion driver ventured to the entrance of Imperial Delivery Service, the wholesale newspaper distributor that delivers The New York Times on Long Island.
His appearance provoked a raucous discussion of motherhood and body parts from picketing members of the Newspaper and Mail Deliverers' Union.
"Tell your mother to take a bath," screamed one angry deliverer.
"She's stinkin' up the place!"


U.N. Negotiates Another Tenuous Truce in Bosnia
The United Nations negotiated a new cease-fire today for Bosnia and Herzegovina, but the organization's peacekeepers ran into fresh obstacles in their attempt to evacuate about 250 staff members trapped in the capital, Sarajevo, by the fighting.
The cease-fire was reached after a meeting between representatives of Serbian forces surrounding Sarajevo and leaders of the Croatian and Muslim Slav fighters who have battled them for six weeks.


WORKING NIGHTS: A Special Report; Lives Upside Down to Help a World Go Round
At 11 P.M., or 1 A.M. on the many nights she must work overtime, Allison McClure stops at her mother's house to retrieve her 3-year-old daughter, Mia, take her home and put her back to bed.
Then she packs Mia's bag for nursery school, does the ironing, cleans house and takes a shower.
"I'm in bed by 3 or 4," she said during her 9-to-9:30 P.M.
"lunch" break at a mail processing center.
Then she gets up at 6:45 A.M.
"I get her up. I fix her breakfast, I feed her and I take her to school. I'll lie down for about an hour and a half, and then I'm up. Any business I have to do, I try to fit in between then and the time I have to be at work at 3."


Bruce Hopkins, 44, Who Helped Form Transvestite Opera
Bruce Paul Hopkins, a director, a cabaret performer and a star of the transvestite opera troupe La Gran Scena Opera Company, died yesterday at Roosevelt Hospital.
He was 44 years old.
He died of complications from diabetes, said Ira Siff, the troupe's artistic director.


Medical Overtreatment of Elderly Is Common; Living Will Solution
To the Editor:
In his discussion of unwarranted and undesired care of his terminally ill father (Op-Ed, April 25), Norman A. Paradis suggests that given our present method of payment for medical services, nothing can be done to prevent abuse of the patient's right of self-determination.
I believe a carefully drafted advance medical directive specifically stating his father's desires and naming an appropriate agent to shepherd the directive through the administrative process could have avoided this result.


Now More Than Ever, Those Without Backyards Need Parks
To the Editor:
Recent articles about New York City budget cuts do not reflect the deep and disproportionate cuts sustained by the Department of Parks and Recreation over the period of the current fiscal crisis.


For Rangers' Roger, Is It Over and Out?
As he cleared out his locker today and headed for the door at the Rye practice rink, Mark Messier found time to cite a couple of inspirational messages from the coach.
The coach he selected was Pat Riley of the Knicks, not Roger Neilson of the Rangers.


Progress Reported in Newspaper Drivers' Dispute
Face-to-face talks between representatives of The New York Times, the drivers' union and a delivery wholesaler continued for a second day yesterday as a panel of intermediaries reported further progress in efforts to resolve a bitter 10-day labor dispute.
"We are pleased to report that the structure set up by the panel, as the way to an accord, is being followed," said a statement issued by the panel late yesterday, while talks were still going on.


Preakness Is Packed With Hope And Horses
Fair weather, a crowd of 90,000, a purse of $744,800 and a free-for-all race were expected for the 117th running of the Preakness Stakes, which will be run here Saturday with its largest field in 22 years.
Fourteen colts are scheduled to go to the post for the race, the second in the Triple Crown series of classics, and they all will be trying to gain footing in the yearlong race for the championship of the 3-year-old division.
But only one of them, Lil E. Tee, the longshot winner of the Kentucky Derby, has a chance to become the 12th Triple Crown winner in history and the first since Affirmed in 1978.


Dinkins and Fernandez Meet on Budget Tensions
With their battling deputies out of the city, Mayor David N. Dinkins and Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez met for an hour yesterday in an attempt to ease tensions between the two men that have been prompted by budget issues.
Nothing was resolved in the unusual closed-door session, but both men said it had been productive.
Mr.
Fernandez described the meeting as upbeat, and the Mayor, through his press secretary, Leland T. Jones, said it was fruitful and informative.


Berbick Sentenced to 4 Years in Prison
TREVOR BERBICK was sentenced yesterday to four years in prison for raping a 26-year-old woman who had been his family's baby sitter.
Dade County Circuit Judge THOMAS WILSON had twice delayed sentencing because of the boxer's outbursts in the Miami court, but pronounced him legally competent yesterday after hearing from court-appointed psychiatrists.


Japan to Aid New Market Economies
Japanese leaders told Vice President Dan Quayle today that after months of coaxing by the Bush Administration, they would lend and invest as much as $400 million in private enterprises in Eastern and Central Europe.
But Japan again refused to send substantial aid to the former Soviet republics until four disputed islands are returned to Japanese hands.
Japan's announcement came at the end of a four-day visit here by Mr.
Quayle, a trip intended to repair the damage from President Bush's ill-fated trade mission to Tokyo in January and refocus attention on a "global partnership" between the two countries.
While both sides declared the trip a success, they also conceded that the most vexing economic issues facing the two countries were deliberately kept off the agenda.


Treat Guns Like Cars
Some repeated images from Los Angeles are making the national gun control debate even more tortured.
With police in retreat, Korean storekeepers were shown fighting off looters with handguns, assault rifles and shotguns.
Unarmed drivers suffered savage beatings.
Gun stores report a surge in sales and National Rifle Association phone lines have been jammed with calls.
For fearful Angelenos to rush to arm themselves demonstrates a simplistic view of safety.
More guns in nightstands, cash drawers and glove compartments are likely to create more danger, not less.
That's why society, which does not hesitate to regulate the possession and use of cars because they can be dangerous, ought even more sensibly to regulate the possession and use of guns.


San Francisco Police Chief Is Dismissed
The Police Commission dismissed San Francisco's Police Chief today, making him the first political casualty of the anti-police sentiment that touched off violence in Los Angeles and other cities two weeks ago.
The Chief, Richard Hongisto, long known for his support of liberal causes, was accused by an unnamed police officer of instigating the removal of a gay and lesbian newspaper from newspaper racks because he was offended by the tabloid's critical coverage of heavy-handed arrests during recent demonstrations and by an unflattering cover photo showing Chief Hongisto holding a nightstick in a lewd manner.


Trucker Who Rarely Backs Down
The New Jersey waterfront has a reputation for producing tough guys and rough talk, and a personal fortune approaching one-quarter of a billion dollars hasn't smoothed all the edges off Arthur E. Imperatore.
The 66-year-old trucking magnate, who has emerged as a central figure in New York's newspaper delivery dispute, has a way of going from prickly to generous to prickly in the span of a sentence.
"I'm a very hard-nosed guy, but I truly like people," Mr.
Imperatore said with a winning smile, just before his voice fell into a growl, "or I truly don't like them."


Ewing Hurting, but He's Game for a Showdown
Considering the extremely physical nature of the Knicks-Bulls playoff series, both teams were extremely thankful to have off yesterday and today in order to regroup for tomorrow afternoon's seventh-game showdown in Chicago.
Patrick Ewing received treatment for his sprained left ankle.
The Knicks' John Starks received a $5,000 fine for a flagrant foul against Scottie Pippen.
Coach Phil Jackson of Chicago received a $2,500 fine for flagrant comments about the series.


ISRAELI CHARGES PRESSURE BY U.S.
Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir said in a published interview today that the United States was trying to force Israel to yield nearly all the territory it had captured in the 1967 Middle East war.
Other senior Israeli officials have issued similar charges in recent months, including one Shamir aide who said Israel would be returned to the "borders of Auschwitz" if it went back to its pre-1967 frontiers.


PLAN FOR BIG JOB CUTS IN FILING WITH S.E.C.
The Bell Atlantic Corporation, reiterating an announcement made last month, said yesterday in filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission that it was considering reducing its work force by 4,000 to 6,000 people as a way to lower costs.
As before, the company emphasized that it would resort to attrition and reassignment before using layoffs to bring about the job cuts.
Bell Atlantic has about 75,700 workers and the cuts would represent up to 8 percent of the work force.


Top Center Signs Letter With Syracuse
JOHN WALLACE, one of the top prospects in the country, has signed a letter-of-intent with Syracuse despite allegations against the school's program.
Wallace, a 6-foot-8-inch center from suburban Rochester, said he sent his letter to Syracuse via mail courier on Thursday.
Yesterday, Syracuse officials would not confirm its arrival.


The Ageless 27th Amendment
The National Archivist, Don Wilson, has announced he will certify ratification of the constitutional amendment on Congressional pay.
Since the Constitution says amendments "shall be valid" when ratified by three-fourths of the states, he is simply confirming the obvious: that 38 states have approved.
But serious questions remain.
The amendment is a sensible declaration that when the members of Congress vote themselves a raise, they can't have it until after the next election.
That ingeniously blocks challengers from complaining, because the raise goes to whoever wins.


Gorbachev Exits on a Kennedy Theme
Mikhail S. Gorbachev completed his two-week tour of the United States today with a renewed plea for aid to Russia and praise for the United States as a nation that faced its own problems and set an example for the world.
The former Soviet President's last two public appearances were heavily laden with tributes to President John F. Kennedy, who he said had led the way to an end to the cold war in 1963 with his disarmament speech at the American University.


Driver Dies After Hitting Wall In Indianapolis 500 Practice
Jovy Marcelo, a 27-year-old driver from the Philippines trying to qualify for his first Indianapolis 500, was killed today in a crash during practice at the Indianapolis Motor Speedway.
Marcelo, who was taken from his car unconscious, was pronounced dead at Methodist Hospital when resuscitation efforts failed, according to Dr.
Henry Bock, the speedway's director of medical services.


Quotation of the Day
"We're not dealing with the question at which time the Sunday school will start. We're dealing with the future of our country." -- TERTIUS DELPORT, a Government negotiator, cautioning against haste in the South Africa talks.  [ 5:2. ]


CHRONICLE
The mother behind the father who knew best, JANE WYATT, is receiving the Woman of Achievement Award at the Barnard College reunion today, and no one involved with her selection sees any contradiction between the prize and the image most readily associated with Miss Wyatt -- that of the quintessential homemaker in the television series "Father Knows Best."
"We think Jane Wyatt is a trailblazer, a pioneering woman who had a career and who gave back to the community," said ANDREA KATZ STIMMEL, Barnard '76, the chairwoman of the reunion committee.
"She was on Broadway and in movies long before that television show, and she was one of the first governors of the National Academy of Television Arts and Sciences.


Cardinals Haven't Run Out of Rallies
Cardinals 7, Astros 5
HOUSTON, May 15 (AP) -- Felix Jose's go-ahead two-run homer off reliever Doug Jones sparked a four-run ninth inning as the St.
Louis Cardinals beat the Houston Astros, 7-5, tonight for their sixth straight victory.
Jeff Bagwell, who hit a three-run homer in the third, had given the Astros a 4-3 lead with a run-scoring double in the eighth off Cris Carpenter.


Traffic Alert
TODAY
Because of the Ninth Avenue Food Festival, Ninth Avenue will be closed between 37th Street and 57th Streets, from 10 A.M. to 7 P.M.


'Les Miz': Of and By But Not For the French
A French epic written by a great French novelist, music by a French composer, an entirely new production with French lyrics and rave reviews.
Surely enough, one would imagine, to break Paris's legendary resistance to Broadway-style musicals.
That, at least, was Cameron Mackintosh's hope when he brought "Les Miserables" to Paris last fall.
Yet after a month of sell-out performances, audiences began to thin out.
And now, with losses piling up, the Paris jinx has won out again: the show will close here on May 24 after just seven months.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.25-6.5
6.25-6.5
8.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.87
3.93
5.79
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.58
3.58
5.42
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.68
3.69
5.58
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.95
6.99
7.93
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.81
7.86
8.27
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.75
8.81
9.35
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.63
6.63
7.22
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  No Roman Holiday


Shattered Lives Testify to Brutal Path of Bullets
The young man held a boom box in his lap, a microphone in his hand.
With an intensity as hard as blacktop, he spat out a rap song he had written.
On first hearing, the cascading words piled on top of one another like poetry in a hurry.
One phrase cut like a knife: "I was laying on the pavement crying," Jerome Wheeler chanted, leaning forward in his wheelchair to stare at the 50 young people slouched in front of him.


Huge Project in London Faces Uncertain Future
Canary Wharf, the huge but half-built office project that crowns Olympia &amp; York's global empire, now faces an uncertain future as bankers here consider whether to continue lending money, run the project themselves or bring construction to a halt.
Olympia &amp; York Developments Ltd. persuaded its main construction lenders today not to force the project into bankruptcy for the time being.
"No one is taking a precipitate action at the moment," one banker said.


Token Convenience
To the Editor:
As a frequent tour escort to your great city, America's top tourist destination, may I offer a suggestion to the Transit Authority?
Here and in most cities, transit tokens are readily available in every bank, most hotels and some other outlets.
This would be an enormous convenience in New York City to those boarding a bus without the correct change who then have to disembark and walk blocks to and from a subway station to purchase tokens.
JOHN M. GEHL 3D New Orleans, April 30, 1992


Review/Theater; Trying to Be Whimsical With a Bit of Cannibalism
Ever since "Little Shop of Horrors" proved to be a surprise success as a monster musical, people have been searching for a potential successor.
One might suppose that research has been done in the creature feature section in video stores.
"Eating Raoul," which opened Wednesday night at the Union Square Theater, is the latest losing candidate.
In spite of the seeming outrageousness of the material, this adaptation of Paul Bartel's 1982 cult movie is over its head in a vat of whimsy.
The show tries so hard to be with it that it ends up being without it, that is, without anything except a shadow of what made the film funny in the first place.


Observer; Won't Sparklers Do?
Our town has a fireworks lobby.
Thursday it manned the town's busiest intersections -- all two of them -- with tin cups.
The local government used to pay for the Fourth of July fireworks show.
No more.
This year if you want the Big Fires, pony up.
I started to reach for a buck, but didn't finish.
"Wait a minute," thought I, "there are knotty philosophical issues here. It is wrong to plunge recklessly into the wallet without thinking them through."


BUSINESS DIGEST
Empire in Trouble
Olympia &amp; York pressed its lenders to allow it to control its prized properties in New York and London after fighting a losing battle to avoid bankruptcy.  [ Page 1. ]


Dinkins Delays Action on Homeless Panel's Ideas
Mayor David N. Dinkins yesterday effectively rejected the sweeping overhaul of the city's troubled shelter system recommended by a mayoral commission, saying that his administration would study its major proposals.
He allowed the commission to claim partial victory by endorsing some of its ideas, including a pilot rental subsidy program for 200 homeless families and a heavier reliance on nonprofit groups to develop and run shelters.


Los Angeles Officer Will Be Tried Again Over Taped Beating
Sixteen days after violent racial disorders broke out over the acquittal of four white Los Angeles police officers on most charges in the beating of Rodney G. King, a judge today ordered one of the officers to stand trial again on the single unresolved charge in the case.
He left open the crucial question of where the trial would be held, but strongly hinted that he preferred to return it to Los Angeles.


Inquiry on Lawmakers' Expenses Is Said to Focus on Possible Theft
Federal prosecutors who have subpoenaed the records of three House Democrats are investigating whether the lawmakers' office accounts were used in a scheme to steal Government money, Congressional officials said today.
The subpoenas, disclosed by House officials on Thursday, order the three members to turn over their office expense records for a period of more than six years, from Jan. 1, 1986, to April 15, 1992.
The subpoenas also order the lawmakers to appear before the Federal grand jury investigating the House post office.


FLIGHT OF HAITIANS SUDDENLY RESUMES
Haitians have suddenly resumed the flight from their country aboard small boats in numbers that surpass the surge seen in October in the aftermath of a violent military coup.
With an average of almost 250 people a day being plucked from the seas off Haiti in recent weeks, the number being temporarily housed at the Guantanamo Bay Naval Base in Cuba has risen to about 8,500, from a low of 2,000 in March.
On Wednesday, one of the busiest days yet, 903 Haitians on 11 rickety vessels were plucked from the seas.


Charges Filed In Crackdown At Corrections
In what officials say is the Correction Department's largest disciplinary crackdown, 21 New York City jail supervisors and guards have been or will be charged with falsifying records to conceal violations in providing housing and medical care for new inmates.
But union representatives for the accused officers said they were being made scapegoats for carrying out the orders of higher officials, who are escaping punishment.


Florio Says He Will Veto Republicans' One-Cent Cut in Sales Tax
Gov.
Jim Florio said today that he would veto a bill to roll back the state sales tax from 7 percent to 6 percent.
His decision sets the stage for a showdown with the Legislature's overwhelmingly Republican majority.
An effort to override a veto may be in jeopardy because of weak support among Senate Republicans.


One Investor's Guide to Making Money
After two decades as an investment adviser to the rich, Michael Stolper has developed principles of investing -- and specific portfolios using mutual funds -- that are intended to move middle-income people into the ranks of the affluent.
Aside from the way money compounds over time, which financial experts often call the eighth wonder of the world, there is nothing magic in the approach that Mr.
Stolper spells out in his new 266-page book, "Wealth: An Owner's Manual" (Harper Business, $20).


Getting a Sunless Tan Is Easier Than Ever
For many people, the very mention of self-tanning products evokes bad memories of blotchy orange skin.
"They made you look like you had jaundice," said Dr.
Nelson Lee Novick, a Manhattan dermatologist, recalling the primitive self-tanners of the not-too-distant past.
But now there is a new generation of lotions, creams and gels that can turn skin brown without the sun.
And while a tan from a tube is still not quite the same as a solar glow, the best of the self-tanners, properly used, can provide a golden skin tone that is safe, smooth and convincing.
"You may have to experiment before you find one you want," Dr.
Novick said.
"But you can get a much more natural color now."


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Candidate's Record; CLINTON IS QUERIED ON DRAFT NOTICE
Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas was forced again today to deal with unresolved questions about his draft status during the Vietnam War, but this time the criticisms came from veterans in his home state.
In response to questions raised at a meeting of the Arkansas Veterans' Coalition, Mr.
Clinton said he was still searching for records that would document how he received a draft induction notice before enrolling in the Reserve Officers Training Corps in 1969, a decision he described today as "the honorable way not to be drafted at the time."


COMPANY BRIEFS
BEN &amp; JERRY'S HOMEMADE INC., Waterbury, Vt., a superpremium ice cream maker, said it had repurchased the Canadian license rights it had granted to an independent licensee in 1987.
EAGLE SNACKS INC., Dallas, a salted snack subsidiary of Anheuser-Busch Companies, Inc., St.
Louis, said it would acquire some of the assets of El-Ge Potato Chip Co., Inc., York, Pa.
Terms were not disclosed.


Abandoned Firehouse Is Occupied and Cleaned
With the zeal of protesters of the 1960's, several dozen youths stormed an abandoned firehouse in Brooklyn yesterday, armed with mops and shovels and vowing to turn the rusting building into a community center for their blighted neighborhood.
Four hours later, 11 bulging garbage bags stood outside the building that once housed Engine Company 232 in Brownsville.
A new lock, purchased by the youths, secured a metal door they had pried open.
And a bedsheet, painted with the words "Youth Center for Ocean Hill Brownsville Youths Determined to Succeed," hung in front of the firehouse, which in recent years has stood as a symbol for what residents say is abandonment by the city government.


West Remains General Manager of Lakers
First things first.
JERRY WEST, who was in the final year of his contract as Los Angeles Lakers general manager, has been given a long-term extension.
All he has to do now is find a new coach and a star player.


Judge Tells City to Obey Charter And Set Up New Budget Office
A State Supreme Court judge has ordered New York City to create the Independent Budget Office, a city agency mandated three years ago by the new City Charter.
In a decision last Tuesday, Justice Carmen Beauchamp Ciparick, in State Supreme Court in Manhattan, rejected the city's argument that "hard economic times" justified withholding financing for the agency.


Getting the Troops Ready for Memorial Day


Top of the Leader Board Is Filled With Distinction
On a tight and tricky course that yielded more to experience than youth, Betsy King shot a five-under-par 66 today to lead one of golf's most illustrious triumvirates to the front after two rounds of the Mazda L.P.G.A.
Championship.
King's 36-hole total of eight-under-par 134 was three shots better than the 137 of Joanne Carner, who also had a 66, and four better than Amy Alcott's 138 at the Bethesda Country Club.


Medical Overtreatment of Elderly Is Common; Hospice Can Help
To the Editor:
I read with interest Norman A. Paradis's moving account "Making a Living Off the Dying" (Op-Ed, April 25).
As medical director of the Hospice at the Texas Medical Center, I have heard many such stories.
Hospice care, either in the home or in a homelike inpatient unit can provide the comfort and sense of control that many dying patients long for.
A highly trained staff and medical expertise is required but the costs are much lower and the outcome, for many, much more satisfying.


Youngsters 'Get High on Life' on the Lower East Side


Rutherford's New Deal for an Old Car
JOHNNY RUTHERFORD, a three-time Indianapolis 500 winner, will get his chance to qualify for this year's race, thanks to a sponsor who's like money in the bank.
Rutherford, 52 years old, thought he had a deal last week, after a sponsor signed a contract with DERRICK WALKER, the car owner for whom Rutherford will be driving.
But after Walker bought a used Lola-Chevrolet from MARIO ANDRETTI's team on the strength of that contract, the money never appeared.
Yesterday, Rutherford found another sponsor, a home-improvement products company from Oklahoma City.
So Rutherford, from Fort Worth, Tex., will try to qualify for the May 24 race this weekend.


Review/Theater; Age, Desire and Song in a Florida Retirement Community
Until it suddenly shifts gear in the middle of Act I, "The Sunset Gang" has the feel of a cozy little revue about the pleasures and stresses of life in a Florida retirement community.
No sooner have Bill (Alfred Toigo) and Jenny (Chevi Colton), who are each one-half of a different, recently retired couple, fallen in love, than the show becomes a bittersweet musical about aging and desire.
Will Bill and Jenny, who are both in their 60's, abandon their longtime spouses to begin new lives together?
The show, with music by L. Russell Brown (who co-wrote "Tie a Yellow Ribbon Round the Old Oak Tree" with Irwin Levine) and a book and lyrics by Warren Adler (the screenwriter for "The War of the Roses"), is adapted from three short stories by Mr.
Adler that were produced as a trilogy for the PBS series "American Playhouse." The stage adaptation, directed by Edward M. Cohen for the Jewish Repertory Theater, veers between a singing-and-dancing answer to "The Golden Girls" and a deeper examination of love and loyalty among people over 60.
The show doesn't have nearly enough time to develop its more serious theme with any emotional depth.
And its score, though tuneful enough, has singsongy lyrics that frequently state the obvious in unvarnished cliches.


Robb Is Said to Be Target of an Inquiry on Wilder Phone Tap
Senator Charles S. Robb, a Virginia Democrat, has been told he is a target of a Federal grand jury investigating illegal wiretaps of telephone conversations involving Gov.
L.
Douglas Wilder, newspapers in Washington and Virginia reported today.
Neither Mr.
Robb's office nor the Justice Department would comment on the reports, which were attributed to "sources" involved in the investigation.
The Washington Post also cited an official of the Justice Department, whom it did not identify.


Corrections
An article yesterday about fighting in Bosnia and Herzegovina referred incorrectly to a French general who is the deputy commander of the United Nations peacekeeping force, based in Sarajevo.
He is Lieut.
Gen.
Philippe Morillon.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 2-5  PLEA FROM OLYMPIA &amp; YORK
After failing to avoid bankruptcy in Canada, Olympia &amp; York Ltd. was pressing its lenders to allow it to control its prized properties in New York and London.
The real estate giant is trying to lay the foundation for a restructured company.  1  BARGAINING IN SOUTH AFRICA
Talks on democracy for South Africa deadlocked, prompting President de Klerk and Nelson Mandela to meet on a solution.  1  HAITIAN EXODUS SWELLS
Haitians have suddenly resumed the flight from their country aboard small boats, with the Coast Guard plucking an average of almost 250 people a day from the seas.
The numbers surpass the surge seen after a military coup last fall.  1  U.N.
COUNCIL FIRM ON BOSNIA
The United Nations Security Council adopted a measure urging Secretary General Boutros-Ghali to continue peace efforts in Bosnia and Herzegovina despite his refusal this week to send peacekeepers there.  3  Serbian fighters blocked a United Nations convoy in Bosnia.  3  DRINKING CHARGE ANGERS YELTSIN
In an emotional outburst after a summit meeting of some former Soviet republics, President Yeltsin of Russia accused his opponents of trying to discredit him.
Mr.
Yeltsin was responding to accusations by lawmakers that he was drunk when he arrived in Uzbekistan.  4  Mikhail Gorbachev lauds John F. Kennedy as he ends a U.S. tour.  4  BURMESE DISSIDENTS ON WHEELS
Democracy advocates who had been students at a university closed by the Burmese military Government have taken to their bicycles.
The former students discuss strategy as they ride side by side along Mandalay's broad streets.  3  JAPAN AGREES TO AID EAST EUROPE
After months of coaxing, Japanese leaders told Vice President Quayle that they would loan and invest up to $400 million in enterprises in Eastern and Central Europe.
But they refused to send substantial aid to former Soviet republics.  4 CRIES OF FRAUD IN MANILA
Miriam Defensor Santiago called for demonstrations across the Philippines to protest what she said was "wholesale electoral fraud" that could rob her of the presidency.
Her main rival, a former general, narrowly led the vote count.  4  Managua Journal: A city scrubbed clean of revolutionary grafitti.  2  Israel's leader accuses U.S. of trying to reverse land gains of 1967.  5  National 6-9  NEW TRIAL IN KING BEATING CASE
One of four Los Angeles police officers acquitted in the beating of Rodney G. King will be retried on the single charge left unresolved by the verdicts, a judge decided.
Another crucial issue, the new trial's location, was left unresolved.  1  Riot fallout: The San Francisco Police Chief was ousted.  6  THE STRAIN OF THE NIGHT SHIFT
Millions of Americans work unconventional hours, and their numbers are growing.
And increasingly, they are objects of concern to psychologists and occupational health specialists.  1  'SUICIDE DOCTOR' ACTS AGAIN
Dr.
Jack Kevorkian, charged with murder in the suicide of two women last year, was at the side of another seriously ill woman as she took her own life in a Detroit suburb.  6  ACQUITTAL IN CHILD-ABUSE CASE
A Georgia jury found Faye Yager, head of an underground network for abused youths, not guilty of charges that she had kidnapped and abused children she was supposed to be helping.  6  POLITICS AND SOFT MONEY
Longtime complaints about big money's influence on the political process have produced laws limiting donations to election campaigns.
But those laws have never deterred many of the nation's wealthiest people and corporations from showering the political system with millions of dollars.  7  Again, Clinton was confronted with questions about the draft.  7  Bush got two very different looks at Pittsburgh.  7  FOCUS OF A WIDENED INQUIRY
Federal prosecutors who have subpoenaed the records of Dan Rostenkowski and two other House Democrats are investigating whether the lawmakers' office accounts were used in a scheme to steal Government money, Congressional officials said.  6  Senator Robb is reportedly a grand jury's target.  7  METHODISTS AND ABORTION
The governing body of the United Methodist Church turned back an attempt to cut the church's ties with a major advocacy group for abortion rights.  9  Religion Notes: Sex and the Catholic priesthood.  9  Endeavour's astronauts reflected on their satellite rescue.  9  Metropolitan Digest, 25  ANOTHER RETAILER GOES UNDER
Alexander's, a retailer that catered to working-class shoppers, closed its 11 stores yesterday and filed for bankruptcy protection.
The closings are expected to ripple through the city economy, adding empty retail space to an already glutted real estate market and hurting neighboring stores in some shopping areas.
Alexander's employs about 5,200 people.  1  MORE TIME TO PONDER HOMELESS
Mayor Dinkins rejected the sweeping overhaul of the city's shelter system a mayoral commission had proposed.
Although he endorsed some of the commission's ideas, including a pilot rental subsidy program, he said he would take up to 18 months to study the other major proposals.
That would put the decision on new action off until after the end of the Mayor's current term.  1  Business Digest 37  Sports 31-36  Auto Racing: Driver killed during Indy 500 practice run.  31  Baseball: Yanks beat A's.  33  Basketball: Knicks and Bulls welcome a day off.  31  Horse Racing: Free-for-all expected in the Preakness.  33  Obituaries 10  Nie Rongzhen, a marshal of China's Communist revolution.
George Keith Funston, headed the New York Stock Exchange.
Arts/Entertainment 11-17  Arts panel protests veto.  11  "Les Miz" to close in Paris.  11  Music: The London Symphony.  11  Consumer's World 30  One investor's guide to making money.
Getting a sunless tan.
Free exam for fighting skin cancer.
Editorials/Op-Ed 22-23  Editorials 22  Treat guns like cars.
Ageless 27th Amendment.
Fort Tryon Park, reborn.
Letters 22  Russell Baker: Won't sparklers do?  23  Mark Horowitz: Laugh riot in Los Angeles.  23  Jerry F. Hough: About those nukes.  23  Charles Millard: Why I'm not marching in Washington.23  John Tauranac: A ride to old-time Brooklyn.  23


Security Council Adopts Measure to Pursue Peace Efforts in Bosnia
The Security Council adopted a resolution today urging Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali to continue peace efforts in Bosnia and Herzegovina despite his refusal earlier this week to send peacekeepers there.
The resolution reaffirms support for peacekeepers in Croatia and Slovenia and for European Community mediation efforts, implicitly rejecting the Secretary General's warning that the United Nations might be forced to withdraw from the region.


Corrections
The Currents column in The Home Section on Thursday misstated the closing date for "Forever Wild: The Adirondack Experience," at the New-York Historical Society.
It closes July 12.


Daly Confident in a Qualified Way
Chuck Daly, coach of the United States Olympic basketball team, said today that his team should win the gold medal in Barcelona, Spain, then he flatly predicted that the Americans "will" win it.
At the same time, he expressed concern that the style of international play could cause a few problems for his team.
"It's the coaches' mentality of fear, that there's always a cloud hovering over," he said here during a seminar organized by the United States Olympic Committee.
"I've been called the prince of pessimism, so I'm sure that's going to rear its head."


Religion Notes
Sex and the Priesthood
When Eamonn Casey resigned this week as Bishop of Galway, Ireland, after admitting that he was the father of a 17-year-old boy in Connecticut, a chorus of former priests mustered arguments against maintaining the Roman Catholic Church rule that priests be celibate.


Herbert Kolsky, 75; Noted for Research On Applied Physics
Herbert Kolsky, a noted researcher and educator in applied physics, mathematics and engineering, died last Saturday at his home in Providence, R.I., where he had been a longtime member of the Brown University faculty.
He was 75 years old.
A family spokesman said the cause of death was prostate cancer.


The Final Sail? America3 Goes for the Cup Clincher
It is one day before the race that could clinch the America's Cup series for Bill Koch and his America
team.
Perhaps it was an omen then for Koch to awaken at dawn to the distant voice of Dennis Conner as the San Diego skipper walked past Koch's waterfront home.
There on the path was the man who had been a thorn in Koch's side during four months of America's Cup defense trials.
And there inside the house was the man obsessed about the trophy that Conner has failed win the right to defend for the first time in 18 years, wondering whether he could do the job instead.


Landlords Guilty of Bias In Brooklyn
A Federal jury has found two Brooklyn landlords and a Brooklyn realty company liable for discrimination against black and Hispanic renters, in a class action suit that lawyers said could make it easier to prosecute future racial steering cases.
The jury, sitting in Uniondale, L.I., awarded $15,350 in damages Thursday to the Open Housing Center Inc., a private, nonprofit fair-housing agency, in a case it brought against A M Realty, in the Kings Highway section of Brooklyn, three of its brokers and and two landlords, Jeno Jakabovitz and Benjamin Breitman.


San Francisco Police Chief Is Dismissed
The Police Commission dismissed San Francisco's Police Chief today, making him the first political casualty of the anti-police sentiment that touched off violence in Los Angeles and other cities two weeks ago.
The Chief, Richard Hongisto, long known for his support of liberal causes, was accused by an unnamed police officer of instigating the removal of a gay and lesbian newspaper from newspaper racks because he was offended by the tabloid's critical coverage of heavy-handed arrests during recent demonstrations and by an unflattering cover photo showing Chief Hongisto holding a nightstick in a lewd manner.


Prices Rise for Most Treasury Securities
Prices of Treasury securities moved higher in moderately active trading yesterday.
Buying began in Europe as news of the bankruptcy filing by Olympia &amp; York prompted traders to put money into short-term bills and notes.


Yanks and Ushers Reach an Accord
A 6 percent pay increase coupled with a 40 percent staff reduction turned out to be the formula that sent striking ushers back to work at the Stadium yesterday, or some of them, anyway.


Fort Tryon Park, Twice Reborn
Take the A train up north to 190th Street in Manhattan to Fort Tryon Park and see what happens when a parsimonious season turns prodigal.
After being held back by cold and damp, flowering plants that usually come out in a sensible spring succession seem to be blooming all at once -- cherry and apple together, Lenten rose and peony, redbud and dogwood and an extravagance of azaleas, modest white to brazen orange.
All this sudden profusion takes place against a stirring background.
After a half-century of neglect and misuse, Fort Tryon Park has finally been restored to its original beauty.
A lost landscape is now twice revived, by season and by reason.


Mayors to March in Capital
Members of the United States Conference of Mayors and other urban advocates plan to march on Washington on Saturday to demand billions of dollars in new Federal aid to the cities after the riots in Los Angeles.
Organizers say they expect 100,000 people to gather on Capitol Hill and march to the Washington Monument.
They will hear Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and Mayor David N. Dinkins of New York and several other mayors, union leaders and civil rights leaders.


Patents; An Electrical Device To Help Ease Pain
Two brothers in Paterson, N.J., have patented an electrical "cranial stimulator," which, they contend, can relieve physical pain, as well as depression, anxiety, insomnia and even jet lag.
Getting a patent does not mean that an invention actually works well, but the inventors, Saul and Bernard Liss, say they have human tests to support their claims, and some medical doctors say they use it on their patients.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: White House; Bush on Tightrope in Pittsburgh, Juggling Politics and Compassion
President Bush collected $350,000 in political donations at a lunch with wealthy supporters today, then sped several blocks to a nearby slum for a show of Presidential concern about the inner city.
The juxtaposition of the two meetings, barely five minutes apart, served to underscore the balancing act that the President must perform in an election year, hoping to present a compassionate response to the urban problems symbolized by the Los Angeles riots, while at the same time seeing to political necessities.


Now Give Stability a Chance in Lebanon
To the Editor:
The resignation of the Syrian-imposed Lebanese prime minister, Omar Karami, and the massive popular demonstrations in Lebanon against the politics of the Taef regime (news article, May 7) raise the question: What comes next?


Moorer Gets Cooper in 5th
It was the war by the shore, and in the end the arsenal of Michael Moorer prevailed.
Moorer, a left-handed bombardier from Detroit, knocked out Bert Cooper at 2 minutes 21 seconds of the fifth round of a scheduled 12-round bout to win the vacant World Boxing Organization heavyweight title at the Trump Taj Mahal here tonight.


Yanks Win With Holding Pattern
No team likes to see scoring opportunities wasted time and again.
When it's done in a game against the Oakland A's, it's enough to drive a manager to prayer.
Fortunately, for Buck Showalter of the Yankees, his pitching staff, led by Scott Kamieniecki and rounded out by unflappable relievers like Steve Farr, answered his silent wishes in a 3-2 victory over the A's last night.
"We squandered a lot early," said Showalter, whose team stranded a half a dozen runners in the first five innings.
"When you do that against that club, your pitching has to bail you out."


Bridge
The final playoff match to select the United States open team in the 1992 World Team Olympiad in Salsomaggiore, Italy, began here tonight.
On one team were three great veteran players who have never quite managed to win a world title: Bill Root and Edgar Kaplan of Manhattan and Norman Kay of Narberth, Pa.
Their teammates are Mike Passell of Dallas, who has won a world title, and Brian Glubok of Manhattan and Richard Pavlicek of Fort Lauderdale, Fla., who would dearly like to.
Opposing them are five players who won the Olympiad title four years ago: Seymon Deutsch of Laredo, Tex., Bob Wolff and Bob Hamman of Dallas, Jeff Meckstroth of Tampa, Fla., and Eric Rodwell of West Lafayette, Ind.
Their sixth player is Michael Rosenberg of Manhattan.


Classical Music in Review
Crashland Berlin John Houseman Theater Studio 450 West 42d Street Manhattan  Through tonight


Beth Anspach Bernstein, Psychoanalyst, 76
Dr.
Beth Anspach Bernstein, a psychoanalyst for children, died on May 8 at her home in Manhattan.
She was 76 years old and died of breast cancer, her family said.
Dr.
Bernstein had a longtime private practice in Manhattan until she retired a year ago because of illness.


Your Money; A Good Mix: Social Action With Profits
When Mayor David N. Dinkins of New York said Thursday that he was likely to back Nelson Mandela's request that the city lift economic sanctions against South Africa, he was in line with one of the fastest-growing investment trends: using economic muscle to forge social change, as well as earn a good return.
The Mayor released a letter from Mr.
Mandela, the president of the African National Congress, saying, "We will issue a call to you and other heads of government who have helped our cause to assist in building our economy," as soon as an interim government is established.
Mr.
Mandela said he wanted "to discuss reintroduction of trade and investment."


Medical Overtreatment of Elderly Is Common
To the Editor:
"Making a Living Off the Dying" by Norman A. Paradis (Op-Ed, April 25) touches upon the recurring problem of inappropriate, inhumane and indeed a poor quality of care that an average elderly person receives in an average U.S. hospital today.
While an attitude of ageism commonly results in undertreatment of many potentially treatable conditions, the practice of overtreatment and unnecessary procedures is no less common.


Charles G. Stanton, Advertising Salesman, 35
Charles G. Stanton, an advertising salesman, died yesterday at Phelps Memorial Hospital in North Tarrytown, N.Y.
He was 35 years old and lived in Detroit.
He died of complications from a brain injury incurred in a skiing accident in Las Lenas, Argentina, in 1988, said his father, Frank Stanton.


TRANSACTIONS
Basketball  National Basketball Association


Tiny CD Player Will Record, Too
The Sony Corporation in Japan, which introduced the portable Walkman tape player in 1979 and the compact disk in 1982, is gearing up for another major innovation: a portable compact disk player, the Mini Disc, which will be the first compact disk player able to record sound as well as play it back.
The system will also have a special appeal for joggers, bicycle riders and fast walkers, because it will substantially reduce the vibration problem common with portable cassette players.


Methodists Retain Ties to Abortion Rights Group
The United Methodist Church, the nation's third largest religious group, turned back an attempt today to cut its ties with the Religious Coalition for Abortion Rights, a major advocacy group for abortion rights.
The proposal to sever ties had been narrowly endorsed a week ago by a committee of the church's General Conference.
But the full body of elected delegates to the General Conference, which meets every four years to set policy for the 8.9-million-member church, turned down the proposal today, 485 to 448.


INSIDE
Politics and Soft Money
Federal laws limiting donations to campaigns have done little to keep the wealthy from showering the political process with millions.
Page 7.
Florio to Veto Sales Tax Cut
Setting the stage for a showdown with the Legislature in Trenton, Gov.
Jim Florio pledged to veto a bill to reduce the sales tax to 6 percent.
Page 25. 'Suicide Doctor' at a Death
Dr.
Jack Kevorkian, charged with murder in two suicides last year, was present as a seriously ill Michigan woman took her own life.
Page 6.
Acquitted of Child Abuse
A Georgia jury rejected abuse charges against the head of a network for abused children.
Page 6.


Teetering Giant Worries New York City Officials
Olympia &amp; York is New York City's biggest commercial landlord and one of its top taxpayers, and while none of its New York buildings are included in the Canadian bankruptcy filing, the real estate empire's troubles have raised shivers at City Hall.
The company's next property tax payment, about $75 million, is due on July 1, and city and Olympia officials said they were exploring whether some or all of that payment might be delayed, and what the conditions might be.
For example, under a new payment schedule, Olympia could pledge that if it failed to make payments it would not contest efforts by the city to take possession of the properties involved, though the city would far sooner collect taxes than own real estate.
Quietly Exploring Options
For weeks, Olympia &amp; York's top New York executives and city officials have been quietly exploring how the city might help a company it had relied on for $142 million in property taxes last year -- 2 percent of the city's total.
The possibilities range from rescheduling payments to creating new tax incentives that could help Olympia and other landlords with holdings in Lower Manhattan.


South Africa Talks in Deadlock; De Klerk Confers With Mandela
Negotiations on South Africa's future deadlocked today, prompting President F. W. de Klerk and Nelson Mandela, president of the African National Congress, to meet to try to devise a solution.
After the two leaders met with their advisers and then for more than an hour with each other, Mr.
Mandela said they would report the outcome on Saturday.
He described their meeting as "substantial," the South Africa Press Association reported, but did not say what they had decided.


Founder of a Network for Abused Children Is Acquitted of Cruelty
Faye Yager, the controversial head of an underground network for abused children, was acquitted today of charges she kidnapped and abused children she was supposed to be helping.
Mrs.
Yager, whose own life was scarred by her former husband's sexual abuse of her daughter, leaned forward with her eyes closed as the jury foreman began reading the verdict and then cried softly as the jury found her not guilty on all four counts.


PLANS LIQUIDATION
The death knell rang for another big New York City retailer yesterday as Alexander's Inc. closed its 11 stores and filed for bankruptcy protection.
The budget department store company, merchant to successive waves of struggling immigrants since 1928, said it would reopen the stores for a close-out sale, then cease operations.
The company, which has not turned a profit on its retail operations since 1987, will continue to try to sell or lease its stores, some of which occupy prime real estate locations like the one occupied by the flagship store at 58th Street and Lexington Avenue in Manhattan.


Perot on Critics: Read My Smile
Ross Perot says that after every appearance of a news article that criticizes him or raises questions about his past, his phone bank lights up and he gets more volunteers.
"So I guess I should get up every morning and say, 'Hit me, please,' " he said in an interview with C-Span, the public affairs cable network.


Review/Dance; Locomotion That's Driven by the Eccentric
Pooh Kaye calls her company Eccentric Motions and that just about perfectly describes what her dancers do on stage.
The new piece she presented last Saturday night at Performance Space 122 is called "The Illusion of Wholeness" and somehow that, too, is a good description.
Ms.
Kaye, a choreographer and film maker, certainly doesn't belong to the fast-dying breed of dance makers who create dances with discernible beginnings, middles and ends.
But there is an odd internal logic to her illogic.
"The Illusion of Wholeness," a piece for 11 dancers that is set to an intriguing electronic score by Chris Cochrane, is based on Ms.
Kaye's collagist "Cut-Ups," the recent dance that opened the program.
The newer work looks unfinished at the end, but up to that point it is a roiling stew of signature Kaye images like upended and interlocking bodies and crawls on all fours.


Review/Music; Variety From the Adaptable London
Some orchestras are celebrated for their special character; others offer listeners a benign facelessness.
The London Symphony Orchestra, which paid two visits to Avery Fisher Hall this week under Michael Tilson Thomas, has probably been too busy to develop its own musical profile.
In place of identifying features is its collective image of tough, hard-working professionals, eager to make music in high-minded ventures but equally prepared to act as hired gun for vanity recordings or marketplace hackwork.
Self-governed, the London Symphony favors less-autocratic principal conductors over music directors and has leaned toward Americans: Mr.
Thomas, Leonard Bernstein and especially Andre Previn, who will be returning as the orchestra's conductor laureate next year.
Through this myriad of faces and circumstances emerges an orchestra that is adaptable and competent, capable of playing anything in any way and often at short notice.


Nie Rongzhen, 93, Last Marshal Of China's Communist Revolution
Nie Rongzhen, the last surviving marshal of China's Communist revolution and the man who oversaw the development of China's atomic bomb, died on Thursday, the Government announced today.
He was 92 years old.
Mr.
Nie died in Beijing of an unspecified illness, the official New China News Agency said.
The agency described him as "an outstanding proletarian revolutionary and strategist."


Suzuki in Hungary: Team Spirit Sags
In the place of arms-to-plowshares, Hungary has embarked on a novel experiment in arms-to-Suzukis, but the abrupt transition from Communist to Japanese industrial culture is proving troublesome.
On the site of a former Soviet military testing area in northern Hungary, the Suzuki Motor Corporation is completing the largest Japanese investment so far in the former Soviet bloc.
The Magyar Suzuki factory is to start producing subcompact Swift automobiles in October.


Bank Panel Chairman Is Denied Documents
Attorney General William P. Barr said today that he would no longer provide classified documents concerning fraud by the Banca Nazionale del Lavoro to Representative Henry B. Gonzalez, who has been disclosing the information in a series of speeches on the House floor.
In a letter to Mr.
Gonzalez, a Texas Democrat who is chairman of the Banking Committee, Mr.
Barr noted that Federal agencies were precluded by an executive order from disseminating classified information "outside the executive branch except under conditions that insure that the information will be given protection equivalent to that afforded within the executive branch."


For Burmese Dissidents, Wheel Reinvents Words
What is left of the pro-democracy movement in this lyrically named city is on wheels.
Beleaguered democracy advocates who had been students at Mandalay University, closed by the Burmese military Government for most of the last four years, have taken to their bicycles, discussing strategy as they ride side by side along the city's broad streets.


Duties Set On Canada Lumber
The Commerce Department issued a final determination today that the Canadian Government was improperly subsidizing its lumber industry, a finding that puts further strain on the United States' troubled trade relations with Canada.
The department found that permanent countervailing duties of 6.51 percent should be placed on imports of Canadian lumber, but such duties cannot be imposed unless the International Trade Commission, a United States agency, rules that the Canadian subsidies have injured the American lumber industry.


Patents; A Variation Of Vitamin D Aids Bones
Mothers and nutritionists have said for decades that drinking milk, rich in calcium and fortified with vitamin D, can help build strong bones and teeth in growing children.
Now, a company with roots in the heart of dairy country has patented a variant of vitamin D that shows promise in treating the bone loss of osteoporosis, an illness that weakens millions of middle-aged and elderly women each year.


French Get Graphic About the Dandelion
To the Editor:
I thoroughly enjoyed your article on the virtues of the dandelion as spring's official herald ("Don't Kill the Dandelions," Home section, April 16).
I confess I am one of those Americans guilty of dumping millions of pounds of chemicals on lawns to rid them of this ubiquitous flower -- or weed, depending upon your botanical bias.
This year I pledge not to do that.


Don Brown, 85, Dies; Former Assemblyman
Don H. Brown, a retired weekly newspaper publisher and former New York State Assemblyman, died on Tuesday at Lee Memorial Hospital in Fort Myers, Fla.
He was 85 years old and lived in Fort Myers. He died of pneumonia, his family said.


Bird-Inspired Celtics Force a Seventh Game
Forty-eight minutes from the possible end of their season, and -- who knows? -- maybe the end of the Larry Bird Era in Boston, the return of the Celtic superstar to the starting lineup became the start of an overwhelming exhibition tonight.
After hours and hours of emotional talk-show speculation that Bird had become Larry Liability, creating a so-called "chemical imbalance" in the Celtics, his 16 points and 14 assists became a focal point of Boston's 122-91 victory over the Cleveland Cavaliers in the sixth game of the Eastern Conference semifinals.


Saberhagen Is Ailing, But Pecota Eases Pain
The lineup change traded a .294 average for a .208 mark, and so it was based on something other than the logic of statistics.
It was, instead, Jeff Torborg's general philosophy of overall productivity that led the manager of the Mets to start Bill Pecota over Dave Magadan.
"I want to make sure," said Torborg, "that everybody is a part of this."


Classical Music in Review
L'Opera Francais de New York Florence Gould Hall


CHRONICLE
The floor of the New York Stock Exchange, easily one of most frenetic places in town during the workday, can be as silent as a tomb in the evening.
But this evening it is sure to rock, with 1,500 guests, mainly officers and partners of member firms, taking part in the first large seated dinner ever to take place there.
The occasion is the exchange's bicentennial.
WILLIAM H. DONALDSON, thechairman of the exchange, said: "It is a wonderful place to give a party. It has wonderful physical presence, with all the electronics, blinking computers and their lights, which will be augmented with decorations."


Review/Music; Wistful Irish Folk-Rock
The Saw Doctors aren't afraid to wave the flag.
On Thursday night at Tramps, they sang about arriving in Ireland's County Mayo by boat, seeing "where the ocean kisses Ireland" and wishing they could "stay forevermore." A band sidekick strode onstage with a huge green-and-red (the colors of County Mayo) flag, and waved it while the full house cheered.
It was only the group's first song.
From there, the Saw Doctors went on to sing about romance, music and homesickness, with the crowd joining in on songs from the band's album, "If This Is Rock-and-Roll, I Want My Old Job Back" (Solid, released in Ireland).
Fans also swayed to waltzes, jumped up and down, climbed on shoulders and collided with one another: slam-reeling.


Classical Music in Review
Partita Chamber Ensemble Merkin Concert Hall


METRO DIGEST
CLOSEOUT FOR ANOTHER RETAILER
The death knell rang for another major New York City retailer as Alexander's Inc. closed the doors at its 11 stores and filed for bankruptcy protection.
The budget department store company, merchant to each wave of struggling immigrants, said it would reopen the stores for a close-out sale, then close for good.
Its demise will have a significant impact on the New York economy: about 5,200 people will lose their jobs and the vacant stores will enter a real estate market glutted with empty retail space.
Page 1.
Tremors in 11 neighborhoods.
Page 27.
NEW YORK CITY  DINKINS REJECTS OVERHAUL OF SHELTERS


Wife of Missing Executive Reports Message
The wife of Sidney J. Reso, the high-ranking Exxon executive who disappeared last month from his home in Morris Township, N.J., said last night that she had received a message from those who she believes are holding her husband captive.
In a four-paragraph plea for her husband's release, Patricia Reso appealed for information on his health.


Classical Music in Review
Jose Carreras Tenor Carnegie Hall


Keating In-Law Enters Plea And Will Assist Prosecutors
A son-in-law of Charles H. Keating Jr. pleaded guilty today to three Federal fraud counts in connection with the collapse of the Lincoln Savings and Loan Assocation and agreed to cooperate with prosecutors as they pursue their case against Mr.
Keating.
The guilty plea was the sixth from executives and business associates of Lincoln and its parent company, but was the first crack in what until now had been a united Keating family defense against the charges in the case.


Managua Journal; Mayor Cleans Up City, but Some Don't Like Him
To anyone who has not seen Managua in the two years since the Sandinistas lost power, the first reaction is inevitably surprise at how clean, scrubbed and orderly the Nicaraguan capital appears.
The city is still grimly poor, dusty and steamy hot, the downtown still a shell left by an earthquake 20 years ago, but it is no longer covered with revolutionary graffiti.


Canadian Financial Markets Remain Composed
The news that Olympia &amp; York Developments Ltd. was finally seeking bankruptcy protection failed to produce the anticipated financial shock waves in Canada.
Markets have already been depressed for weeks by the threat of forced asset sales and other problems arising from an Olympia insolvency.
In fact, now that the company has acted, the stock and currency markets have apparently taken the positive view that a big uncertainty has been cleared away.
Both Canadian dollars and prices of Canadian stocks rose today.
On the Toronto Stock Exchange, even bank shares were buoyant.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Campaign Finances; Exemption Is Allowing Big Spenders To Skirt Curbs on Aid to Candidates
For nearly two decades complaints about the influence of big money on the political process have produced laws to restrict large donations to election campaigns.
Yet neither the complaints nor the resulting laws have deterred many of the nation's wealthiest individuals and corporations -- most with interests before the Federal Government -- from showering the political system with millions of dollars.


Scofflaws Give Communities A New Line Item
LAST fall New Britain paid $1,875 for five Denver boots, devices that immobilize illegally parked cars until their owners pay outstanding parking tickets.
"We had more than $60,000 in unpaid tickets, and we had to do something," said the supervisor of the New Britain Police Department's traffic division, Sgt.
Joseph S. Rizzo.
It proved to be a good investment: New Britain got back more than half the cost of the boots the first day, snaring two of the city's worst scofflaws, who owed $1,000 between them.
Since then, the boots have brought in more than $15,000, Sgt.
Rizzo said.
As tax collections fall and municipal expenses rise, towns are looking at all sources of revenues, and parking ticket receipts are getting increasing attention.
Across the state, officials are using a variety of methods to collect unpaid parking tickets, which can amount to hundreds of thousands of dollars.


Recession Is Ravaging Architectural Firms
EMPLOYMENT in the architectural industry in New York City has dropped 23 percent in the last two years, forcing firms to alter fundamentally -- and perhaps forever -- the way they do business.
"It will never be the same again," said Michael A. McCarthy, a partner in Skidmore, Owings &amp; Merrill, one of the largest firms in New York and the nation.
"Beginning work in this city in 1964, I've had the chance to see a lot of ups and downs. This one, to me, is without a doubt the worst."


The Greening of Soup, Salad and Chicken
SPRINGTIME demands green.
A number of greens provide fresh-flavor accent and verdant color.
High on the list are scallions and watercress.
Scallions are often called green onions or spring onions.
They are essentially onion shoots, treasured as much for their delicately tangy greens as for the somewhat sharper taste of their baby white bulbs.
Scallions, irreplaceable as an accent for salads and a garnish for soups, chicken, fish and grain dishes, can also play a more significant role in recipes.


The Thrifty Traveler in 10 World Cities; Vienna
Finding a place to stay is only one of many choices facing the traveler on a tight budget.
Here are suggestions on where to eat, what to do and what not to do from 10 New York Times correspondents in cities around the world.


A STITCH IN TIME
I, too, like to compensate for my infrequent attendance at school assemblies and children's athletic events by providing my children with sweaters I knit by hand.
And I think it is a healthy disturbance of sexual and occupational stereotypes when my son's classmates say, in astonishment, "Your mother made that sweater? But I thought she was a professor!" MARGARET R. GREER
Princeton, N.J.


Straight Out of Brooklyn
WHEN Matty Rich, the director of "Straight Out of Brooklyn," closed his clothing store, Matty Rich's Red Hook, in Park Slope last month, it was a chilling reminder that the recession has felled even the most altruistic of ventures.
For Mr.
Rich's store was one of several owned by such notable black directors and actors as Spike Lee and Christopher Martin, stores that were created to infuse some life, and cash, back into the neighborhoods that have inspired their film careers, the neighborhoods they grew up in.


Sampras Is Finally Ready to Dig In and Play on the Clay
Like a flag at half-mast, his shoulders seem permanently fixed in a shrug that could be apologetic, apathetic, or simply an expression of the non-aggrandizing posture they don't teach in Dale Carnegie's course -- or anywhere else.
But no wonder Pete Sampras hasn't learned to strut.
He's at a career-high No. 3 in the world, he's merely 20 years old, in 1990 he became the youngest United States Open champion in history, and still, wherever he goes, it's the same old litany: What's wrong with Pete Sampras?
What has this one-slam-wonder done lately?
"If I don't play well, people say I wasn't trying; if I'm on, they say it's just a matter of serving genius, not effort," said Sampras.
"I've said from Day One that I'm a guy who lets his racquet do the talking." Sampras is at his most articulate during his service motion -- which happens, naturally, to be silent and virtually unreadable.


Scorer Enters the Record Book At Opportune Time for Tigers
In his four seasons at Princeton, Justin Tortolani has scored more lacrosse goals, 116, than any player in the school's long history in the sport.
None was more important than the 115th, which became the winning score today in a tight playoff contest with Maryland that the Tigers won, 11-10.
The victory elevated Princeton for the first time into the National Collegiate Athletic Association Division I tournament's semifinal round, which will be played next weekend in Philadelphia, on Penn's Franklin Field.


Sigourney Weaver in Alien Terrain . . . Yet Again
Sigourney Weaver has her hair back.
It is fashionably short -- a sort of 1920's flapper cut -- but thick and lustrous, an elegant crown for her stern patrician bearing.
Her lanky frame folded on the couch of a Manhattan hotel suite set aside for an interview -- "the afternoon rate," Ms.
Weaver says -- she runs a hand over her scalp and recalls, a little wistfully, her brief tenure as a Sinead O'Connoresque near-skinhead.
As watchers of movie trailers know, Ms.
Weaver was shaved almost to baldness to reprise once again her role of Ellen Ripley, the unassuming Wonder Woman who did futuristic battle with the title characters in "Alien" (1979) and "Aliens" (1986).


Straight Out of Brooklyn
WHEN Matty Rich, the director of "Straight Out of Brooklyn," closed his clothing store, Matty Rich's Red Hook, in Park Slope last month, it was a chilling reminder that the recession has felled even the most altruistic of ventures.
For Mr.
Rich's store was one of several owned by such notable black directors and actors as Spike Lee and Christopher Martin, stores that were created to infuse some life, and cash, back into the neighborhoods that have inspired their film careers, the neighborhoods they grew up in.


Orioles Are the First to Solve McDowell
Orioles 7, White Sox 2
CHICAGO, May 16 (AP) -- Jack McDowell lost for the first time in eight starts this season as Chris Hoiles hit a two-run homer and a triple that led the Baltimore Orioles past the Chicago White Sox, 7-2, tonight.


'Salem Is My Dwelling Place'
To the Editor:
Nathaniel Hawthorne's rumored "dark private knowledge" is explored in Andrew Delbanco's review of Edwin Haviland Miller's "Salem Is My Dwelling Place: A Life of Nathaniel Hawthorne" (Feb. 16).
Mr.
Delbanco cites various theories about Hawthorne's deeply secretive nature: incest, childhood traumas and, more probably, Hawthorne's adult efforts to maintain the fly-on-the-wall stance so valuable to literary artists observing their "human materials." While Mr.
Delbanco suggests that "Hawthorne's secret was finally, I think, his fearful recognition of the responsibility of being mortal," his habits may also have had a more patent motivation -- one reinforced by the local architecture and landscape he saw with each daily stroll through town.
Today, the House of the Seven Gables sits at the edge of Salem, in the long shadows of the Witch House, the Witch Dungeon, the Witch Museum and the Salem Witch Trials Tercentenary Memorial -- all of which pay dubious tribute to the Salem witch trials, which divided a generation and claimed the lives of 25 Salemers 112 years before Hawthorne's birth.
Until witching became a lucrative venture in the 20th century, Salem practiced long-term amnesia in regard to its history.
Hawthorne himself, the story goes, was so ashamed of his ancestor John Hathorne, "the hanging magistrate," who earned his pernicious reputation in court during the trials, that he added the "w" to his own last name.
Jonathan Corwin, a magistrate who examined several accused witches in his bedroom (including searches for "witch marks" on the bodies of the accused), affected repentance by remodeling the street side of his prominent Salem house in a less ostentatious style.
Reflecting on the trials 28 years after Hawthorne's death, the Mayor of Salem described the "witchcraft horror" as "a chapter in our local annals which I for one would make haste to blot out if I had it in my power to do so."
In a town that so repressed its own history, where neighborly feuds and social flamboyance once led to cries of "Witch!" and a public execution on Gallows Hill, how could the author of "The Scarlet Letter" choose anything but compulsive privacy and total discretion?
SARAH BAYLISS New York


Big Movies on Little Budgets
Lindsay Law, the man who presides over "American Playhouse," the public television dramatic series, inhales from yet another cigarette and rubs his sore hands together.
A 43-year-old frenetically competent doer of things, Mr.
Law is the kind of person who isn't overly happy unless he's overly busy, and maybe not even then.
He is restlessly taking a rare day off, during which he has been putting together garden furniture in his yard in Roxbury, Conn.
It hasn't been a relaxing day, however; there have been persistent interruptions by phone and fax, mostly irksome news about "Golden Gate," a feature film written by the playwright David Henry Hwang ("M. Butterfly"), which, budgeted at $4.5 million, is the most expensive project "American Playhouse" has ever attempted.
Recently, the project, for which the Samuel Goldwyn Company has put up $3.5 million of the cost, lost its star, Matt Dillon, because of scheduling conflicts.


Data Bank/May 17, 1992


Bush Overrides Agency on Pollution Restrictions
President Bush, in a major concession to industry, has overruled the Environmental Protection Agency and decided that companies may increase their emissions of pollution without notifying the public, an Administration official said tonight.
The decision, which the White House has said could save thousands of American companies billions of dollars, reverses the E.P.A.'s interpretation of how it should carry out amendments to the Clean Air Act of 1990.


Elizabeth Briody, Marc Robinson
Dr.
Elizabeth Kathleen Briody, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Leonard L. Briody of Beverly, Mass., was married yesterday in Orchard Lake, Mich., to Dr.
Marc Seiden Robinson, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
David Z. Robinson of New York.
The Rev.
Michael R. Dylag performed the Roman Catholic ceremony in the chapel of St.
Mary's College.
Dr.
Briody, who is 35 years old and is retaining her name, is an industrial anthropologist for General Motors Research Laboratories in Warren, Mich.
She graduated from Wheaton College and received master's and doctoral degrees in anthropology from the University of Texas at Austin.
Her father, who is retired, was a supervisor of inspectors for the Pennsylvania Railroad in Boston.
Her mother, Mary B. Briody, who is retired, was a secretary at the Abraham Edwards Elementary School in Beverly.


Declining Living Standards Account for Sharp Rise in TB Cases
To the Editor:
"The Tuberculosis Failure" (editorial, April 26) blames government "napping" for the recent sharp rise in TB cases.
You say that after the 1950's "antibiotics brought the scourge under control."


Big Bankruptcy Dampens Hopes for Real Estate
The decision by Olympia &amp; York Developments Ltd., the world's largest real estate company, to seek bankruptcy protection in Canada last week is unlikely to have an immediate effect on New York City's already distressed real estate market.
But the long-term impact could be devastating.
The danger, developers and money managers say, would come if Olympia &amp; York's New York portfolio is broken up by creditors and sold at fire sale prices, reducing the value of comparable properties.
And if rents are slashed to attract tenants, other landlords would be forced to follow suit.


Public &amp; Private; The Old Block
The block on which my father grew up half a century ago is a truncated little street that leads nowhere.
If it were a foot or two narrower, the map makers might have called it an alley.
The houses are identical, two-story attached brick buildings with bay windows on the top floor, an over-obvious attempt at grandeur.
In this quiet backwater in the southwestern part of the city, the children of Irish-Catholic families played in the late afternoons after they had changed from their parochial school uniforms.
A police officer walked by twice a day, talking to the people he knew so well.


The Riots Bring A Rush to Arm And New Debate
"NEXT time, be prepared," screamed the ad in a Los Angeles newspaper, and it wasn't recruiting for the Boy Scouts.
Placed by a gun store after the deadly days of rioting, it urged the purchase of weapons for self-defense.
More than a few scared, angry people needed no egging on from gun merchants.
For some, it was the footage of a truck driver viciously beaten while the police hung back; for others, the image of armed Koreans defending their life's work.
Whatever the reason, thousands of Americans have gone to gun shops in the last two and a half weeks, many for the first time.


After Relatively Clean Election, Mudslinging Starts in Philippines
The Philippine presidential election degenerated today into a venomous series of charges and countercharges among the candidates over whether the outcome of the vote was being determined by cheating.
The charges, fueled by a painfully slow tabulation of the nearly 27 million votes cast Monday, added to concern that next month's transfer of power from President Corazon C. Aquino to her successor might be neither orderly nor peaceful.


Making a Difference; Cleaning Up on Pollution
After years of hypothesizing among economists and utility experts about the wonders of emissions trading, the Wisconsin Power and Light Company last week became the first utility to announce that it had actually sold pollution credits.
The company, which expects to build up the credits by exceeding Federal cleanup goals, sold the Tennessee Valley Authority and the Duquesne Light Company the right to emit an additional 25,000 to 35,000 tons of sulfur dioxide, the main ingredient of acid raid.
In buying the credits, which can be used starting in 1995, the T.V.A. and Duquesne are in effect buying more time to install cleanup equipment or switch to cleaner fuels.


Canadians May Get to Vote In Constitution Referendum
While Prime Minister Brian Mulroney does not have to face an election for 18 months, Canadians may be asked to vote this year on their country's future -- or on whether indeed it has one.
Recent political commentary has been marked by a burst of enthusiasm for a national referendum on the Constitution to help resolve the debate on national unity.


RIDING UGLY
An entire article glorifying the macho "sport" of bull riding and not a word in defense of the bulls ("Riding Ugly," by Jeff Coplon, April 12)?


Shuttle Uses Parachute to Chalk Up Another First
The space shuttle Endeavour glided to earth this afternoon, ending a nine-day inaugural voyage that featured a daring rescue of a wayward communications satellite.
"Welcome to California and congratulations on a spectacular and historic flight," Jim Halsell of NASA told the astronauts.


Helen Runnells, R. F. DuBois Jr.
Helen Rutherford Runnells, the daughter of Winifred Trimble Carter and Clive Runnells, both of Houston, was married there yesterday to Raymond Francis DuBois Jr., the son of Rear Admiral DuBois, U.S.N., retired, and Mrs.
DuBois of McLean, Va.
The Rev.
Canon John A. Logan Jr. performed the ceremony at Christ Church Cathedral.
Mrs.
DuBois is a consultant to the National Fish and Wildlife Foundation in Washington, responsible for fisheries issues.
She graduated from Yale University.
Her father is a businessman in Houston, with interests in ranching and cable television.
She is the stepdaughter of Nancy M. Runnells of Houston.
The bride's great-great-grandfather, George Fisher Baker, was the founder of the First National Bank, one of the forerunners of Citibank.


The Greening of Soup, Salad and Chicken
SPRINGTIME demands green.
A number of greens provide fresh-flavor accent and verdant color.
High on the list are scallions and watercress.
Scallions are often called green onions or spring onions.
They are essentially onion shoots, treasured as much for their delicately tangy greens as for the somewhat sharper taste of their baby white bulbs.
Scallions, irreplaceable as an accent for salads and a garnish for soups, chicken, fish and grain dishes, can also play a more significant role in recipes.


Which Way Out?; The Civil Rights Battle Was Easy Next to the Problems of the Ghetto
IN the aftermath of the Los Angeles riots, many Americans feel some shame about the inner cities and most have at least some desire to see them improve.
But the country has watched passively for more than a generation as its urban cores have devoured the people who live there.
And Washington politics last week offered little reason to think that things are about to change.


Lizabeth Fiedler, Stuart Styles
Dr.
Lizabeth Jill Fiedler, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Robert Fiedler of Scarsdale, N.Y., was married last evening in New York to Dr.
Stuart Todd Styles, the son of Shel Styles of Centereach, L.I., and Sheila Styles of New York.
Rabbi Mark Winer performed the ceremony at the Helmsley Palace.
The bride, 28 years old, graduated from Haverford College and received a medical degree from Mount Sinai School of Medicine.
She is a resident in internal medicine at Mount Sinai Medical Center in New York.
Her father is an endocrinologist in private practice in New York and an associate attending physician at Mount Sinai Medical Center.
Her mother, Ina Fiedler, a psychologist at St.
Agnes Hospital in White Plains, is studying for a doctorate in psychology at Yeshiva University.


A Lifetime Fighting Racism: Was It Worth It?; Marginalized Blacks
To the Editor:
We would demur, however, on the way Mr.
Patterson and Mr.
Winship formulate and arrive at these points.


MAY 10-16: The Balkans; Peacekeepers Leave, But Not Because The Job Is Done
As the civil war involving Serbs, Croats and Muslims in Bosnia and Herzegovina escalated last week, so did the frustration of both the United Nations and the European Community at their inability to stop the latest round of the vicious conflict that has torn apart Yugoslavia for 11 months.
Both United Nations peacekeeping troops and European Community observers were ordered out of Sarajevo for their own safety.
The message was clear: Until the fighting stops, no outsiders want to be caught in the middle.
Blame for the new bloodshed is being directed principally at Belgrade, the Serb-dominated Yugoslav Army and Serb militias who seem intent on seizing part of Bosnia and Herzegovina in the name of its Serb minority.
But things are never simple in the Balkans.
Croatia, which was fighting a Serb intervention until United Nations forces arrived two months ago, is now said to be eyeing annexation of part of Bosnia and Herzegovina.


The Executive Life; A Human Whirlwind In South-Central L.A.
Marva Smith Battle-Bey delayed her long-planned trip to Chicago and Detroit by two days in the wake of the Los Angeles riots, but when she returned last Tuesday she hit the ground running.
Phone calls have been flooding the 13-year-old private nonprofit Vermont Slauson Economic Development Corporation, deep in the heart of riot-ravaged South-Central Los Angeles, which Mrs.
Battle-Bey, the president, has run since 1981.
She and her staff are on the front lines of the "Rebuild L.A." movement because they already know how to do it.
With money scraped together from the City of Los Angeles, foundations and banks, they have built a neighborhood shopping center, an affordable apartment building and a low-rent "incubator" to house five fledgling businesses; they rehabilitate 75 to 100 housing units a year.
The black-owned McDonald's at their Vermont Slauson shopping center has so little competition right now that on Monday it ran out of french fries.


Insurers and Lawyers Throw the Dirt Back at Polluters; Shifting the Burden
In an article on the Forum page on May 3, Eugene R. Anderson and Robert M. Horkovich, partners in the New York law firm of Anderson Kill Olick &amp; Oshinsky, wrote about the high litigation costs associated with the cleanup of toxic waste.
The article, "Why Insurance Companies Say No," cited a recent study by the Rand Institute for Civil Justice, which "reported that nearly 90 percent of the money allocated by insurance companies in Superfund claims had gone toward legal and related 'transaction' costs, rather than for cleaning up pollution."


From City's Doldrums To a Vacation in the Sun
THIS will be Sindano Sherrod's third summer with the Salmon family of Commack, and he is again looking forward to playing baseball at day camp and swimming in the pool.
Sindano, who will be 12 years old on July 4, will arrive by bus on July 11 to spend two weeks with the Salmons, a host family for the Fresh Air Fund.
The fund has provided free summer vacations for more than 1.6 million children since 1877.


Airport Crime Under Attack In U.S. Drive
Asserting that labor racketeering continues to plague the air freight business at Kennedy International Airport and inflate shipping costs, the Federal Government is mounting another drive to clean up a teamsters union local with a history of ties to the mob.
The Government's new effort comes after a dozen years of investigations that have led to the convictions of some of the local's top figures for extortion, racketeering and other crimes.
The illegal acts, prosecutors say, included systematically extorting millions of dollars from employers by threatening work stoppages, slowdowns and other disruptions if the payments were not made.


Thespis and Frisbee: The Play's the Thing
The following list, which includes events through mid-September, is selective.
Performances rarely occur every day of the week, and programs are subject to change.
Alabama
MONTGOMERY Alabama Shakespeare Festival (205-277-BARD).
Through July 12: "The Comedy of Errors"; "Shadowlands"; "King Lear"; "Arms and the Man"; "Lend Me a Tenor"; "Richard II."  Arizona
FLAGSTAFF CAA Theater, Northern Arizona University (800-266-7740).
In repertory, July 8-Aug. 9: "Cole"; "The Foreigner"; "Rehearsal for Murder."


Rio de Janeiro
Living in a land without seasons, residents of Rio de Janeiro head in June for the mountain city of Petropolis to play winter for a weekend.
With overnight temperatures dropping below 50 degrees, they wrap themselves in sweaters, snuggle in front of crackling fires and introduce their children to an exotic drink called hot chocolate.
The road to the mountains climbs out of tropical banana groves and winds dramatically through a granite and green landscape vaguely reminiscent of the Swiss Jura.
At Petropolis, one hour from Rio and 2,700 feet in altitude, a European aura prevails -- flower boxes, red-painted bridges, horse-drawn surreys, streets named for German settlers and, best of all, the neo-classical estates of Brazil's 19th-century empire.


'Compassionate' Air Fares Shift
IN the Travel section dated April 12, this column carried a roundup of domestic airlines' pricing policies for tickets to attend funerals or visit sick relatives.
On April 9, after the section went to press, American Airlines and then most of the other lines mentioned in the article simplified their fare structures effective April 13, eliminating many fares in the process.
The bereavement (or compassionate) fare was one that American Airlines, Northwest, United and USAir say they eliminated.
Continental, Delta and Trans World Airlines say they have retained it.
Representatives for the airlines, however, are wary of saying that the situation has settled down; even the "simplified" fares are multiplying again as the lines jockey for competitive advantage.


'Baby Jane Doe' Turns 9 This Year
The Long Island girl who became known as "Baby Jane Doe" during a bitter legal battle over her medical care following her birth in 1983, will observe her ninth birthday this year, but she suffers from severe mental and physical handicaps.
The baby was born with several defects, including an open spine, which caused those handicaps.
After consulting with doctors, clergy and social workers, her parents chose a conservative treatment.
They were opposed by right-to-life advocates who filed suit in an effort to force life-prolonging medical treatment.


Sculptures by Marisol, With Their Hints of the Macabre
AT the New Jersey Center for Visual Arts here, Hirohito, the late Emperor of Japan, holds court together with the Empress, Nagako; Georgia O'Keeffe sits heraldically on a tree stump flanked by her chows, and Bishop Tutu, in sunglasses, presides over all with his crozier, his body a box painted red.
These are some of the sculptures attesting to the eerie talent of Marisol Escobar, known as Marisol.
As deadpan a performer as Andy Warhol, Marisol is usually labeled Pop.
But sometimes she is regarded as a naive, and currently there is a move to conscript her into the feminist army.


Requiem for a Heavy, or Lighter, Weight
The recent rape conviction of Mike Tyson, the former heavyweight champion, may have cast a shadow over professional boxing, but that hasn't stopped amateur pugilists from pursuing the sport.
Some may dream of actually getting in the ring; most have simply found a new workout regimen.
BIG BOUT: Last Wednesday's three-rounder between Frank Stallone, a brother of Sylvester Stallone, and Geraldo Rivera at Kingsway Boxing Center on West 40th Street, which raised money for the Working Organization for Retarded Children and Adults.
No knockouts there.
Mr.
Stallone won by a unanimous decision.


The Thrifty Traveler in 10 World Cities; Bangkok
Finding a place to stay is only one of many choices facing the traveler on a tight budget.
Here are suggestions on where to eat, what to do and what not to do from 10 New York Times correspondents in cities around the world.


Laurie Kusch, Jonathan Talcott
Laurie Ruth Kusch, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert E. Kusch of Vero Beach, Fla., was married in New York yesterday to Jonathan Hart Talcott, a son of Sheila T. Talcott of New York and the late James H. Talcott.
The Rev.
William J. Chase performed the Episcopal ceremony at St.
James' Church, assisted by the Rev.
George L. Cleaves Jr.
Mrs.
Talcott is a graduate of Lafayette College.
Her father is a partner in Vero Beach in the Stamford, Conn., law firm of Diserio Martin O'Connor &amp; Castiglioni.
He is also a founder of the firm.
The bride's grandfather the late Charles A. Dana founded the Dana Corporation, an auto-parts maker in Toledo, Ohio, and later established a foundation for the advancement of higher education and medicine.


Fordham Graduates Gladly Ignore Steady Rain
Despite damp circumstances, 3,300 Fordham University graduates marched to "Pomp and Circumstance" yesterday at the school's 147th commencement, which was held on its Rose Hill campus in the Bronx.
The rain on Edwards Parade -- the lawn where the ceremony was held -- led graduates to hide caps and gowns under umbrellas and sent proud parents scurrying for the shelter of nearby buildings.
But it did not dampen the spirits of the graduates who loudly cheered themselves and booed the weather.


Stankiewicz Is Hard to Spell but Easy to Root For
If you are in the mood for some incredible stories with vivid details and the same hero every time, listen to Al Stankiewicz recount a few tales from his turbulent life as an undercover cop, boxer, trainer and father.
Fact or fiction, the 52-year-old Stankiewicz makes the stories reverberate in your ears.
He tells them as deftly as his son Andy plays infield for the Yankees.
From the horrible events he had to quell during the Watts riots in Los Angeles to the time he tossed a drug dealer and his fistful of cocaine into a lake to the time he was pummeled and then arrested after a boxing match at the Pan American Games in Venezuela, the man known as Al Stankie on the streets of Los Angeles has proven to be a tough guy who wears a white hat.


Pomp and Circumstance Plus Honorary Degrees
THOUSANDS of Long Island college students will receive graduate and undergraduate degrees this weekend, and several dozen distinguished Americans have been singled out for honorary degrees.
"We look for people who are prominent and who would have the most to say to our graduates," the president of Long Island University, Dr.
David Steinberg, said.
"This is the last moment of instruction for our students, and we seek people who would be role models for their future."


Hispanic Leaders Shun Dinkins's Caribbean Trip
When Mayor David N. Dinkins leaves tomorrow on a four-day trip to Puerto Rico and the Dominican Republic he will not be traveling with many of the Hispanic leaders he had hoped would accompany him on the political pilgrimage.
Although the city administration has sought to portray the Caribbean trip as primarily altruistic, with the Mayor announcing new initiatives to improve AIDS care and education on the islands, his aides acknowledged last week that Mr.
Dinkins was hoping to use the trip to restore his credibility with Hispanic voters in New York, who have accused him of being insensitive to their needs.


'Eleemosynary,' 3 Women and Power of Words
LEE BLESSING has written a play about three generations of super-articulate women who cannot communicate with one another.
Lee Blessing has written a play about how feminist sensibilities need to resolve a search for independence and the pull of the intellect in a male-dominated world.
Lee Blessing has written a play about the power of words to control life and the failure of words to replace feelings.
To reinforce one of his points, he has called the play "Eleemosynary," which is a fancy way of saying forgiving or charitable.
But, ultimately, Lee Blessing has defeated his own purposes with words, words, words.
"Eleemosynary" is as tedious in its preciosity as it is tantalizing in its possibilities.


'Concerts in Color' Coming to a Close
THE last two 5 P.M. programs in the Philharmonia Virtuosi "Concerts in Color" recitals, the music flowing beneath the Chagall and Matisse stained-glass windows at the Union Church of Pocantico Hills, bracket this week's musical programming.
On today's agenda are String Quartets by Haydn, Salieri and their Spanish contemporary Juan de Arriaga.
Next Sunday there will be another Haydn quartet plus duos by Karl Stamitz and Karl Philipp Emanuel Bach and Boccherini's delightful Guitar Quintet with added castanets.


Made to Measure
I WANT LARGE BREASTS.
Not having them will be a disappointment I carry to my grave, and it will be unlike any other disappointment -- unlike missing out on that perfect job, or on blond hair and creamy skin, or on unlimited wealth.
Any of those small failings can be made up for; we redirect our energies and find more solid sources of self-esteem.
But breasts are major-league.
They define us in accepted ways as women -- nurturing and sexual, abundant, playful, mysterious.
We have a right to them.
And as long as I can remember (including the so-called Twiggy era), images of busty women have been thrust before me in a single-minded way to which no other physical image -- bulging pectorals, say, for men -- can be compared.
They are on museum walls and in sex magazines, in lingerie ads and on TV commercials.
Yet I am small-chested, and I never considered getting silicone-gel implants.


An Illusion? No, Not at All
No need to rush to the eye doctor if you're seeing double and triple checks coming down Fifth Avenue.
It's a simple case of fashion going overboard for one of its classic motifs.
Last year's polka-dot epidemic is being replaced by an explosion of checks, from bold houndstooth patterns to demure ginghams.
What causes so many women to adapt a particular fabric pattern might seem like a manipulation of consumers by fashion designers, textile manufacturers and store buyers.
The truth is that the fashion industry has simply expanded what started out last year as a high-fashion ripple into a much broader market, and a much broader price range.
After years of solid-color suits, the public is evidently ready for just this sort of vitality.
And so are the ailing retail and fashion worlds.


Russia: Tourism Transformed
IN the old days, when the Soviet Union was still one country with just one travel agency, foreign tourists knew more or less what to expect.
They were met, housed, fed and herded about by Intourist, a watchful servant of the state that made sure visitors stuck with a program, from stale, pre-ordered meals to well-rehearsed litanies of Soviet achievements.
Now, there is no program, just as there is no Soviet Union and no Intourist monopoly.
Instead, the traveler finds a bewildering array of offers, services, tours, hunting and fishing trips, ski adventures, cultural exchanges and study groups.
Name it, and if you look hard enough, you can find it here in the 15 former Soviet republics, of which 11 are still loosely banded together in the Commonwealth of Independent States.


Laurie Morris, Anthony Betts
Dr.
Laurie Morris, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas W. Morris of Shoreham, L.I., was married yesterday in Shoreham to Anthony Paul Betts, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
A.
Dean Betts of Seaford, Del.
The Rev.
Katherine Lehman officiated at the Unitarian-Universalist ceremony at the Shoreham Club.
Dr.
Morris Betts, 32 years old, is a third-year resident at Abington (Pa.) Memorial Hospital.
She is a graduate of Dartmouth College and received her medical degree from the State University of New York at Stony Brook.
Her father, who is retired, was a nuclear physicist at the Brookhaven National Laboratory in Upton, L.I.
Her mother, Lynn P. Morris, who is also retired, was the assistant principal of Coram (L.I.) Elementary School.


Marchers Demand that the Government Focus On the Cities


ABOUT CARS: A Quick Trip Through the Mailbag; Battle of the Tanks
Dear Sir:
Regarding your column on the Honda Civic VX, I think you will find that the "champ at passing gas stations" is the Geo Metro XFi, not the Civic.
Also, the purchase price of the Metro is nearly half that of the Civic, but I would expect that the performance and ride of the Metro would not be up to the Civic.
ROBERT W. BREILING Malvern, Pa.
The point was that the Civic is the champion when it comes to range.
With an 11.9-gallon tank and a highway rating of 55 miles per gallon, it can travel 654.5 miles between fill-ups.
You are right, though, that the Metro is the most fuel-efficient of today's cars, with a rating of 58 m.p.g.
Unfortunately, its 10.6-gallon tank means that it needs to be fed every 615 miles or so.


TALES FROM THE BABY FACTORY
A bright spot in Ellen Hopkins's article on infertility ("Tales From the Baby Factory," March 15) was the potential of a new technology called Natural Cycle Ovum Retrieval and Intravaginal Culture Fertilization (IVC).
My husband and I had success with this new procedure, aften 10 years of futile attempts to conceive and many thousands of dollars spent for painful injections of hormonal drugs.
Poorer, older, exhausted, we nevertheless agreed to one last try using IVC.
Miraculously, we conceived in the first month and our son, Paul, was born on Feb. 14.
I felt good about IVC from the beginning.
My doctor retrieved the single egg I had produced in my normal monthly cycle and combined it with my husband's sperm in a tiny vial, which was placed in my vagina to incubate for 48 hours.
Two days later, the vial was removed and the resulting embryo was inserted into my uterus via catheter.
Not only was IVC less painful physically and emotionally, but it was far less expensive than our many unsuccessful attempts using drugs.


Cardigan's The True Fit
To the Sports Editor:
In "Sports Do Not Bestow Character" (The Times, May 3), Heywood Hale Broun wrote that Lord Raglan led the Light Brigade into the valley of death during the Crimean War.


Osborn Elliott Surveys His Troops
Osborn Elliott, the magazine editor turned city official turned revolutionary who organized today's march on Washington, is not known for understatement.
"I believe this march could change the course of this country," he said early this morning.
Nothing, he seemed to feel, would stop it.


Using the Theater as a Tool To Build Up Character
TINA SATTIN describes opening night as though it were yesterday: how the leading lady lost her voice, so that Ms.
Sattin, the standby, had to go on.
How seven critics walked out when the substitution was announced, but one stayed to see the show.
How that one review the next day was a rave, but the paragraph praising Miss Sattin was accidentally left out of The Daily Argus, her hometown newspaper in Mount Vernon.
It was New Year's Eve, 1969, when the play "To Be Young, Gifted and Black," based on the writings of Lorraine Hansberry, opened at the Cherry Lane Theater in Manhattan.
The play was an adaptation by her husband, the late Robert Nemiroff, of the published and unpublished works of Miss Hansberry, a playwright who died in 1965 at the age of 34.


The Chanel Platform
WHAT: Karl Lagerfeld, Chanel's designer, has canonized the cork-soled platform sandal.
The price is a reassuring $615, which includes: one two-inch cork sole, one four-and-a-half-inch cork heel, one black suede-on-leather vamp and one ankle strap with Velcro closure, joined to the sole by two suede-on-leather strips.
The shoe extends the silhouette of Chanel's lower hemlines, which can look dowdy with flat shoes.
The look is monumental, even architectural.
The ground floor presents massed forms that look like pitted sandstone.
The second story elaborates a sophisticated line that plays off against the bulk below.


Saigon, in Transition and in a Hurry
Sunday evening in Ho Chi Minh City.
At first it sounds like the beginning of "Apocalypse Now," with the growling
whumf-whumf
of American helicopters prowling across the paddy fields, reconning raw material for the ultimate body count.
But standing outside the Majestic Hotel, at the beginning of Dong Khoi Street by the sinuous Saigon River, these days, one sees an almost stranger phenomenon: countless motorbikes, motor scooters and motorcycles, like enraptured mosquitoes, their little motors revved as high as possible, carrying neatly dressed young men and women in a continuous formation down Dong Khoi toward the river, then up Nguyen Hue and around again, for hours at a time.


Corrections
An article on May 3 about Bryant Park in Manhattan referred incorrectly to the landscape architectural firm in charge of the redesign.
It is Hanna/Olin.


Grace Ellen Poole, Alexander Benn
Grace Ellen Poole, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas M. Poole of Princeton, N.J., was married there yesterday to Alexander Whittingham Benn, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
T.
Alexander Benn of Short Hills, N.J.
The Rev.
Dr.
Richard J. Lichti of the Reformed Church of Bronxville, N.Y., performed the ceremony at the Miller Chapel at Princeton Theological Seminary.
Mrs.
Benn is an actress in regional theaters and national commercials.
She was a founder of the Playground Theater in New York.
She graduated from Lehigh University.
Her father, a former Deputy Mayor of Princeton, is a management consultant in Princeton.


Keeping the Seawolf Afloat; In Battle of Budget, Democrats Defend Military Hardware
BEFORE the Soviet Union imploded, the great divide between liberal Democrats and conservative Republicans was defined in large part by their clashes over guns vs. butter.
Now,in an improbable role reversal, Congressional Democrats are challenging the Bush Administration to build more tanks and fighter jets.
This new stance has lent an ironic coloring to the battle over the construction of two Seawolf nuclear submarines, which each cost nearly $2 billion.
The Pentagon says there is no need to build the ships, which were designed to track the Soviet submarine fleet, because a hostile Soviet Navy no longer exists.
But Connecticut's Senator Christopher J. Dodd and Representative Sam Gejdenson, both passionate liberals who spent much of the 1980's opposing the Reagan defense buildup, have coalesced a bloc of Democrats and New England Republicans to guarantee the Seawolf program.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on May 3 about Preston Stephen Fischer, executive producer of the television films "Murder in Texas" and "Criminal Behavior," misstated his credits.
He was supervising producer, not executive producer, of "The Burden of Proof," producer of "The Two Mrs. Grenvilles," "Son of the Morning Star," "Liberace," "Lace" and "Lace II" and executive in charge of production of "Eye on the Sparrow."


Clay Shooting In Virginia
Shooters and spectators can spend an unusual Memorial Day weekend this year at The Homestead resort in Hot Springs, Va., the first United States Open Sporting Clays Championships, May 22 to 24.
Sporting clays competition is fairly new in this country, but it has a long history as a British shotgun sport.
In the competition, in which shooters of all abilities can take part, participants fire at six-inch-round clay targets from 12 stations along a milelong course.
Each station presents the targets in different ways that replicate the sudden and erratic flights of game birds such as grouse, quail, ducks and pheasant.
The competitors move from stand to stand to complete the course.
Spectators can stroll along the course and safely watch from sites behind the shooters.
A smaller version of the 12-stand course, with five adjacent stands, will also be a competitive event.
The competition will be open to teams and individuals in several categories -- men, women, seniors and juniors -- and judged according to five skill levels.
Winners, 31 in all, will take home cash and prizes, and a drawing among the participants will determine the winner of a 1992 Ford Explorer.


California With a New York Edge
AFTER HENRY
By Joan Didion. 319 pp. New York: Simon &amp; Schuster. $22.


Super Croats
The phrase "model wars" has taken on a whole new meaning.
On Thursday, Ford Models Inc. sent Dominique Caffin to Croatia to hold a regional contest for its annual Super Model of the World competition, to be held in Los Angeles in June.


King Leaves Challengers In Her Bogeyless Wake
With metronomic precision, Betsy King extended her lead in the Mazda L.P.G.A.
Championship today over a gasping field.
King's bogeyless four-under-par 67 gave her a 54-hole total of 12-under-par 201, five shots better than 27-year-old Helen Alfredsson of Sweden and six shots ahead of 53-year-old Joanne Carner and Julie Inkster, who shot the low round of the day with a 66.


Fresh Air Fund Hosts to Repeat Shared Blessings
Vivien and Paul Ian Tartter live and work in Manhattan, but on weekends and vacations they leave the city with their two sons, ages 6 and 2, for their house on seven wooded acres in Connecticut.
The couple usually seek peace and quiet, but last summer they decided to invite another 6-year-old from a poor neighborhood in New York City for a two-week vacation.


Driver, 20, Is Charged in Pedestrian's Death
A 20-year-old man from Spring Valley, N.Y., whose driver's license was suspended in January, struck and killed a pedestrian crossing Park Avenue at 87th Street late Friday, the police said.
The driver, Kevin B. Swift, was charged with speeding and driving with a suspended license.


Basic Prep: $45
In 1919, if we're to believe the hang tag, Bradford Dexter Bagg, preppie of yore, uncovered a cache of his father's old button-down shirts in a Midwestern attic and brought them East to college, where they inspired a campus fashion.
Today, B. D. Baggies makes those same extra-roomy, Oxford-cloth shirts, 100 percent cotton and prelaundered, in delicious candy stripes and solids.
The big draw is the cotton drawstring bags they're packed in, prominently marked with country of origin (this one).
The English, especially, love them.
So do the Japanese.
Hudson's sells them for $45.


A Daunting Challenge for Graduates
STARTING out or starting over -- either way, finding a job these days can be difficult.
For many recent college graduates and for experienced workers, obtaining employment in a changing marketplace is becoming daunting.
Although most job seekers do not need an expert to confirm what they already know from personal experience, economists and labor-market analysts -- while not describing a hopeless situation -- report that not only are the jobs few and the competition keen but also that this situation is not likely to change dramatically in the near future.


MAY 10-16: Los Angeles; One Officer in Taped Beating Will Be Tried Again
One of the four Los Angeles police officers acquitted in the beating of a black motorist will be tried again on the single charge in the case that the jury deadlocked on.
The state judge who presided over the trial in suburban Simi Valey said Officer Laurence M. Powell would face a new trial on the count of assault "under color of authority." If convicted, he faces up to six years in prison.
On the videotape, Officer Powell is seen hitting Rodney G. King as many as 56 times with his nightstick.
Judge Stanley M. Weisberg said the first trial's evidence -- presumably the videotape -- required that Officer Powell be retried.


Crossovers Anonymous
FROM ISTANBUL'S Galata Bridge linking Europe with Asia to Prague's Charles Bridge with its Baroque statues or San Francisco's iconic Golden Gate, bridges lend character and definition to landscape and cityscape alike.


District Attorney, Fond of Publicity, May Be Wilting in Spotlight's Heat
Two years ago, Ira Reiner, the Los Angeles County District Attorney, was the favorite in the race for California attorney general and from there, the political oddsmakers said, he might even have a shot at the governor's mansion.
But now, wounded by his office's failure to win convictions in the Rodney G. King beating case, Mr.
Reiner faces a strong challenge in the election on June 2 and may even lose his post.


Meghan M. Miller, Christopher R. Creedon
Meghan Marie Miller, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph H. Miller of New Canaan, Conn., was married yesterday to Christopher R. Creedon, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard S. Creedon of Chatham, Mass.
The Rev.
James F. Buckley officiated at the Holy Redeemer Roman Catholic Church in Chatham.


Seeing Challenges Instead of Problems
He likes to begin his day on a treadmill, walking fast and getting nowhere.
This might be an apt metaphor for some beleaguered urban officials, but not for Lee P. Brown, New York City's relentlessly confident Police Commissioner, whose invariable answer to how things are going is, "Outstanding."
The last two weeks have seen striking ups and downs for the department he heads but have not shaken the equanimity of the 54-year-old police scientist and career officer.


Conversations/Radovan Karadzic; Understanding, and Letting Loose, Historic Hatreds in the Balkans
IN the Europe of the earlier part of this century, its history repeatedly knocked askew by events in the southeastern corner of the continent, the word Balkan became a synonym for things obscure, laden with unpleasant surprises, menacing.
It seemed like a good word to ponder approaching an encounter with Radovan Karadzic, the man who as much as any is bound up with the bizarre and frightening events in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Normally, (if anything about Bosnia's violent destruction can be called normal), Mr.
Karadzic is to be found here and there in the mountainous republic, a pimpernel of a politician who leads the 1.4 million Bosnian Serbs and their powerful militias.
But on this day, he was not moving behind a phalanx of bodyguards in the blasted precincts of Sarajevo, the Bosnian capital, or plotting strategy at his headquarters in Pale, a resort village outside Sarajevo that was base for the Alpine events in the 1984 winter Olympic Games.


Street Rage Invades a Boston Church Funeral
Violence is no stranger to the Mattapan section of Boston, a neighborhood of aging buildings, poverty and all the other ills familiar to the inner city.
But the Rev.
John Borders 3d and the congregation of his neat red-brick Morning Star Baptist Church had always considered themselves safe while at worship, immune to harm in their sanctuary.
An act of rage and numbing cruelty changed all that this week.
Some members of the congregation say they are now afraid to even attend church.
The incident occurred Thursday night at a funeral for the 20-year-old victim of a drive-by shooting.
Suddenly the service was interrupted by a dozen young men, sweatshirt hoods pulled up over their heads, who singled out one mourner, chased him around the church, threw chairs at him and stabbed him eight times.


Dodger Pitching Hopeful Arrested
KEITH (KIKI) JONES, a promising pitcher in the Los Angeles Dodgers' organization, was arrested on charges he falsely reported his car stolen and collected the insurance money, Tampa, Fla., police said.


Orchids Unveiled In San Francisco
As their habitats in the Andes mountains in South America have disappeared, some of the last specimens of rare cool-growing orchids are preserved at the Conservatory of Flowers in Golden Gate Park in San Francisco.
In March the conservatory opened to the public its collection of 2,800 Masdevallia and Dracula orchids, varieties that thrive in cool climates -- 70 degrees in the daytime and 50 degrees at night.
The collection is air-conditioned.


MAY 10-16: Presidential Race; Clinton, All but Clinched, Ponders Vice Presidents
Governor Bill Clinton won two more primaries this week, in West Virginia and Nebraska, and now has 80 percent of the delegates he needs.
The race for the Democratic nomination is considered a done deal; the real buzz now is over his choice of running mate and how he will deal with the Perot Problem.
The Arkansas Governor formed a panel to look at potential running mates last week.
He faces the basic choices: whether and how to balance the ticket geographically, ideologically and demographically.
And experientially -- to wit, whether, in this year of the outsider, to seek some Washington expertise in a running mate?


Pushing Classicism To Extremes
AFTER NEARLY A YEAR, THE Sainsbury Wing has settled so comfortably into the landscape of Trafalgar Square that it is hard to imagine the brouhaha that this addition to the National Gallery caused when it opened.
"Picturesque mediocre slime"?
"An insult both to the National Gallery and to London"?
"A vulgar American piece of post-modern Mannerist pastiche"?
A what?
There hasn't been a gentler public building put up in London since Sir Christopher Wren.
And far from being a violation of all things English, as these steaming British critics would have us believe, it is in some ways the most characteristically English building of the age.


Mirabella Wins Fight for a Star Star
The astrologist Patric Walker has landed.
At least two magazines, Conde Nast Traveler and Mirabella, bid for Mr.
Walker's monthly horoscope column, which had been published in the now-defunct magazine European Travel &amp; Life.
Last week, Mirabella signed him.
"Our lives have changed since we got him," says Gay Bryant, Mirabella's editor in chief.
"He's so much more encouraging and believable than any other horoscope I know of."


Free Sex? Not Now, Love
SHIRTWAISTS and sweater-sets are in style.
Communism, everyone agrees, is a terrible idea.
And while sex may be talked about and thought about, no one thinks anyone should actually
have
it.
The '90s are feeling more and more like the '50s all the time.


Come On In. Sit Right Down And Pull Up Your, er, Monkey?
VISITORS to John and Mary Risley's home in Middletown are quite likely to find themselves seated on a moose, an oryx, a kitten, an angel, a mermaid or even a bejeweled woman.
It's not that there isn't plenty of conventional seating available, it's just that the animal and people chairs created by Mr.
Risley, a sculptor and former professor of art at Wesleyan University, are so inviting.
The chairs, which are fabricated of cold roll steel rods using an acetylene and oxygen welding technique, are surprisingly comfortable as well.
Mr.
Risley sprays the furniture with black paint.
"Black echoes the hardness of the steel," he said.
"I tried painting the card people different colors but it didn't seem to work." he added, referring to the queens of hearts and diamonds, the kings of clubs and spades that with matching card table would make an appropriate setting for bridge enthusiasts.


No Progress In Finding Executive
Investigators appeared no closer yesterday to solving the disappearance of Sidney J. Reso, the Exxon executive who vanished last month from his home in Morris Township, N.J., despite a new note from his purported kidnappers and a televised appeal by his wife for his safe return.
Lacking hard evidence that the 57-year-old president of Exxon International was actually kidnapped, the authorities continued to list his disappearance as a missing-person case.
They said requests for a photograph, a tape recording, a handwriting sample or any other sign that he was being held had been ignored.


Corrections
A picture caption in Styles of the Times last Sunday with an article about Swatch watches misstated the estimated value of one model.
Keith Haring's Modele Avec Personnages is estimated to be worth $2,240 to $2,400, not $22,400 to $24,000.


Absence of Blacks in Ads Costs Developer
A Federal jury this week directed the owner of a suburban Virginia housing development to pay $850,000 to a group of plaintiffs for having used only white people as models in the development's advertising.
Legal experts said the verdict, returned Thursday, might be the largest award ever made by a jury in a housing discrimination case.
Although the law at issue, the Federal Fair Housing Act, was enacted in 1968, it was not until two years ago that Congress removed the legislation's $1,000 ceiling on jury awards.


Networking; The Expanding Terrain of CD-ROM
The CD-ROM is coming into its own on networks as more and more network administrators realize that compact disks are a relatively inexpensive way to put vast amounts of specialized information at the fingertips of users.
This trend was evident at the National Online Meeting held recently in New York.
The meeting's traditional audience is corporate librarians and professional researchers who use dial-up computer data bases to get information.
But technological changes and the rapid growth of networks are blurring the edges of the subject matter at the conference and who attends it and exhibits material.
So while the librarians still attended, so did LAN administrators and companies selling CD-ROM equipment and disks.


Corrections
A picture caption on the Evening Hours page of Styles of the Times last Sunday misidentified a guest at the arts auction for AIDS program of the Village Nursing Home.
He was James Rosenquist, not Jasper Johns.


Coming to America
A record 1.8 million immigrants were given permanent residency in the United States last year, most of them under six-year old amnesty programs for illegal aliens.
More than 1.1 million of them were already living in the United States when they received permanent status, according to the Immigration and Naturalization Service; the rest arrived in the country last year.
For the past three years the number of persons granted permanent residency has increased sharply as a result of the 1986 Immigration Reform and Control Act, which granted amnesty to illegal aliens who could show that they had lived in the country on a continuous basis since 1982.


The Thrifty Traveler in 10 World Cities; Rio de Janeiro
Finding a place to stay is only one of many choices facing the traveler on a tight budget.
Here are suggestions on where to eat, what to do and what not to do from 10 New York Times correspondents in cities around the world.


Stephanie Long, Thomas P. Kikis
Stephanie Long, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Anthony C. Long of Newport News, Va., was married there yesterday to Thomas Peter Kikis, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Peter T. Kikis of New York.
The Rev.
Peter Macris performed the Greek Orthodox ceremony at the Church of SS.
Constantine and Helen.


S. A. Schelkunoff, 95, Researcher And Developer of Coaxial Cable
Dr.
Sergei A. Schelkunoff, an inventor and expert on electromagnetism who 60 years ago researched the coaxial cable now widely used for television transmission, died on May 2 at the Meadow Lakes Health Care Center in Hightstown, N.J.
He was 95 years old.
He died of a heart ailment, a funeral home spokesman said.


Sampras Is Finally Ready to Dig In and Play on the Clay
Like a flag at half-mast, his shoulders seem permanently fixed in a shrug that could be apologetic, apathetic, or simply an expression of the non-aggrandizing posture they don't teach in Dale Carnegie's course -- or anywhere else.
But no wonder Pete Sampras hasn't learned to strut.
He's at a career-high No. 3 in the world, he's merely 20 years old, in 1990 he became the youngest United States Open champion in history, and still, wherever he goes, it's the same old litany: What's wrong with Pete Sampras?
What has this one-slam-wonder done lately?
"If I don't play well, people say I wasn't trying; if I'm on, they say it's just a matter of serving genius, not effort," said Sampras.
"I've said from Day One that I'm a guy who lets his racquet do the talking." Sampras is at his most articulate during his service motion -- which happens, naturally, to be silent and virtually unreadable.


In Boston, A Blend of Wit And Pathos
THESE HAVE NOT BEEN FLUSH times in the art world, and they've been particularly rough on the Museum of Fine Arts here.
Largely because of a costly expansion program in the 80's, combined with serious lack of foresight, the museum has incurred multimillion-dollar problems.
It has laid off dozens of employees and entered into an agreement to rent parts of its collection to a new museum in the Japanese city of Nagoya.
Less controversially, and like an increasing number of museums around the country, it has also begun to stress exhibitions based on its own collection instead of expensive loan shows.
Richard Artschwager's smart, and in places unexpectedly affecting, exhibition is an example.
On view through July 26, it is the last installment in the museum's Connections series, overseen by the curator of contemporary art, Trevor Fairbrother.
For the series, artists were invited to juxtapose their own works with works from the collection.


Tarpley Ejected in First U.S.B.L. Game
He was the class of the court, flashing across the lane with an assortment of finger rolls, dunks and even a behind-the-back dipsy-do layup, but what really showed that ROY TARPLEY was still on the National Basketball Association wavelength occurred just before the end of the first half of his United States Basketball League debut in Miami Friday night.
Jockeying for rebounding position, Tarpley, a former Dallas Maverick who was banned by the N.B.A. for drug and alcohol offenses last October and has now joined the U.S.B.L.
Miami Tropics, got N.B.A. physical with Atlanta's SCOTT BAILEY.


New Cast of Characters Skating in Bruins' Den
As the Boston Bruins prepare to play the Pittsburgh Penguins, think of the Adams Division playoff champions in part as the Albertville All-Stars, with five late arrivals from the Olympics adding youth, speed and enthusiasm to Boston's surprising post-season push.
Joe Juneau is the best of the bunch, supported by Hynes and Heinze (Gord and Stephen) along with Donato and Donatelli (Ted and Clark).
They joined the journeymen Sweeneys (Bob and Don) right after the Olympic Winter Games in France.


Washington Marchers Demand Attention to the Cities
Warning that the riots in Los Angeles were a symptom of widespread anger, tens of thousands of city dwellers marched through the capital today to demand that President Bush and Congress focus their attention -- and money -- on the cities.
As high school bands played marching tunes and buses arrived from cities along the East Coast, politicians, labor leaders and civil rights advocates criticized the Government.
They said that while the Defense Department had received money for major weapons programs throughout the 1980's, Federal aid for urban programs was cut by almost two thirds to less than $15 billion.


The Menaces of Everyday Life
TIME AND TIDE
By Edna O'Brien. 326 pp. New York: Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $21.


Ms. Hallenbeck, H. M. Carlson
Catherine DeWolfe Hallenbeck, a daughter of William J. Hallenbeck of Pound Ridge, N.Y., and Patricia D. Hallenbeck of Petaluma, Calif., was married yesterday in San Francisco to Hilding Mark Carlson, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Hilding D. Carlson of Los Altos Hills, Calif.
The Rev.
Robert Conover performed the ceremony at the Calvary Presbyterian Church.
Mrs.
Carlson, 25 years old, is an associate at Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company in San Francisco.
She and her husband graduated from the University of Pennsylvania.
Her father is the advertising director of We/My, a weekly newspaper in English and Russian that is published in Washington and Moscow.
Her mother is a family therapist at Youth Advocates of Marin in San Rafael, Calif.


Contemplating Women's Lives
To the Editor:
Blanche Wiesen Cook's interpretation of Eleanor Roosevelt as an ardent feminist is a result of sincere but wishful thinking.
The struggle for women's rights was not Mrs.
Roosevelt's priority.
Although she was, at times, its important spokesman and ally, Mrs.
Roosevelt was motivated by her love of
mankind,
as shown by the following excerpt from one of her letters to my husband, Dr.
A.
David Gurewitsch (April 17, 1948): "The people I love mean more to me than all the public things even if you do think that public affairs should be my chief vocation. I only do the public things because I really love all people, and I only
love
all people because there are a few people whom I love dearly and who matter to me above everything else.
These are not so many, and of them, you are now one.
And I shall just have to try not to bother you too much."


Shut Your Eyes, Spin, Then Face North
The human brain, a scientist said last week, is peppered with billions of microscopic magnets.
What they are doing there is anybody's guess.
Bacteria, bees, pigeons, salmon, whales and other beings somehow form biological bar magnets from magnetite crystals and navigate along the Earth's electromagnetic fields, said Dr.
Joseph L. Kirschvink, a professor of geobiology at the California Institute of Technology in Pasadena.
Whales, he believes, beach themselves at geomagnetic anomalies, and bee compasses can be reversed so they fly in other directions.


Topics of The Times; Yankee Doodles
The older you get, the less likely you are to doodle.
The Faber-Castell Corporation, the pencil people, came up with this classic trivia in a survey of a thousand American adults.
Among the young, under 25, it found that almost everyone doodles -- 93 percent.
In each higher age bracket, the percentage was smaller, bottoming out at 60 percent for 65's and older.
Women doodle more circles and curves than anything else, and more of them than men do.
Men do more squares, rectangles and designs with straight lines.
About one in four of both sexes do symbols, such as stars and arrows.
Men also do cars a lot.
Both sexes sketch people -- or parts of people -- least of all.


A STITCH IN TIME
I once visited the Franklin D. Roosevelt home in Hyde Park, N.Y., and saw, in a collection of memorable photographs, a picture of Eleanor Roosevelt, when she was representative to the United Nations.
She is sitting in a large lecture hall, listening intently; in her hands are knitting needles, with a sweater in progress.


Groundwater
To the Editor:
Stephen Hess, president of the developers' Association for a Better Long Island, is correct in saying in his letter on May 3 that groundwater can be protected by cluster development with covenants guaranteeing perpetual open space for the rest of the property.
But location, type and overall development density are much more important.


Making a Difference; Mr. Yost's New Line
In the mid-80's, the Allen-Bradley Company garnered raves in manufacturing circles for the design of the automated production line at its Milwaukee headquarters for one of its most prosaic products: a contactor for turning industrial motors on and off.
At the time, though, Larry Yost, the executive in charge of operations in the industrial control business, had his eye on a future in which a growing number of his products were likely to be electronic machine controllers, vision systems and similar solid-state devices.
One result of that vision, a new circuit board assembly line in Milwaukee, is now being shown off for the first time and it looks as if the 54-year-old Mr.
Yost and his colleagues are in for a new round of praise and visits.


If You're Thinking of Living in: Cold Spring Harbor
THE first inhabitants of Cold Spring Harbor were Matinecock Indians, who discovered fresh-water springs under a salt waterharbor.
They called it Wawapex, "at the good little water place."
"You can actually dip your bucket in and pull up fresh water if you know the right spot," says Rufus Langhans, the Huntington Town historian.


District Attorney, Fond of Publicity, May Be Wilting in Spotlight's Heat
Two years ago, Ira Reiner, the Los Angeles County District Attorney, was the favorite in the race for California attorney general and from there, the political oddsmakers said, he might even have a shot at the governor's mansion.
But now, wounded by his office's failure to win convictions in the Rodney G. King beating case, Mr.
Reiner faces a strong challenge in the election on June 2 and may even lose his post.


On Location


A Calm After the Storm at Spoleto?
If the battle-weary staff of the Spoleto Festival U.S.A. had only one wish, it might be to put the turmoil of the last few years behind and get on with the new season, which begins Thursday and runs through June 7.
The festival, an explosion of culture that enlivens this gorgeously preserved center of Southern charm every spring, was started in 1977 by the composer Gian Carlo Menotti, who patterned it after his thriving Festival of Two Worlds in Spoleto, Italy.
A longing to move ahead would be understandable, given the pressures that Spoleto employees have endured.
In September 1989, Hurricane Hugo blew the roof off the restored 18th-century house the festival uses as its headquarters, drenching files and ruining computers.
Some of the performance halls were damaged, too, to say nothing of the rest of Charleston.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: White House; Bush Tells Graduates That Nation Must Face Problems
President Bush preached a doctrine of optimism and self-reliance at Southern Methodist University today, arguing that America is still a rising nation in global affairs and "is certain to remain so, if we refuse to settle for anything less."
But the President drew his strongest response from the 2,433 graduates and their relatives when he conceded the nation's shortcomings, not when he praised its strengths.


ABOUT CARS: A Quick Trip Through the Mailbag; A Large Point, Indeed
Dear Sir:
Since I am a 69-year-old retiree who divides his time between South Florida and New York, your column on older drivers was of special interest.


A STITCH IN TIME
In previous magazine pieces, Perri Klass, physician, wife, mother and prolific author, has stunned me with her multiple accomplishments.
I have wondered: does the woman not need sleep?
Now, in "A Stitch in Time" (Hers, April 19), Klass lets another cat out of the bag: she also knits!
Yes.
And the reason she creates colorful, handmade sweaters for herself and her family, while she is saving children's lives in clinics and attending medical conferences, is so that she won't get
bored
.


AS CANNONS ROAR, U.N. LEAVES BOSNIA
With mortar and artillery battles erupting around them, United Nations peacekeepers today in effect dismantled their headquarters in Sarajevo, the capital of Bosnia and Herzegovina, and evacuated more than 200 staff members.
After hours of negotiations with the commanders of Serbian militia units that encircled Sarajevo, about 80 United Nations vehicles passed through barricades to reach the headquarters in the western suburbs.
The evacuees emerged from bunkers beneath the steel-and-glass headquarters and a nearby accommodation complex where they had taken shelter for two days while Serbian forces shelled the area from the surrounding hills.


Incessant Dripping of Hoses and Faucets
USING an outdoor faucet and garden hose for the first time in the spring sometimes results in a few unpleasant surprises, among them a leaking hose and a faucet that drips after being turned off.
Neither problem is too difficult to resolve.
Hose leaks are usually the result of cracks caused by improper storage.
Pinhole-size leaks can be temporarily repaired by covering them with waterproof duct or electrician's tape.


Corrections
A chart with an brief article last Sunday about money-management firms owned by women or minority entrepreneurs omitted the sixth-largest firm.
It is Ariel Capital Management, which has $1.8 billion in assets under management and 11 employees.


Teen-Agers Get Down To Issues
Like most installments of "Jane," "Young Women in the Ku Klux Klan," broadcast the week after the riots in Los Angeles, started out calmly enough.
A woman named Rachel sat on the stage and explained in cool, even tones why she was a member of the Klan.
A black woman in the audience stood up and decried white separatism, her voice rising with emotion.
More guests came out and denied that the Klan perpetrated hate crimes.
A black couple described how their home had been vandalized by a white supremacy group.
The young, racially mixed audience began shouting angrily at the Klan members.
The Klan members shouted back.
"Keep it down! Keep it down!" screamed Jane Pratt, the host of the new Channel 5 talk show.
"That means panelists, too!" One young supremacist nastily noted that Ms.
Pratt didn't seem capable of controlling her audience.
Cut to a commercial.


TODAY'S SECTIONS
Special Today: The Sophisticated Traveler/Magazine Part 2 Speical Today: Summer Arts/Section 2A
A guide to cultural events around the nation.


Dietrich Buried in Berlin, and Sentiment Is Mixed
Marlene Dietrich, the film star who embodied not only the fantasies of millions but also aspects of the complex German psyche, was buried today in her native Berlin, where people are still not sure what to make of her.
Several hundred mourners crowded around the entrance to the small cemetery where Miss Dietrich was laid to rest.
When the open black Cadillac carrying her coffin appeared, they applauded, threw flowers and called her name.


Those Weeklong Repairs May Be Done by '95
In late December 1990, New York City transportation officials shut down a subway line that runs across the Manhattan Bridge after inspectors found corrosion, sheared bolts and missing steel plates that help support the tracks over the bridge's large structural beams.
So bad was the damage beneath the tracks of the N line that a beam lacking a support plate had slipped to wheret it was within a half-inch of falling off its support.
That would have caused the track to sag, city engineers said, and a derailment easily could have resulted.
When they closed the two N tracks on the south side of the bridge, city officials said that repairs would take about a week.
But N trains have not run on the bridge for the last 16 months, and transit officials said last week that the trains would not return until the fall of 1995, at the earliest.


Residential Resales
Closings in the week ended May 2  MANHATTAN  Battery Park City 180,000
200 Rector Place  (Liberty Court)  1-bedroom, 1-bath, 648-sq.-ft. condo in a 5-year-old building; 24-hr. doorman, concierge, partial Hudson River view; common charge $476, taxes $1,688 (Broker: Tabak Real Estate)  Carnegie Hill 1.225 million
1170 Fifth Avenue (98th St.)  4-bedroom, 4-bath, 2,500-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, 2 maid's rooms, dining room, library, 2 exposures, Central Park view; maintenence $2,578, 31% tax-deductible (Brokers: Carnegie Hill Properties-Corcoran Group)  TriBeCa 315,000
80 Warren Street  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,650-sq.-ft. duplex co-op in a loft building; skylights, 2 exposures; maintenance $953, 50% tax-deductible (Broker: Bascom &amp; Sears)  Upper West Side 315,000
411 West End Avenue (80th St.)  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,100-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, dining foyer, Hudson River view; maintenance $1,087, 43% tax-deductible (Broker: Bellmarc Realty)  Upper West Side 535,000
10 West 86th Street  2-bedroom, 3-bath, 1,600-sq. ft. co-op in a prewar building; 24-hr. doorman, maid's room, dining room, renovated kitchen and bath; maintenance $1,575, 32% tax-deductible (Brokers: Klara Madlin Real Estate- Wells &amp; Gay/Stribling &amp; Associates)  BRONX  Riverdale 53,000
640 West 239th Street  1-bedroom, 1-bath, 800-sq.-ft. postwar co-op; dining room, 3 exposures; maintenance $389, 53% tax-deductible (Broker: Trebach Realty)  Spuyten Duyvil 100,000
2500 Johnson Avenue  (Winston Churchill)  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 1.600-sq.-ft. postwar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, concierge, dining area, terrace, 2 exposures; maintenance $1,262, 68% tax-deductible (Broker: Charles G. Brophy &amp; Associates)  BROOKLYN  Carnarsie 218,000
2-family, attached, brick house; 4 bedrooms, 2 1/2 baths in primary duplex unit; 2 bedrooms, 1 bath in simplex; dining room, den in each; finished basement, 2-car garage, 20- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $2,152 (Broker: Jacob Gold Real Estate)  Sheepshead Bay 172,500
2118 East 23d Street  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, single-family, semi-attached, aluminum-sided house; dining room, full basement, 1-car garage, 22- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,000 (Broker: Sure Sale Realty)  Sheepshead Bay 214,000
2256 East 26th Street  2-family, attached, brick house; 3 bedrooms, 1 1/2 baths, dining room in primary unit; 1 bedroom, 1 bath in other; 1-car garage, 20- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,358 (Broker: Maryl Realty)  QUEENS  Astoria Heights 65,000
22-40 80th Street  (Barclay Gardens)  1-bedroom, 1-bath, 535-sq.-ft. condo; dining area, windowed kitchen, private entry; common charge $185, taxes $900 (Broker: Rose Marie Realty)  Elmhurst 257,000
88-42 50th Avenue  2-family, brick, attached contemporary; 2 bedrooms, 1 bath, dining room in each unit; finished basement, 2-car garage, 20- by 94-ft. lot; taxes $2,030 (Broker: Kremer Real Estate)  STATEN ISLAND  Bulls Head 190,000
190 Merril Avenue  3-bedroom, 1-bath, single-family, detached, ranch; dining room, c/a, 1-car garage, 74- by 105-ft. lot; taxes $1,900 (Broker: RE-MAX Preferred)  Rosebank 92,000
20 Cliff Street  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 790-sq.-ft. postwar co-op; dining area, remodeled kitchen, outdoor pool, 2 terraces, harbor view; maintenance $578, 43% tax-deductible (Broker: Gateway Arms Realty)


Ware Works Toward a Trophy Season
BACK home in the city where he remains a strong role model and a favorite son, Andre Ware arrives at Gold's Gym prepared for a grueling workout that will last nearly six hours, complete with weight lifting and aerobics.
Ware is confident that the 1992 National Football League season, his third as a Detroit Lions quarterback after winning the 1989 Heisman Trophy at the University of Houston, will be different from the first two.
Something has to give, he said.
This was Thursday at 1 P.M., a few days after he had completed spring courses at the University of Houston where he continues to work toward his degree in business management.
Now his complete focus is on football.
On becoming a starter.
On fulfilling his promise.
In 32 regular-season games with the Lions, he has made one start -- and that in his rookie year, when he was pulled at halftime in a game against the Minnesota Vikings, with Detroit trailing by only 7-0.
He has played in only six regular-season games as a Lion.
He has attempted only 30 passes.
He is frustrated, which is evident as he munches on a sandwich between the weight lifting and the aerobics.


Unscarred U.S.C. Tries To Silence Fear of Riots
Two weeks after rioters pillaged nearby businesses and the smoke of burning buildings filled the sky over the University of Southern California, the university is waging a campaign to calm jittery nerves and protect its reputation as an idyllic campus in the midst of urban decay.
In the university's brand new telemarketing center filled with computers, a room that is normally used in the school's fund-raising drives, students, parents, employees and alumni have been calling prospective freshmen to encourage them to attend the college that was in the middle of the battle zone.


Sara White, Paul Lennon
Sara Creighton White, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John R. White of Lincoln, Mass., was married yesterday in Lincoln to Dr.
Paul Francis Lennon, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Hugh J. Lennon of Upper Saddle River, N.J.
The Rev.
Nancy Rockwell performed the ceremony at the First Parish in Lincoln Unitarian and Congregational Church.
Mrs.
Lennon, 32 years old, is a partner in Abboud &amp; White, a graphic-design firm in Acton, Mass.
She is a graduate of Wesleyan University and has a master's degree in English and American literature from the University of Virginia.
Her father, who is retired, was a senior vice president with Arthur D. Little Inc., a consulting company in Cambridge, Mass.


Under the Gun, Some Real Bloopers
THERE were indeed grievous blunders in the semifinal elimination matches April 11-28 in Linares, Spain, to determine who will challenge Gary Kasparov of Russia in the title contest in Los Angeles in the fall of 1993.
The most spectacular were those by Anatoly Karpov of Russia (losing his queen for a rook in Game 6 against the English grandmaster Nigel Short) and by Artur Yusupov of Germany (walking into a mate in one in Game 4 against Jan Timman of the Netherlands).
Tension can do that.


CULTURAL BAGGAGE
Ehrenreich's article underscores the predicament of many.
What happens when your ethnicity is written all over your face, or obvious from your accented speech.
How should you respond when the question of your origin isn't just a polite query but backed up with a clenched fist?
How many minorities daily are reminded of the avenues closed to them, the places too dangerous for them to visit?


And Now, a Word From Off Broadway
SO WHAT ABOUT OFF Broadway?
For the last few months, there hasn't been much opportunity to get out of Times Square.
Broadway, showing uncharacteristic signs of liveliness, has grabbed the lion's share of the attention.
Two weeks from now, when the Tonys are awarded, there'll be even more grabbing.
In the relative calm before that annual orgy of pride and humility, here's a quick look at what's going on in some theaters off the beaten macadam.  'Fires in the Mirror: Crown Heights, Brooklyn And Other Identities'
You could describe Anna Deavere Smith as a documentary film maker who has simply decided to dispense with the camera.
Instead of capturing her subjects on film, she interviews them, then, using their own comments and a few of their mannerisms, portrays them on the stage.
In "Fires in the Mirror: Crown Heights, Brooklyn and Other Identities" (at the Joseph Papp Public Theater), she assumes the personalities of nearly 30 people -- male and female, young and old, famous and anonymous -- caught up in racial unrest.
If the actress weren't vitally concerned with giving us the truth of each of her subjects, the 90-minute piece could easily come off as so much quick-change trickery.
Instead, you are apt to leave the Public thinking that the old saw about every story having two sides vastly underestimates the matter.
To every story, especially one as tangled and inflammatory as this, there are as many sides as there are participants.
The fact that Ms.
Smith takes
all
of them in turn strips the work of any partisanship.
The prevailing tone is curiously cool and distanced, even when the actress is depicting behavior that isn't.
In "Fires in the Mirror," she is looking into the widely reported racial disturbances that rocked a Brooklyn neighborhood almost a year ago.
The trouble began when an automobile, driven by a Hasidic man, leaped the curb and killed Gavin Cato, a 7-year-old black child.
Several hours later, in what appeared to be an act of retaliation, a crowd of angry blacks stabbed Yankel Rosenbaum, a 29-year-old Hasidic rabbinical student visiting from Australia, who died shortly afterward in the hospital.
Battle lines were rapidly drawn.
Riots broke out.
By the time they were over, the Jewish and the black communities were eyeing each other across a deep divide of bitterness and suspicion.
What's notable here is how little it takes to transform Ms.
Smith.
Dressed in black pants and white shirt, the barefoot actress occasionally relies on a prop or a piece of clothing to switch identities.
She's not above modifying her voice or, more often, her vocal rhythms.
But doing impersonations doesn't interest her as much as communicating essences.
If you believe her as the Rev.
Al Sharpton or the feminist rapper Monique (Big Mo) Matthews, as Gavin Cato's father or as Roz Malamud, an indignant Jewish homeowner, as an anonymous drugged-out bystander or Yankel Rosenbaum's outraged brother, it's because the actress commits herself fully to their passionate words.
And the
words
actually remake her -- hardening or softening her features, adding to her height or subtracting from it.
With the rioting in Los Angeles fresh in our minds, the obvious remark to make about "Fires in the Mirror" is that it couldn't be more timely.
Yet the timelessness of the piece is what impressed me.
Put the specifics aside and you have a view of people so at odds with one another that human nature itself seems to be to blame.
We are stubborn creatures, claiming right for ourselves and wrong for the other guy, and that stubbornness repeatedly dooms us to violence.
Nonetheless, we advance a thousand and one reasons, grand and pitiful, to explain why giving an inch just isn't possible.
Beyond the anger that separates the individuals in "Fires in the Mirror" is an unarticulated sadness that binds them together -- if only they knew it. 'Ruthless!'
If Rhoda Penmark, that little darling better known as the bad seed, had craved a show-business career and killed for roles, instead of penmanship medals, she might have turned out rather like Tina Denmark, the pre-teen heroine of "Ruthless!" (at the Players Theater).
Such, at any rate, is the operating assumption of the writer and director Joel Paley and the composer Marvin Laird, who have concocted this brash and campy musical spoof.
As played by Laura Bundy, Tina is what you'd get were you to cross a cherub with a shark -- a cloud of fluffy blond hair, smooth skin, sharp teeth and beady eyes that just dare you to move.
"I was born to entertain," she sings out, in the kind of voice that blows down electrical wires and topples church steeples.
Soon after, she is tap dancing furiously on the living-room coffee table.
When someone suggests that maybe she should postpone her ambitions and enjoy a normal childhood, she snaps back: "I've had a normal childhood. It's time to move on." She's a terror, all right.
In two acts and 14 songs, "Ruthless!" tries to get to the bottom of what is clearly a genetic predisposition toward celebrityhood.
On the surface, Tina's mother (Donna English) seems to be a perfectly normal, if vacant, homemaker in polka dots, while her grandmother, the acid-tongued drama critic Lita Encore (Denise Lor), not only hates musicals, but can barely bring herself to sing her allotted number in this show.
Before long, however, surprise twists are playing havoc with the family tree.
Everybody is coming unglued and lunging desperately for the big time.
That includes Sylvia St.
Croix, an imperious, gravel-throated agent (played by Joel Vig in drag), and the frustrated actress turned third-grade teacher (Susan Mansur) who is directing the production of "Pippi in Tahiti, the Musical," which first stirs the blood lust in Tina.
While "Ruthless!" begins promisingly enough, by the end it has veered off into total inanity -- which is not quite as good as total insanity.
Even the cheerful score has become relentlessly cheerful.
What you have here, I fear, is material for a solid half-hour sketch. (Actually, Carol Burnett would have done it up brown in about 15 minutes.) Dragging it out only drags it down.
The same joke -- people will do anything to be in a show -- is made time and again.
Each time, it's a little less funny.
Still, I'd be lying if I didn't say the musical has its moments.
Ms.
Mansur, as the tyrannical teacher with envy lodged deep in her heart and curls like rusted bedsprings piled high on her head, is responsible for a lot of them. 'Empty Hearts'
Cotter Smith and Mel Harris are a sexy couple and they bring considerable heat to "Empty Hearts," a courtroom drama with flashbacks (at the Circle Repertory Company).
He's a craggy/sensitive type, a Clint Eastwood who can quote Yeats.
She comes on smart and tough -- even her nose flips up defiantly -- but underneath she's appealingly vulnerable and needy.
As soon as they lock eyes, you sense something's going to combust.
They meet at a state hospital, where Mr.
Cotter plays Michael, a psychologist specializing in geriatric care.
She portrays Carol, a volunteer with a young son and a lousy marriage.
In no time, they're going to dinner.
Then, they're going to a motel.
And not too long after that, she's left her loutish husband, and she and Michael, draped with flowers, are headed for the altar.
Mr.
Cotter and Ms.
Harris, who happen to be husband and wife offstage, are thoroughly persuasive in their depiction of buried yearnings and runaway passions.
What the playwright John Bishop gives them to say isn't particularly original.
But the performers put so much oomph of their own into the relationship that you can get easily involved in their mating games.
Unfortunately, that's the flashback part of "Empty Hearts." Its immediate concern is Michael's trial for murder. (Accordingly, the set designer John Lee Beatty has made the inside of the theater into a courtroom.) You, the juror, will gather early on that Carol is the victim, which makes the play not so much a whodunit as a
why
dunit.
But the psychological motive, when it finally surfaces, will not have you tumbling from your seat.
Until then, Mr.
Bishop, who is also the evening's director, hopscotches back and forth between past and present -- the present tending to extinguish whatever excitement is generated by the past.
The supporting players are required to enact two and three roles apiece -- a task that John Dossett accomplishes very convincingly, and Edward Seamon and Susan Bruce accomplish not convincingly at all.
Mr.
Bishop's title is taken from the passing observation that now and again what seems like love is just "empty places desperate to be filled." I wish he'd looked further into the idea.  'One of the All-Time Greats'
In all the years that playwrights have been telling us what happens behind the scenes in the theater -- producing comedies like Moss Hart's "Light Up the Sky," Edna Ferber and George S. Kaufman's "Royal Family," Terrence McNally's "It's Only a Play" -- no one has ever accused show folk of being bland.
Self-centered, unreasonable, jealous, myopic, sentimental, magnificently temperamental, yes.
Bland, no.
The actor and occasional playwright Charles Grodin may be breaking fresh ground.
"One of the All-Time Greats" (at the Vineyard Theater), his comedy about the travails of putting on a Broadway show, is flat and colorless.
The characters -- the director down on his luck; the blustering producer lacking in taste; the young playwright hungry for success; the hotshot director who may be hired as a replacement; plus assorted wives, girlfriends and hangers-on -- is predictability incarnate.
The drama that has brought them all together is an epic called "Thunder Road" and is described as a combination of "Barefoot in the Park" and Kafka.
"One of the All-Time Greats" takes place in the back room of a Chinese restaurant, where these ciphers gather during previews to thrash out personal and artistic differences; then again, after the opening night performance, to await the reviews, which are scalding.
No surprise there.
Momentarily closing ranks, they clap one another on the back in a brave expression of solidarity -- which seems to be the fairly insignificant point of this endeavor.
We may trust in God, but in times of theatrical calamity we embrace.
The actor Tony Roberts, making his directorial debut, stages the evening at such a glacial pace that the obvious becomes only more so.
Renee Taylor, as the luckless director's wryly supportive wife, comes off best.
In view of the evidence elsewhere, I suspect her wryness is a native, not Grodin-given, quality.
It does serve effectively to shield her from professional harm, though.


On Sunday; Young Hopes Ride on a Bus To Washington
"The future of the country is at stake here," Jasper King was saying at 4:30 yesterday morning to his wife and daughter.
They were sipping coffee in their kitchen in the Soundview section of the Bronx.
Yvette looked like a 9-year-old who'd had only six hours of sleep.
Outside, a rooster was crowing.
"I was at the last march," he said.
He meant the "I have a dream" march led by the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr. 29 years ago.
"There was a lot of hope in the air for that one." That's why his daughter and wife and 46 other mainly black and Hispanic parents and children from Public School 182 were riding a bus to Washington at 5:30 A.M. to the Save Our Cities march.


Is It Retro?
FOR most of recorded history, fashions changed ever so slowly.
Half-centuries crawled by before hemlines dropped or tunics loosened.
Now the culture emits messages at a frenetic pace.
Like the shadows cast on the wall of Plato's cave, the images speed by and one can only look and wonder.
One can see sport clothes, bondage wear and a partial return to Victorian bustles on the same fashion runway (Jean-Paul Gaultier).
Or one can see clearly dysfunctional clothes, clothes that make no sense, on both the catwalk and the street.


What the Pursuit of Leisure Required in the 19th Century
THE subject under survey at the Scarsdale Historical Society is fun, 19th century style.
Still, the show has a solemn title, "Yesterday's Sports: Leisure Activities of the 19th Century," and for its contents the curators, Betty Greenebaum, Barbara Hammond and Eda Newhouse, have combed institutions from the American Museum of Fly Fishing to the Lacrosse Foundation, from the Hudson River Museum to the Baseball Hall of Fame.
The largest object is the penny-farthing bicycle, the smallest any one of several trout flies.
These flies are works of art -- brilliant cockades of feathers and fluff, each concealing a barb.
They are juxtaposed with fish lures, one of them a frog, which raises the question of which freshwater fish is attracted to something so large -- a pike, perhaps?
Other implements are rods, reels, an Irish linen line in its original package and a decoy fish that is painted green with white spots and has golden glass eyes.


Powerful Performance In 'Diary of a Madman'
A SHORT but intense adaptation by John Monteleone of Nikolai Gogol's "Diary of a Madman" is at the Dowling College Arts Center in Oakdale through May 23.
The powerful solo performance piece chronicles the slow downward slide of a man from a position of clerk in an indifferent government bureaucracy to his final frantic hours as an inmate in an insane asylum.
Mr.
Monteleone is not only the script's architect, but also plays the title role, and as such he brings to life Gogol's penniless middle-age civil servant, and also all contemporary men drowning in hopelessness and despair.


Corrections
A picture caption on May 3 about the play "Jock" misstated its age and referred incorrectly to two cast members.
The work is having its American premiere, not a revival; the troupe includes Margaret Klenck and Jim Abele.


Mexico City
On a given day, there are 20 million reasons to leave Mexico City; if you live here they are your neighbors.
Then there is the toxic air, the numbing traffic, the maddening pretense of order where clearly none exists.
But places to restore your faith in Mexico are nearby, in any direction.
The ancient village of Tepoztlan, an hour south of the city by toll road, would seem to have had an advantage.
It hides in a ring of hills that rise like great, faceless totems, pulling the edges of the lush valley up with them.
There is only so much room, and all of the artists, anthropologists, hippies and yuppies who have fallen in love with it have never been able to take hold of Tepoztlan from the Nahuatl-speaking people who have always been there.


The March of the Tongue Depressors
BEA'S 4 BEARS
Written and illustrated by Martha Weston.
Unpaged.
New York: Clarion Books. $9.95. (Ages 3 to 5)
EACH ORANGE HAD 8 SLICES
A Counting Book.
By Paul Giganti Jr.
Illustrated by Donald Crews.
Unpaged.
New York: Greenwillow Books. $14. (Ages 3 to 5)
THE ONE THAT GOT AWAY
By Percival Everett.
Illustrated by Dirk Zimmer. 32 pp.
New York: Clarion Books. $14.95. (Ages 4 to 8)
ONE DAY, TWO DRAGONS
By Lynne Bertrand.
Illustrated by Janet Street.
Unpaged.
New York: Clarkson Potter. $14. (Ages 4 to 7)


Dr. Arthur B. Voorhees Jr., 70; Developer of Artificial Arteries
Dr.
Arthur B. Voorhees Jr., who made an accidental laboratory discovery as an intern that inspired him to develop and implant the first successful artificial arteries for human patients, died on May 12 at his home in Albuquerque, N.M.
He was 70 years old and died of brain cancer, his family said.


Legislators Face Their Critics On Housing
THE latest attempt by county legislators to define Westchester's need for affordable housing encountered a critical audience at a public hearing last week, with some claiming that the draft does not go far enough and others complaining that it goes too far and underestimates local housing initiatives.
At the unusual evening hearing conducted by a legislative subcommittee rather than the full Board of Legislators, members listened intently as town supervisors and representatives of municipal planning boards defended their own efforts while housing advocates and social workers accused legislators of promoting a housing program that ignores low-income residents.


Short-Term Urban Policy
Two weeks after the Los Angeles riots, the White House remains focused on the short-term goal of moving its existing urban policies through Congress and shows little sign of beginning work on a broader agenda of new programs to revive the nation's cities.
Although Administration officials acknowledge that President Bush's program is not a complete response either to the riots themselves or to more sweeping urban needs, none of Mr.
Bush's advisers have been asked to draft major new long-range initiatives or significant new spending for cities, the officials said.


Corrections
An article on May 3 about the television series "Northern Exposure" misidentified its post-production coordinator.
He is Steve Turner.


Requiem for a Heavy, or Lighter, Weight
The recent rape conviction of Mike Tyson, the former heavyweight champion, may have cast a shadow over professional boxing, but that hasn't stopped amateur pugilists from pursuing the sport.
Some may dream of actually getting in the ring; most have simply found a new workout regimen.
BIG BOUT: Last Wednesday's three-rounder between Frank Stallone, a brother of Sylvester Stallone, and Geraldo Rivera at Kingsway Boxing Center on West 40th Street, which raised money for the Working Organization for Retarded Children and Adults.
No knockouts there.
Mr.
Stallone won by a unanimous decision.


Susanne Rubenstein, Jonathan Mordoh
Susanne Renee Rubenstein, the daughter of Lois B. Goodman of Chappaqua, N.Y., and Fred V. Rubenstein of Washington, Conn., was married last evening to Jonathan Mordoh, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Maurice Mordoh of Closter, N.J.
Rabbi George Stern officiated at the Marriott Glenpointe Hotel in Teaneck, N.J.
Mrs.
Mordoh, 26 years old, is a producer at Napoleon Videographics, a television-commercial company in New York.
She graduated from Lehigh University.
Her father retired as an executive vice president of Institutional Investor, a financial publication in New York.
Her stepfather, Arthur H. Goodman, is a lawyer and an insurance broker in Briarcliff Manor, N.Y.
The bride is the stepdaughter of Joan K. Rubenstein of Washington.


Trading Town's Flea Market
THE 19th century ended in Santa Fe, N.M., one day last year when the town's first escalator was installed in a building on Lincoln Street.
Once, wagon trains camped here on the Plaza for the summer to do business at the end of the arduous 10-week journey over the Old Santa Fe Trail from Missouri.
Now, people come to see and buy images of that heroic pre-industrial West -- to find things not as they are but as they were -- but it's increasingly hard to find the fantasy in this high-rent district.
Tourists trudge through the Plaza in new Western clothes, stiff boots and souvenir T-shirts, victims of the rage for Western style.
To find 19th-century initiative and Western authenticity, leave the Plaza and head north six miles on the Taos Highway, (Route 84; take the left after the opera house), where pickup trucks, today's wagons, are camped on the dusty mesa with a vast view toward Colorado.
Here, at the flea market, are objects and people with the patina and complexity of New Mexico.


CULTURAL BAGGAGE
I, too, have long wondered about my own lack of ethnic or religious stirrings -- and have felt almost proud about their absence from my life.
Indeed, I am puzzled when people rush to proclaim themselves as members of this group or that, particularly in America.
Carrying such cultural baggage seems to me to run contrary to the idea of being an individual first, necessarily endowed with "skepticism, curiosity and wide-eyed ecumenical tolerance." SHAFFIN SHARIFF
Toronto


A Quick Trip Through the Mailbag
DRIVERS and owners are happy or mad these days, depending.
And, as usual, the letters keep coming in, the lighter ones filled with encomiums, the heavier ones with sledgehammers.
Here's a sampling: Dear Sir:
I find it irritating when you talk about fuel "economy" in cars like BMWs.
I mean really!
Nobody who puts down 50 grand for an inflated German status symbol is worried about how much the gas costs.
Somebody should open a line of prestige gas stations to sell them overpriced gas.
STEVE MILLER Bloomington, Ind.
You've never heard of premium unleaded?


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball American League  BOSTON RED SOX -- Activated John Dopson, pitcher, and Mike Greenwell, outfielder.
Optioned Peter Hoy, pitcher, to Pawtucket of the International League.
Waived Mike Brumley, utilityman.


Super Croats
The phrase "model wars" has taken on a whole new meaning.
On Thursday, Ford Models Inc. sent Dominique Caffin to Croatia to hold a regional contest for its annual Super Model of the World competition, to be held in Los Angeles in June.


What Is Wrong With Arthur's Life?
THE PLAGIARIST
By Benjamin Cheever. 322 pp. New York: Atheneum. $20.


Chandler H. Kibbee, Retired Executive, 84
Chandler H. Kibbee, a retired Philip Morris Companies executive, died on May 8 at the Sheridan County Memorial Hospital in Sheridan, Wyo.
He was 84 years old and lived in Sheridan.
He died of a stroke, his family said.


Looking for Sympathy
To the Editor:
In "Keep Workplace Disputes Out of Court" (Forum, April 26), the authors make the disingenuous point that eliminating jury trials will benefit not only employers but also "workers and their families." This is nonsense.
Any employment-discrimination plaintiff can waive the right to jury trial, but none do because they know a jury is likely to be the most sympathetic forum.
What the authors suggest is to force prospective employees to sign arbitration provisions (what choice does a job hunter have?), which will discourage even valid discrimination claims and thereby increase profits.
JONAH ORLOFSKY  Chicago, April 29


Red Sox Hurt by a Power Failure
The Boston Red Sox have become the Boston No Sox.
A team long feared for its ferocity at Fenway Park, the No Sox have become harmless gnats with their bats there and everywhere.
Mark McGwire has hit more home runs than all of the Boston batters combined.
Entering their game yesterday against the Angels, the No Sox had hit 12 home runs, lowest total in the major leagues.
The Texas Rangers hit 12 home runs in the first seven games of the season.
The Detroit Tigers hit 12 home runs in a six-game span April 19-24; they hit 21 in the 14 games before yesterday.


SWISS UNDERGOING AN IDENTITY CRISIS
Long a symbol of moneyed stability, Switzerland seems abruptly unsure of its place in a world no longer divided into hostile blocs and is in the grips of an identity crisis acute even by Europe's current standards.
The disappearance of the Berlin Wall and the Soviet Union has caused disorientation in most West European countries.
But for Switzerland, which prospered on its reputation as a neutral haven, the new configuration of Europe has been particularly troubling because it has posed the question of whether the model for the country's postwar development remains viable.


This Week's Numbers
Consensus
Last Period
Estimates*
Tuesday
Housing starts, millions
1.37
1.35
Wednesday
Merchandise trade, billions
$-3.4
-4.0
Thursday
New jobless claims, thousands
424
430
Treasury budget, billions
-$49.36
$20
Monday: I.G.
Metall union to vote on whether to strike in Germany *
O.E.C.D. annual meeting begins in Paris
Tuesday: Federal Open Market Committee meeting * OPEC ministerial meeting
Wednesday: Two-year note auction *
OPEC full meeting *
Japanese trade balance *
Governor of the Bank of Japan holds news conference
Thursday: Five-year note auction * German Bundesbank council meets


Report from Milan
The fashion circus pitched its tents in Milan for the fall ready-to-wear collections in early March.
Cowgirls were chic.
Leather was everywhere.
Animal prints roared.
The ringmasters of Italian fashion, Giorgio Armani and Gianni Versace, were in fine form, Armani with his exquisite tailoring and Versace cracking the whip with a collection of wickedly elegant bondage-inspired clothing.
The young design team of Dolce &amp; Gabbana also emerged strongly, with two striking collections.
For their own label, Dolce &amp; Gabbana showed mirror-embroidered suits, satin-lined denim shirt dresses and long, shapely pants suits.
Their collection for Complice had a big-top theme and featured sexy lion tamers in jeweled leather pants, slinky jungle cats in chenille-dot catsuits and funky clowns in candy-striped leggings and battered felt hats.
One gorgeous Emmett Kelly wore a striped jersey and a bouffant skirt made of clouds of coin-dotted tulle.
She will not easily step out of a Volkswagen with a dozen other clowns.


Europe, Weary and Burned, Is Limiting Its Risk in Bosnia
Embarrassed and frustrated by their failure to broker a settlement of the Yugoslav conflict over the last 11 months, European Community governments now seem unwilling to assume new political risks in trying to end the fighting in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The community says it remains ready to act as mediator if conditions improve, and it is also studying whether economic sanctions might force the Serbian-dominated Yugoslav Army to disengage in the Bosnian fighting.
But there is no constituency for deeper European involvement in the crisis.


High-Riding Hamptons Settle Down, but How Far Down?
At the Sagaponack General Store, caterer to the rich and trendy, Mary Spellman is thinking about trying to bolster her business by offering express delivery service of her famous pot pies.
Would people really pay $19 for 24-hour delivery of a pot pie -- even hers -- anywhere in the United States?
A few years ago, there would have been no doubt.
One magazine described how a desperate yuppie could not persuade another customer to sell him the last chicken pot pie for $200.


Glass Blower Thrives in a Corporate Post
CIBA-GEIGY, the international developer and manufacturer of pharmaceuticals and specialty chemicals, has 91,600 employees worldwide -- 17,000 in the United States -- and one of those, Robert W. Wallace, is the glass blower at Ciba-Geigy corporate headquarters here.
Every month, Mr.
Wallace estimates, he produces about 30 original pieces of glassware made to specifications of Ciba-Geigy scientists for use in experiments in the research departments at headquarters.
He also mends pieces of expensive laboratory glassware bought from outside vendors.


Cape Town
One of South Africa's most pleasant weekend getaways is to Franschhoek, a sleepy farm town in a lush valley of the Cape wine country, about 50 miles east of Cape Town.
The town's name means French Corner in Afrikaans, and it was settled three centuries ago by French Huguenots fleeing religious persecution.
They were assimilated into the larger colony of Dutch pioneers, whose descendants all now speak Afrikaans.
But most of the graceful wine estates surrounding Franschhoek retain French names, like La Motte, l'Ormarins and Dieu Donne.
Franschhoek offers pleasant walks in the valley and surrounding mountains or a visit to the Huguenot Memorial Museum.
You can also spend time tasting vintages at the 13 local wineries.
My favorite is the fume blanc, a white sauvignon aged in oak casks imported from France.


The Thrifty Traveler in 10 World Cities; Houston
Finding a place to stay is only one of many choices facing the traveler on a tight budget.
Here are suggestions on where to eat, what to do and what not to do from 10 New York Times correspondents in cities around the world.


VOTES IN CONGRESS
Tally Last Week in Connecticut, New Jersey and New York Senate
1.
Voter Registration: Procedural vote to limit debate on a bill intended to make voter registration easier.
Failed, with 58 in favor and 40 opposed (60 votes were needed), May 12.
2.
Veto Override: Vote to override President Bush's veto of a bill limiting Congressional campaign spending.
Failed, with 57 in favor and 42 opposed (9 votes short of the two-thirds required), May 13.
3.
Liability Limit: Vote to kill a proposal that would establish nationwide standards on how much consumers can recover in suits against manufacturers.
Approved 53 to 45, May 14.
1
2
3
Connecticut
Dodd (D) . . .
Y
Y
N
Lieberman (D) . . .
Y
Y
N
New Jersey
Bradley (D) . . .
Y
Y
Y
Lautenberg (D) . . .
Y
Y
Y
New York
D'Amato (R) . . .
N
N
N
Moynihan (D) . . .
Y
Y
Y
House
1.
Aid to Cities: Vote to approve legislation providing $822 million in disaster-relief grants and small business loans to Los Angeles and Chicago.
Approved 244 to 162, May 14.
1
Connecticut
1. Kennelly (D) . . .
Y
2. Gejdenson (D) . . .
Y
3. DeLauro (D) . . .
Y
4. Shays (R) . . .
N
5. Franks (R) . . .
Y
6. Johnson (R) . . .
N
New Jersey
1. Andrews (D) . . .
Y
2. Hughes (D) . . .
Y
3. Pallone (D) . . .
Y
4. Smith (R) . . .
Y
5. Roukema (R) . . .
N
6. Dwyer (D) . . .
Y
7. Rinaldo (R) . . .
Y
8. Roe (D) . . .
Y
9. Torricelli (D) . . .
Y
10. Payne (D) . . .
Y
11. Gallo (R) . . .
Y
12. Zimmer (R) . . .
N
13. Saxton (R) . . .
Y
14. Guarini (D) . . .
Y
New York
1. Hochbrueckner (D) . . .
Y
2. Downey (D) . . .
Y
3. Mrazek (D) . . .
Y
4. Lent (R) . . .
Y
5. McGrath (R) . . .
Y
6. Flake (D) . . .
Y
7. Ackerman (D) . . .
Y
8. Scheuer (D) . . .
Y
9. Manton (D) . . .
Y
10. Schumer (D) . . .
Y
11. Towns (D) . . .
Y
12. Owens (D) . . .
Y
13. Solarz (D) . . .
Y
14. Molinari (R) . . .
N
15. Green (R) . . .
Y
16. Rangel (D) . . .
Y
17. Weiss (D) . . .
Y
18. Serrano (D) . . .
Y
19. Engel (D) . . .
Y
20. Lowey (D) . . .
Y
21. Fish (R) . . .
Y
22. Gilman (R) . . .
Y
23. McNulty (D) . . .
Y
24. Solomon (R) . . .
N
25. Boehlert (R) . . .
Y
26. Martin (R) . . .
N
27. Walsh (R) . . .
A
28. McHugh (D) . . .
Y
29. Horton (R) . . .
Y
30. Slaughter (D) . . .
Y
31. Paxon (R) . . .
N
32. LaFalce (D) . . .
Y
33. Nowak (D) . . .
Y
34. Houghton (R) . . .
Y
KEY: Y Yea; N Nay; (A) Absent or did not vote; (P) Present.


Russians Not What They Used to Be in Laos, Too
A senior Russian diplomat received a visitor at his modest embassy with a rueful smile.
"You are probably the last to visit us here," he said.
"We are moving to our big new embassy today."
The new chancellery was designed for a relationship that no longer exists.
While there was a Soviet Union, it was this impoverished country's main source of economic, technical and military sustenance.
"Now our relations are at bottom," the diplomat said.


Wall Street; For 2 Brewers' Stocks, a Week of Ferment
There are as many recipes for building a brewing business as there are for building a brew -- and investors got a taste of two of them last week.
The Adolph Coors Company's chairman, William K. Coors, told shareholders on Thursday that Coors was planning to spin off its non-brewing businesses, including ceramics and aluminum.
Coors's stock rose sharply on the news and closed the week at $19.75, up $1.875.
"The two pieces are worth more than the stock right now," Allan Kaplan, a Merrill Lynch analyst, told Bloomberg Business News.


The Greening of Soup, Salad and Chicken
SPRINGTIME demands green.
A number of greens provide fresh-flavor accent and verdant color.
High on the list are scallions and watercress.
Scallions are often called green onions or spring onions.
They are essentially onion shoots, treasured as much for their delicately tangy greens as for the somewhat sharper taste of their baby white bulbs.
Scallions, irreplaceable as an accent for salads and a garnish for soups, chicken, fish and grain dishes, can also play a more significant role in recipes.


History Has Questions for Gorbachev; What Does He Know and When Will We Know It?
MIKHAIL S. GORBACHEV, it used to be said, plays a weak hand brilliantly, and this talent was never more in evidence than during his just concluded two-week tour of the United States.
Mr.
Gorbachev is out of office, on a meager pension, and is hounded back home by charges about his role in this or that abuse of power.
Yet he got Americans to treat him like a head of state, promise him millions, and confine the conversation to such tame questions as who started the cold war (no one was going to blame
him,
after all), how to reorganize the United Nations, and how to deal with global environmental pollution. The man at the center of the most important political revolution of our time came and went without providing a single new revelation, not one sharp insight or telling detail, about what happened.
For Russians, this result will come as no surprise.
Radio Moscow recently expressed doubt that Mr.
Gorbachev had anything "new, practical, interesting or unexpected" to say to foreign listeners.
His ability to grow rich while saying nothing will be especially galling to those former Soviet officials, high and low, who -- whether as consultants to Western corporations or as participants in oral history projects -- are trying to sell what little they know about the system for a few measly dollars.
Even Pravda, now the voice of reaction, grumbled that when he gets home Mr.
Gorbachev ought to tell his own people the truth about such episodes as the crackdown in the Baltic states in January 1991.
A Thin Account
Mr.
Gorbachev sometimes avoids pointed questions by saying that he has to save his best material for his memoirs, now nearly finished.
He said the same thing last fall while preparing his book, "The August Coup," and it is worth remembering how thin and insubstantial a recounting that turned out to be.
American publishers seem to remember; they have reportedly balked at the sums Mr.
Gorbachev is asking, realizing that for all that he has said and written in the past ("master of the 40-minute sound bite," someone once said), he has left us with a long list of questions about perestroika and only the most fragmentary answers.


World Markets; Tough Sledding for Canada's Banks
Although Olympia &amp; York Developments has finally let the other shoe drop by filing for bankruptcy, little has changed in the outlook for Canadian banks and investors who own their stock.
The banks are still in trouble because Olympia &amp; York's difficulties are only one of many problems besieging Canada's six major banks.
The banks also face real estate problems in other areas that, in some cases, are just as serious as the difficulties Olympia &amp; York faces.
And the banks' earnings outlook, especially for next year, has been seriously undercut by an economy that has refused to snap back from its long recession.


Peggy Faesy, Jared MacKenzie
Margaret Faesy, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
A.
Robert Faesy of Wilton, Conn., was married yesterday to Jared David MacKenzie, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Ward MacKenzie of West Hartford, Conn.
The Rev.
Mary Louise Stevens performed the Episcopal ceremony at the home of the bride's parents.
Mrs.
MacKenzie, 27 years old and known as Peggy, graduated from Sarah Lawrence College.
She is a cabinetmaker and carpenter with South Mountain Company, a custom-house designer and builder in Chilmark, Mass.
Her father is the senior partner of Robert Faesy Associates, an architecture firm in Wilton.
Her mother, Nancy N. Faesy, now retired, was the librarian for Save the Children in Westport, Conn.


What Is Pink?
COLOR
A Poem.
By Christina Rossetti.
Illustrated by Mary Teichman.
Unpaged.
New York: HarperCollins Publishers. $15. (Ages 3 to 6)
THE COLOR BOX
By Dayle Ann Dodds.
Illustrated by Giles Laroche.
Unpaged.
Boston: Little, Brown &amp; Company. $12.95. (Ages 1 to 6)
SEVEN BLIND MICE
By Ed Young.  Unpaged. New York: Philomel Books. $16.95. (Ages 3 to 7)


Topics of The Times; Mail Call
President Bush's veto of the campaign finance reform package sent to him by Congress now poses a telling test of sincerity for House Democrats.
That's because the vetoed measure included an amendment that would have stopped House incumbents from using their free mailing privilege, known as franking, to send promotional -- and politically helpful -- literature to areas added to their districts by reapportionment.
Ordinarily, such out-of-district mailings are prohibited.
But a loophole in the current franking rules permits members to deluge their new district once a redistricting plan is final.


Spies &amp; Thrillers
Janice Weber is an American concert pianist who has made some interesting Liszt recordings.
On the evidence of FROST THE FIDDLER (St. Martin's, $19.95), she writes as well as she plays.
The book has its conventional elements: Leslie Frost, the heroine, is a sort of female James Bond, a famous violinist who doubles as a spy for a very secret United States agency.
She is licensed to kill -- and she does.
But the spirit of the writing, and the authentic musical background, separate "Frost the Fiddler" from most others in the genre.
The plot is as byzantine as that in any Ian Fleming novel.
Most of the action takes place in Leipzig, where Frost accidentally observes a murder and then gets romantically involved with the murderer.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: California; Politicians Warily Gauge the Effects Of Los Angeles's Rioting at the Polls
For a week or 10 days after the riots that ravaged some parts of this city and terrified people in others, conventional electoral politics was swept from Californians' minds.
The candidates fell silent, convinced that the voters would pay no attention whatever they said.
Now, with the state's June 2 primary election only a little more than two weeks away, the war of words is resuming among the contestants in the Republican and Democratic Presidential primaries and those seeking the nominations in not one but two Senatorial races here.
Commercials are appearing on television, rallies are starting to attract lunchtime crowds, and a few bumper stickers and yard signs are evident, even in the fire-scarred neighborhoods of Los Angeles.


Bring Back Ginger Beer
To the Editor:
I was interested to read about the plight of the ginger ale industry ("A Dowdy Soft Drink in Search of a New Age Remake," May 3).
When our children were little, in the 60's, ginger beer was sold in Canada.
Gradually, and sadly for us, it seems to have disappeared from the shelves.
Once in a while we find in this country a few bottles of Old Tyme or Jamaican ginger beer.
These same young folks who learned about pop from ginger beer are now health food fans, and ginger is used freshly ground in an extraordinary number of dishes.
Why not revive ginger beer?
It's a natural.
ADELE BUTLER NASH  Buffalo, May 4


POSTINGS: Estonian House; Beaux-Arts Restoration
The Estonian House, an elegant Beaux-Arts landmark at 243 East 34th Street, off Second Avenue, is about ready to serve as the base for ESTO '92 New York, the sixth Estonian world festival, which will be celebrated here from July 4 to 11.
The building's limestone and brick facade has just been restored and its mansard roof repainted an eye-opening patina green (to simulate oxidized copper).
"We started right from the top," said the Estonian-born architect Tonu Vanderer, principal of Vander Associates of Montclair, N.J., and a member of the Estonian Educational Society, owner of the building.
"We did brick work, decorated stone work and replaced the deteriorated balustrade on two levels."


THE LADS OF THE NATIONAL FRONT
Buford's article seems to suggest that things are somehow better here in the United States -- an assumption that we know to be wrong after the events in Los Angeles earlier this month.


The Global Village Of Photography
AS the European Community ushers in a new era in politics by way of the Common Market, the international photographic community is also bracing for great technological changes.
These two forces will be explored at the seventh annual Journees de l'Image Professionnelle, scheduled July 4-6 in Arles, France.
Vincent Bertomeu, the founder of the conference, known as JIP, said that this year's lectures and workshops will focus on electronic imaging, in which pictures are made without film and standard processing and instead are stored on electronic chips and disks.
The conference is open to professional photographers and advanced amateurs alike.


Limousine Operators Fighting City Licensing
LIMOUSINE operators in Westchester are up in arms over an attempt by the New York City Taxi and Limousine Commission to levy a series of fees on suburban-based taxis that pick up passengers in the city.
"If they get away with it, I can say goodbye to a business that took me 15 years to build," said Walter Bell, owners of Walter's Personal Car Service in White Plains.
"It makes me very angry, especially because there's no real reason behind it. It's only a scheme to raise money for New York City."


In the Region: New Jersey; Recent Sales
Aberdeen 149,000
8 Ormont Lane  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 27-year-old colonial; c/a, fenced yard, large property; taxes $4,260.
Bridgewater 240,000
595 Glen Ridge Road  4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 29-year-old colonial split; fireplace, enclosed porch, eat-in-kitchen; taxes $3,675.
Mendham 650,000
8 Kendall Court  5-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 5-year-old Williamsburg colonial; central vacuum, marble baths, whirlpool; taxes $10,349.
Old Bridge 220,000
2 Clearbrook Court  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 5-year-old colonial; Jacuzzi, skylights, fireplace; taxes $6,078.
Park Ridge 175,000
25 Storms Road  3-bedroom, 1-bath, over-50-year-old ranch; eat-in-kitchen, deck, newly painted, new carpeting; taxes $3,400.
Upper Saddle River 500,000
594 West Saddle River Road
5-bedroom, 3-bath, new colonial; porch, fireplace, country kitchen, full basement; taxes $8,523.
OTHER AREAS South Salem, N.Y. 300,000  Mill River  5-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 269-year-old colonial; 6 stone fireplaces, library, sun room, pantry, wine cellar, 8.2 acres; taxes $8,748.
Enfield, Conn. 108,000
11 Washington Avenue  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 52-year-old Cape Cod; book shelves, formal dining room, porch, 0.2 acre; taxes $1,247.
East Meadow, L.I. 185,000  2747 Woods Avenue  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 9-year-old high ranch; dining room, eat-in kitchen, family room, 1-car garage; taxes $5,200.


Dina B. Zarin, Benjamin B. Potter
Dr.
Dina Barbara Zarin, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Michael S. Zarin of Great Neck, L.I., was married last night in Chatham, Mass., to Benjamin Broughall Potter, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Benjamin E. Potter of Concord, N.H.
Rabbi Albert Ginzburgh performed the ceremony at the Wequassett Inn.
Dr.
Potter, 28 years old, is a pediatric resident at the New England Medical Center in Boston.
She graduated from the University of Michigan and received her M.D. from Brown University.
Her father is the principal of the Wellfleet Capital Company, an investment banking concern in Great Neck.
Her mother, Renee Zarin, is the director of alumni affairs at Queens College.


Or Rushing to Bankruptcy
To the Editor:
The North American corporations cited in "The Lemmings Who Love Total Quality" may be rushing headlong to a destination, but it is not called "total quality." It's called bankruptcy if they are following the techniques described.


Round About Midnight With Billie Holiday
FIRST the audience hears haggling backstage.
"I won't go on," says the singer.
Then the introduction: "A legend in her own time."
Clutching a gardenia and finding her way into the spotlight and into the first song with great effort, Miche Braden evokes the unbearable sadness of Billie Holiday nearing the end of her life in "Lady Day at Emerson's Bar and Grill," which concludes the Boston Post Road Stage Company's season at the Westport Country Playhouse.


Deals And Discounts
CARIBBEAN RESORTS Air fare credits and free golf are two incentives offered by Caribbean resorts.
Le Sport, the resort and spa on St.
Lucia, is offering a Fly Free program until Dec. 17.
When two people stay a minimum of seven nights, the resort will credit up to $359 toward one guest's air fare.
For solo travelers, the credit is up to $179.50.
Rates during the period range from $190 to $250 a person daily, based on double occupancy (the single supplement is $40 a day).
The price includes accommodations, airport transfers, meals, open bar, all health and beauty treatments and sports activities with instruction, tax and tip.
Call (800) 544-2883.
Sandy Lane Hotel and Golf Club in Barbados is now including unlimited golf on its 18-hole course in its room rates.
Until Dec. 18, rates start at $1,060 a person for a four-day, three-night stay, $2,080 a person for an eight-day stay, based on double occupancy.
Call (800) 225-5843.


Bite vs. Bark Or 'Beethoven' Vs. 'Ferngully'
IF YOU WERE 6 YEARS OLD, WHAT would you rather see?
A rain forest fairy who talks gently about "the magic powers of the web of life" or a big sloppy dog who comes in from the rain, shakes his fur and gets your dad all wet?
Somehow, the makers of "Ferngully: The Last Rain Forest," an environmentally correct cartoon, got the answer wrong.
And the people behind "Beethoven," the story of a St.
Bernard who destroys the carpets and torments the father of a typical suburban family, are making dog jokes all the way to the bank.


THE LADS OF THE NATIONAL FRONT
Thank you for Bill Buford's article "The Lads of the National Front" (April 26).
The insidious rise of racism and fascism in the last decade is an international trend that should be explored by the news media.
We need only look at the popularity of David Duke in the South.
And this is just the tip of the iceberg.
NAOMI GAMORRA
Haledon, N.J.


Indictment of Congressman Means Little at Home
In most districts, a Federal indictment of a local Congressman on charges of corruption would fan the flames of anti-incumbency and bring voters' blood to a boil.
But this has not happened in the 10th Congressional District in northeastern Pennsylvania, where the indicted Congressman is Joseph M. McDade, the man credited with funneling more than $1 billion worth of Federal projects and jobs to the distressed former coal-mining region.


Perspectives: Brighton Beach; Revising (Again) a Plan for the Baths Site
IN Florida it was easy.
A decade ago, it took the developer Stephen Muss, president of Alexander Muss &amp; Sons, based in Miami Beach, only six months to win approval for his 750-unit Towers of Quayside in North Miami.
Now the Brooklyn-born builder is in his sixth year of trying to win New York City's approval for a large-scale residential redevelopment called Brighton by the Sea on the 15-acre site of the Brighton Beach Baths in Brooklyn.
If built, it would give Brooklyn its first market-rate high-rise waterfront development in a generation.


The Greening of Soup, Salad and Chicken
SPRINGTIME demands green.
A number of greens provide fresh-flavor accent and verdant color.
High on the list are scallions and watercress.
Scallions are often called green onions or spring onions.
They are essentially onion shoots, treasured as much for their delicately tangy greens as for the somewhat sharper taste of their baby white bulbs.
Scallions, irreplaceable as an accent for salads and a garnish for soups, chicken, fish and grain dishes, can also play a more significant role in recipes.


BEST SELLERS: May 17, 1992
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
JEWELS, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $23.) From New York schoolgirl to doyenne of a French chateau: the life of a woman who becomes rich by dealing in precious stones.
2
2
4
ALL AROUND THE TOWN, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $22.) The plight of a college student accused of killing her professor.
3
1
10
THE PELICAN BRIEF, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $22.50.) A woman law student seeks to discover the truth about the murder of two Supreme Court justices.
4
3
4
"I" IS FOR INNOCENT, by Sue Grafton. (Holt, $18.95.) Kinsey Millhone investigates the case of a man once charged with murdering his rich wife.
5
4
5
JAZZ, by Toni Morrison. (Knopf, $21.) A couple in the Harlem of the 1920's learn again and again that life does not keep its promises.
6
7
3
FRENCH SILK, by Sandra Brown. (Warner, $18.95.) The ordeal and romance of a New Orleans businesswoman suspected of killing a television evangelist.
7 *
8
108
OH, THE PLACES YOU'LL GO! by Dr. Seuss. (Random House, $12.95.) Verse and pictures.
8
5
14
RISING SUN, by Michael Crichton. (Knopf, $22.) The mysterious death of a young woman leads to an investigation in which technology and the American-Japanese rivalry play major roles. (LP)
9
6
4
FOR LOVE ALONE, by Ivana Trump. (Pocket, $22.) The experiences of a Czechoslovak-born skier married to a wealthy entrepreneur from an old Newport, R.I., family.
10
2
A THOUSAND ACRES, by Jane Smiley. (Knopf, $23.) An Iowa farmer shares his heritage with three daughters.
11
1
AT WEDDINGS AND WAKES, by Alice McDermott. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $19.) Growing up in an Irish Catholic family from Brooklyn, as experienced by three children.
12
1
THE LIVING, by Annie Dillard. (HarperCollins, $22.50.) Four decades in the lives of the motley residents of the 19th-century Washington Territory.
13
11
10
THE ELF QUEEN OF SHANNARA, by Terry Brooks. (Del Rey/Ballantine, $22.) The third volume in a series about a fantasy land.
14
12
32
SCARLETT, by Alexandra Ripley. (Warner, $24.95.) The sequel to "Gone With the Wind."
15
9
21
DISNEY'S BEAUTY AND THE BEAST. (Gallery Books/Penguin USA, $6.98.) A retelling of the classic fairy tale in words and pictures.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
4
GIVE WAR A CHANCE, by P. J. O'Rourke. (Atlantic Monthly, $20.95.) Satirical essays on recent social and political developments.
2
2
16
REVOLUTION FROM WITHIN, by Gloria Steinem. (Little, Brown, $22.95.) The reflections of a feminist on the struggle to achieve self-esteem.
3
4
26
BACKLASH, by Susan Faludi. (Crown, $24.) A journalist contends that the media and political groups are staging a war against women's rights.
4
3
9
ROGUE WARRIOR, by Richard Marcinko with John Weisman. (Pocket, $22.) The memoirs of the retired commander of a counterterrorist unit.
5
12
3
TWO NATIONS, by Andrew Hacker. (Scribners, $24.95.) A political scientist discusses the way racism affects American life.
6
14
2
HEAD TO HEAD, by Lester Thurow. (Morrow, $25.) The upcoming economic battle among Japan, Europe and the United States.
7
2
WHO WILL TELL THE PEOPLE, by William Greider. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $25.) A journalist's account of how powerful monied interests and elite groups dominate the Federal Government.
8
8
6
REINVENTING GOVERNMENT, by David Osborne and Ted Gaebler. (Patrick/Addison-Wesley, $22.95.) How government should operate.
9
9
7
THE DISUNITING OF AMERICA, by Arthur M. Schlesinger Jr. (Norton, $14.95.) A historian considers the current emphasis on ethnicity.
10
7
31
DEN OF THIEVES, by James B. Stewart. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $25.) Plunderers on Wall Street.
11 *
1
THE WAY I SEE IT, by Patti Davis. (Putnam, $22.95.) The autobiography of the daughter of Ronald and Nancy Reagan.
12
25
MOLLY IVINS CAN'T SAY THAT, CAN SHE? by Molly Ivins. (Random House, $23.) Essays about the current political and cultural scene.
13 *
1
MIRACLE MAN, by Nolan Ryan with Jerry Jenkins. (Word Publishing, $18.99.) The autobiography of the record-breaking pitcher.
14
5
11
DOUBLE CROSS, by Sam Giancana and Chuck Giancana. (Warner, $22.95.) Two relatives of the late Sam Giancana recall his life in the Mafia.
15
10
24
MEMORIES, by Ralph Emery with Tom Carter. (Macmillan, $19.95.) The autobiography of a country-music broadcaster.
16 *
1
PLAYING IN THE DARK, by Toni Morrison. (Harvard University, $14.95.) The novelist-critic's call for literary scholarship that will bring the black experience to the attention of all Americans.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
1
13
A RETURN TO LOVE, by Marianne Williamson. (HarperCollins, $20.) Inspirational advice about ways to replace feelings of fear with feelings of love in daily life.
2
2
4
THE JUICEMAN'S POWER OF JUICING, by Jay Kordich. (Morrow, $15.) A program for staying healthy and trim by consuming fresh fruit and vegetable juices.
3
18
BROTHER EAGLE, SISTER SKY: A Message From Chief Seattle, illustrated by Susan Jeffers. (Dial, $14.95.) An environmental warning.
4
5
24
HOW TO SATISFY A WOMAN EVERY TIME, by Naura Hayden. (Bibli O'Phile/Dutton, $14.95.) Sexual counsel for married couples.
5
3
24
MORE WEALTH WITHOUT RISK, by Charles J. Givens. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) An updated and expanded volume of financial advice.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,050 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 28,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.
And Bear in Mind
(Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)
BLACK WATER, by Joyce Carol Oates. (William Abrahams/ Dutton, $17.) A 26-year-old woman drowns when a senator's car goes off a bridge; but the point of view in this powerfully imagined novel belongs to the victim, whom we are made to know and whose tragedy we are made to comprehend.
VERY OLD BONES, by William Kennedy. (Viking, $22.) The sixth novel in the author's Albany cycle is a sort of excavation into the past of his own career as a writer, where the undoing of gloom and the reconciliation of family members are central themes.
DE GAULLE: The Ruler 1945-1970, by Jean Lacouture. (Norton, $29.95.) This final volume in Mr.
Lacouture's monument to the colossus particularly features de Gaulle's foreign policy (alliance but independence) and his theatrical methods of getting his way.
A MAN'S PLACE, by Annie Ernaux. (Four Walls Eight Windows, $15.95.) An autobiographical novel that confronts the author's painful growth into incomprehension as she becomes a French intellectual while her father remains a hardworking shopkeeper.
THE BRIDE PRICE, by Grete Weil. (Godine, $20.95.) Mrs.
Weil's beautiful novel, her first to be published in English, interleaves a narrative of King David and his infidelities with her own life as a German Jew who returned to Bavaria in 1947.
INTOXICATED BY MY ILLNESS: And Other Writings on Life and Death, by Anatole Broyard. (Clarkson N. Potter, $18.) Urbane, lyric, witty and gracious essays written mostly in his last 14 months by a former editor of The New York Times Book Review.
THE SHRINE AT ALTAMIRA, by John L'Heureux. (Viking, $19.) A stark, cleanly told novel of guilt and redemption following a hideous act of child abuse; the climax is unspeakably terrible.


A STITCH IN TIME
Perri Klass reminds me of the girl I knew in college who, while the rest of us were taking notes, spent an entire semester of British lit working a skein of sky-blue yarn.
She took the final wearing the lovely sweater she had made, and to our margin-doodling amazement, aced the course.
EILEEN SIKORA
Pompton Plains, N.J.


Love and Surprise in a Vine
THERE is something a little racy about a flowering vine.
It's not a plant that is content to just sit there quietly, keeping its blouse tucked in and its skirt over its knees.
It loves to ramble, reaching into a pear tree or a corkscrew willow, winding up some ugly old telephone pole or curling itself about almost anything you give it, be it string, wire or a weedy sapling cut from the backyard.
Once you are hooked on climbers, your garden and your house -- or your fire escape -- may be in the lovely danger of disappearing beneath the blooms of perennial woody vines like clematis, akebia, honeysuckle (I have goldflame, a tamed one that doesn't act like kudzu, the vine that ate the South) and the white doilies of climbing hydrangea.
But there are many annual tropical vines that can be planted from seed right now, in pots or the ground, that will bloom by late summer.


Fashion Avenue's $100 Million Woman
Eight A.M.
The Regency on Park Avenue in Manhattan.
Among the power brokers sipping coffee and spooning Irish oatmeal in the power-breakfast capital of corporate America are Laurence A. Tisch, head of CBS Inc. and the Loews Corporation; his brother Preston R. Tisch, president of Loews and co-owner of the New York Giants; and Paul Tagliabue, the commissioner of the National Football League.
As he leaves, Jerome Chazen, chairman and chief executive of Liz Claiborne Inc., stops at a table by the window to chat and is joined by Lester Pollack of Lazard Freres &amp; Company, who smiles at a small woman with honey-colored hair when she raises her arm, bound by a watch from Harry Winston, to squeeze his hand.
Meet Linda J. Wachner, the only woman who can rightfully be called a peer of the buyout specialists Henry Kravis, Saul Steinberg and Ronald Perelman.


Bonds's Power Show Not Enough for Pirates
Padres 10, Pirates 9
PITTSBURGH, May 16 (AP) -- Barry Bonds hit a grand slam and a bases-empty homer and drove in a career-high six runs for Pittsburgh, but Tony Gwynn's bases-loaded double helped the San Diego Padres rally past the Pirates, 10-9, tonight.


REGULATOR LOWERS ESTIMATE OF COSTS OF SAVINGS BAILOUT
After several years of steadily higher forecasts of the cost of bailing out the nation's insolvent savings and loans, a senior Federal regulator for the first time has brought in a lower estimate of the cost to taxpayers.
Albert V. Casey, the head of the Resolution Trust Corporation, the Federal agency that oversees the bailout, has told lawmakers in recent days that because of lower interest rates, which bolster the balance sheets of savings and loans, he believes the bailout will cost no more than $130 billion.
That is 19 percent less than the Administration's top estimate of $160 billion last June.


Leading City Ballet Into a Grand Jete
As the New York City Ballet enters its 10th year since George Balanchine's death, a new imprint is apparent -- that of its current artistic director, Peter Martins.
His outstanding contribution has been to uphold the value of classical technique at a time when ballet is subject to a barrage of influences from modern dance and other idioms.
After a transitional period during which he has been both hailed and assailed, Mr.
Martins has emerged triumphant and in full control of the company.
Even balletomanes who will never forgive him for not being Balanchine admit that he has redeemed himself as company director through his splendid production of "The Sleeping Beauty." Mr.
Martins's staging of the 19th-century classic was such a critical success at its premiere last spring that it became an instant hot ticket.
The production finished an exceptional three-week reprise before the City Ballet's repertory season resumed last week at the New York State Theater.


The Thrifty Traveler in 10 World Cities; Paris
Finding a place to stay is only one of many choices facing the traveler on a tight budget.
Here are suggestions on where to eat, what to do and what not to do from 10 New York Times correspondents in cities around the world.


U.S. Removes Anti-Drug Radars From Peru
In another step that reduces the American military presence in Peru, the Pentagon has removed two large radar systems in the northern Peruvian jungle that had been used for more than four months to track planes carrying drugs between Peru and Colombia, American officials say.
Officials said the United States had also stopped flights of Awacs and Orion radar planes over Peru's Upper Huallaga Valley, where 60 percent of the world's coca leaves -- the raw material for cocaine -- is grown.


Surviving the Dreaded Dogwood Disease
PLENTY of dogwood trees are in full bloom, and when they are seen in concert with the flowers of the redbud, there is no finer springtime show.
Because of this dramatic appeal, dogwoods are still being planted, and should be.
But the fungus that has been decimating the dogwood population still exists throughout the dogwood's natural range.
Although the disease was first reported in 1978, it has not been conquered; where it runs out of control, in forested areas especially, dogwood trees have died in two to three years.
But more and more scientists are researching the problem, and the consensus is one of optimism.


Nature's Cupboard Swings Wide in Spring
WHEN plants shoot up, fish get lively, and turtles come ashore to lay eggs, people who like wild edibles start looking and cooking.
They know it's time for snapping-turtle soup, stir-fried lilies, toad's bellies and dandelion dip.
Many also take time to introduce others to what's good -- and nutritious -- in Connecticut backyards, woods and waters.
"In anybody's yard, I can find 25 edible or useful plants," said a naturalist, Barbara Clark, who stepped out the door of the Center for Environmental Education in Manchester and began picking peppermint.
"It makes a very pleasant tea," Mrs.
Clark said.


Contemplating Women's Lives
To the Editor:
According to the review of Blanche Wiesen Cook's biography of Eleanor Roosevelt (April 19), Ms.
Cook at one point pictures Mrs.
Roosevelt standing before the famous statue in Washington that Henry Adams had Augustus Saint-Gaudens create as a memorial to his wife, Clover (Marian Hooper Adams), who took her life in 1885 at the age of 42.
There "E.R. contemplated her life, the lives of women and of wives . . . mostly overworked, frequently ignored, generally misunderstood, often betrayed, casually mistreated. . . . E.R. and Clover Adams shared a set of realities: the realities of women who have been trifled with, humiliated."


Unscarred U.S.C. Tries To Silence Fear of Riots
Two weeks after rioters pillaged nearby businesses and the smoke of burning buildings filled the sky over the University of Southern California, the university is waging a campaign to calm jittery nerves and protect its reputation as an idyllic campus in the midst of urban decay.
In the university's brand new telemarketing center filled with computers, a room that is normally used in the school's fund-raising drives, students, parents, employees and alumni have been calling prospective freshmen to encourage them to attend the college that was in the middle of the battle zone.


MAY 10-16: Disability Rolls; Blacks Denied Benefits More Often Than Whites
After the Reagan Administration began purging the nation's disability rolls, moderate and liberal Democrats tried unsuccessfully to pass laws giving more independence to the judges who award billions of dollars a year in Social Security disability benefits.
But last week evidence surfaced that independence without oversight can also pose problems.
A General Accounting Office study found that for 30 years, blacks with serious ailments have been much more likely than whites to be rejected.
Perhaps most disturbing, it said the greatest disparities were in rulings by the 866 administrative law judges who meet claimants face-to-face -- the first time their race is apparent to the Government.


A STITCH IN TIME
As a criminal-defense lawyer in New York City, I, too, knit in a male bastion.
Early in my tenure, I realized that the hurly-burly atmosphere of Criminal Court is not conducive to serious reading or writing, and there are only so many crossword puzzles you can do.
So I knit.
Like Perri Klass, I have encountered opposition to my hobby.
A judge once asked me to stop because knitting reminded him of his wife!


SCIENTISTS DISSECT SOUNDS OF MUSIC
Music may have charms to soothe a savage breast, but as scores of scientists met here this week to dissect musical sound into power spectrums, reverberation equations, modal resonances and other technical arcana, some participants concluded that it is easier to appreciate music than to fathom its tortuous acoustic complexities.
For others, however, the research reported at the weeklong meeting of the Acoustical Society of America represented progress toward building better concert halls, diagnosing hearing impediments in infants, understanding the behavior of ancient musical instruments and many other matters related in one way or another to music.


How to Become a Prophet
To the Editor:
In his review of my book "How the Shaman Stole the Moon: In Search of Ancient Prophet-Scientists From Stonehenge to the Grand Canyon" (April 12), Chet Raymo says that the "new light" I shed on the architectural aspects of archeoastronomy "is not nearly as original as Mr. Calvin makes it sound. A fairly substantial body of literature explores some of the same ground, dating back to Gerald Hawkins's popular 'Stonehenge Decoded.' "


Suzanne Delaney, L. E. McCarthy
Suzanne Lynn Delaney, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
George T. Delaney of Bedford Hills, N.Y., was married yesterday to Lawrence Edward McCarthy, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Larry McCarthy of Falmouth, Mass.
The Rev.
James Low and Msgr.
John J. Regan officiated at St.
Barnabas Episcopal Church in Falmouth.
Mrs.
McCarthy, 27 years old, graduated from the University of Massachusetts at Amherst.
She is an executive assistant to the chairman at Paramount Communications Inc. in New York.
Her father is of counsel to the law firm of Kroll &amp; Tract in New York.
Her mother, Carol A. Delaney, is an administrative assistant at General Reinsurance Corporation in Stamford, Conn.


Ellis Ketcham, Stephen Johnson
Ellis Anne Ketcham, the daughter of Mrs.
Samuel K. Ketcham of Seattle and the late Mr.
Ketcham, was married yesterday to Stephen Searle Johnson, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Stephen J. Johnson of Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.
The Rev.
Ralph Blackman performed the Anglican service at Christ Church Cathedral in Vancouver.
Mrs.
Johnson, 29 years old, graduated from Lewis and Clark College.
Until recently she was the special-projects officer at Imax Corporation in Chicago, which invented and produces the components for large-screen film projection.
Her father was the founder and president of West Fraser Timber in Vancouver.


Victor Borge Plays the Stamford Palace
FOR well over half a century, Victor Borge has been bringing his unique blend of outrageous wit, brilliant invention and, let us not forget, sensitive keyboard performances to countries around the world.
But this afternoon he will only have to travel a few minutes from his Greenwich home to get to his next show, which begins at 3 in the Palace Theater at the Stamford Center for the Arts.
"The pianist, comedian and consummate entertainer is making a triumphant return to the Palace after a complete sellout last season," said a theater spokesman, Mike Horyczun.
Indeed, today's appearance was so quickly booked that the Palace added a second performance for tomorrow evening at 8.
The Palace is not ready to close out its spring season just yet: the delightfully imaginative Pilobolus Dance Theater will appear on Thursday at 8 P.M., and next month there will be jazz and pop performances at 8 P.M. by Mel Torme on June 26 and the Ramsey Lewis Trio the following evening.
Box office: 323- 2131.


Wall Street; Once Again, a Troubled Behemoth
Two years ago as the spring was creeping toward summer, the cause of most of the financial community's nail biting and hand wringing was Donald Trump, the New York real estate developer and casino operator.
His banks were impatient.
His "trophy" assets were tarnishing and his Atlantic City properties were doing poorly.
But just about the only publicly traded company that shivered when Donald Trump caught cold was Alexander's, the department store chain.
Mr.
Trump owned nearly 30 percent of the retailer, and the company's shares were buffeted by speculation that he would unload his stake to raise cash. (He didn't, but perhaps he should have; when Alexander's finally filed for bankruptcy on Friday, its shares were trading at about $12, down from almost $50 in May 1990.)


The First Lady Who Endorsed Bitters
ETHICS evolve.
Today, it is hard to imagine Barbara Bush's endorsing a digestive medicine; a century ago, Frances Folsom Cleveland seems to have done just that.
Stamp collectors often drift into being hoarders of other ephemera, and when a handsome advertising card was offered in a recent mail auction, entering a $25 bid proved irresistible.
The bid was successful.


Chicago
A little more than two hours west of Chicago, the mundane yields to the nostalgic, the flat plains and four-lane highways become woodlands and country roads, and what was beige and predictable turns into a Currier &amp; Ives print.
It takes another 45 minutes to get to Galena, a few more twists and turns on Illinois Route 20, and then, just before the bend at Horseshoe Mound, you see white church steeples and brick Italianate mansions climbing the hills on either side of the Galena River.


Where Terpsichore Spends the Summer
The following is a selective list of summer dance festivals and events.
It is national in scope but concentrates on the Northeast.
California
ANNUAL SUMMER ARTS PERFORMANCE FESTIVAL Arcata, July 5-Aug. 1 (707-826-5401).
Presented by the California State University at Humboldt, John van Duzer Theater: Loretta Livingston and Dancers (July 11); Lola Montes Company and Carol Tetan's Dance Through Times(July 14); Urban Bush Women (July 24); San Francisco Mime Troupe (July 25); Tandy Beal and Company (July 28).


The Rebound of the Celtic Legend
The skeptics who were ready to dispose of Larry Bird have been shown that Larry Liability can still operate as a legend.
The Bird Era, threatened by his alarmingly recurring back problems, will extend at least one more day, to a seventh game in the Eastern Conference semifinal playoff series between the Boston Celtics and the Cleveland Cavaliers in Richfield, Ohio, Sunday afternoon (Channel 4, 2 P.M.).
But then what?
Will the Cavalier franchise, which has lost seven of its previous nine National Basketball Association playoff series -- including four losses in decisive games -- reverse its history?
Will the Celtics, with a legacy of a 21-7 record in deciding playoff games, including 4-1 in seventh games on the road, add another successful chapter and a few happy cigars?


Five New Maps With Attitude
Friendly is not a word one thinks of in association with a map, but it seems a good one to describe the MapEasy series, which is adding five new maps this month.
These city maps are hand-drawn and lettered; with colored pencil, parks are tinted green, main routes yellow and bodies of water blue.
Names of restaurants are written in red, hotels in blue, shops in green and buildings in black.
Architectural drawings of major sites can help visitors orient themselves.
Written by many locations are historical tidbits, tips or breezy comments.
Also most maps include a public transit map.
The new maps are of London, Seattle, Toronto, Vancouver and Upper Manhattan.
Others cover Boston, Chicago, Honolulu, Los Angeles, Midtown Manhattan, San Francisco, San Diego and Washington; a New Orleans map is due to be issued in late summer.
The maps, $5 each, are updated each month to keep up with changes in shops and restaurants.
They are sold at many bookstores and some museum and hotel gift shops.


Mutual Funds; The Risky Business of Selling Short
Do you believe that health-care stocks are still too pricey?
That interest rates will spike, pushing down bond prices?
Or that the stock market will stumble badly?
Mutual fund investors who saw trouble ahead in the financial markets once had no choice but to park their money in money-market funds.
Now there is a way to stay invested and still profit from market declines: selling mutual funds short.


C. Harold Taylor, 84, a Longtime Lawyer
C.
Harold Taylor, who was a lawyer in Manhattan for more than 40 years, died May 3 at the Cottage Hospital in Nantucket, Mass.
He was 84 years old and lived in Nantucket.
He died of a stroke, his family said.


Toward an Even Playing Field for All
On Saturday, May 2, at Comiskey Park in Chicago, the White Sox honored some 25 former Negro League baseball players who, because of the accident of birth, were never able to play in the major leagues.
The irony, of course, is that while these aged but quietly dignified men were standing on the field to receive long overdue recognition, the rest of the country was wondering whether the rioting in Los Angeles would spread to other cities.
The tribute in Chicago had been planned months in advance, and therefore there was a poignancy, in some sense awful, to what was taking place at the ball park.


New Lebanese Premier Announces a Cabinet
The new Prime Minister, Rashid al-Solh, named his Cabinet today, with the intention of leading Lebanon out of economic crisis.
He narrowly made a deadline set by unions that had threatened to resume a nationwide strike.
The 24 Cabinet posts are evenly split between Christians and Muslims, with 15 ministers having served under former Prime Minister Omar Karami, who was forced out 10 days ago.
Samir Geagea, a Christian militia leader, said he would not serve in what he considered a pro-Syrian Cabinet.


POSTINGS: 2 Mews Buildings; N.Y.U. Irish-Studies Center
The lilting sounds of Gaelic talk and song will float through Washington Mews on lower Fifth Avenue when New York University opens Ireland House later this year.
Two buildings, at Nos. 1 and 2 Washington Mews, are to be used as a center for exploring Irish culture and contemporary affairs.
The university, which has long-term leases on the buildings, was able to start planning for Irish House when the last rental tenants moved out last year.


Firehouse Lessons in Food and Fitness
IT was only 8:30 in the morning on April 6, but at the Englewood Firehouse the temperature was already rising and the building was vibrating.
Upstairs, in a recreation room barely big enough to contain them, some 30 firefighters were doing pushups and shadow boxing and trying to match the high kicks of Keith Byard, their aerobic fitness instructor.
Music boomed from a large tape player as the fit, the not so fit and the out of shape struggled to keep up.


Bay Bounty
SPRING TAUNTS the watermen of the upper Chesapeake Bay.
In one moment, March will flash a blue sky over Crisfield, Md.
The next, a nasty little breeze snaps away the blue, quick and cold as a change of heart.
By April, the sun lingers long enough to pop the dogwood blossoms and coaxes the hopeful aroma of brine and bait and new eelgrass into the air.
But the sun doesn't stick around long enough to rouse the blue crabs from their winter burrow in the crab grounds that run north from Tangier Island in Virginia to the eastern shore of Maryland.
"Like as never ta git here," is how the local watermen discuss the arrival of the warm season and the molting crabs it brings.
James Michener called soft-shell crabs "the tastiest morsel in the bay." As perishable as the Chesapeake spring is impetuous, soft-shell crabs remained a regional delicacy until the railroad carried them north to Philadelphia and New York in the early 19th century, eventually turning a sideline business into a full-scale industry.


All About/ECU's; A European Currency Inches Toward Acceptance
The ECU is a currency in waiting.
Although it is slated to become the single currency of the 12-member European Community by 1999 at the latest, the European Currency Unit is still little known outside European financial circles.
It is not a legal currency yet.
In fact, there are no ECU bills, and the only coins are for collectors.
Yet since it was created in 1979 as a basket or weighted combination of the values of the 12 currencies of the European Community, it has slowly become a player in international financial markets.
There is a growing ECU bond market that is used by Governments, international organizations and companies around the world.
There are a commercial paper market, ECU bank loans, checks and credit cards.


NORTH KOREAN SITE HAS A-BOMB HINTS
The head of the International Atomic Energy Agency said today that a mysterious building in North Korea, if outfitted with additional equipment, could function as a plutonium reprocessing center, the core of a nuclear weapons program.
Hans Blix, the director general of the agency, just returned from a six-day visit to North Korea.
He is the first Westerner known to have visited the sprawling laboratory in Yongbyon, 60 miles north of the capital, Pyongyang.
The laboratory is the focus of suspicions about North Korea's nuclear intentions.
A Network of Tunnels
The observations of Mr.
Blix, who also saw three nuclear power plants and a surprising network of underground tunnels, provide the firmest evidence yet that North Korea may have tried to build a nuclear bomb, or perhaps is still trying.
He said his inspection would be followed within a few weeks by a team that will examine all of North Korea's declared nuclear sites.


Sued on Implants, Doctor Is Apparently a Suicide
A Madison Avenue dermatologist and cosmetic surgeon, despondent because he was being sued by several people over breast-implant operations, is dead in a mid-Manhattan hotel in what appeared to be a suicide, the police said yesterday.
Police officers found Dr.
Allen Epstein, 46 years old, dead in a suite at the Doral Tuscany Hotel at 120 East 39th Street just before midnight on Friday.


Of 58 Riot Deaths, 50 Have Been Ruled Homicides
For days, the worst American rioting of this century cast its net over a sprawling area, bringing death in a variety of ways to people divided by geography, race, class, language and age.
The Los Angeles County Coroner's Office lists 58 people as having died because of the riots and says 50 were homicide victims.
Charges have been filed in only two of the deaths, those of Matthew Haines, 32 years old, and Charles W. Orebo, 22.


With Budgets Cut, Public Officials Seek Private Money
Only a year after voters in this community near the Jersey Shore forced cuts in spending by voting against a school budget, education officials are planning to build an elaborate greenhouse for teaching plant biology.
But instead of relying on taxpayers, the school board will use a private foundation backed by local businesses.
The greenhouse here is among dozens of programs blooming around the New York metropolitan area and the country as tight budgets force public institutions to seek private financing for activities once supported almost completely by tax dollars.


A Voice With Broad Echoes; A Muslim Cleric Hones the Fusing of Religion and Politics
GONE were his traditional flowing white robe and matching half-foot-high turban.
Hassan al-Turabi, the elegant Sudanese legal scholar and philosopher with advanced degrees from the University of London and the Sorbonne, looked as pinstriped as any Barclay Street banker as he addressed multiple gatherings of influential scholars, businessmen, officials and journalists in Washington last week.
Dr.
Turabi is accustomed to wearing two hats.
He is a preeminent pioneer and spokesman of the Islamic revival that is sweeping the Middle East and other regions with heavily Muslim populations.
He is also widely regarded as the de facto power in the Sudan, where a militant Islamic Government seized control in a military coup in 1989 and since then, according to Amnesty International and other human rights groups, has tortured political dissidents and engaged in other systematic violations of human rights.


A Voice With Broad Echoes; A Muslim Cleric Hones the Fusing of Religion and Politics
GONE were his traditional flowing white robe and matching half-foot-high turban.
Hassan al-Turabi, the elegant Sudanese legal scholar and philosopher with advanced degrees from the University of London and the Sorbonne, looked as pinstriped as any Barclay Street banker as he addressed multiple gatherings of influential scholars, businessmen, officials and journalists in Washington last week.
Dr.
Turabi is accustomed to wearing two hats.
He is a preeminent pioneer and spokesman of the Islamic revival that is sweeping the Middle East and other regions with heavily Muslim populations.
He is also widely regarded as the de facto power in the Sudan, where a militant Islamic Government seized control in a military coup in 1989 and since then, according to Amnesty International and other human rights groups, has tortured political dissidents and engaged in other systematic violations of human rights.


The Bible Lands Museum Opens in Jerusalem
A museum depicting the material civilization and cultures of the ancient Near East opened Monday in Jerusalem.
The Bible Lands Museum, housed in an elegant glass-fronted building of Jerusalem stone, contains over 3,000 artifacts dating from 6000 B.C. to A.D. 600.
Among the rare and precious items are East Mediterranean mosaics, Phoenician ivory inlays, painted coffins from Egypt, wine vessels from Persia, terra-cotta figurines from Syria and Sumerian seals depicting religious stories.
The museum's stated aim is to "illuminate the life and times of the Bible, setting the Bible in its ancient environment."


The Thrifty Traveler in 10 World Cities; Rio de Janeiro
Finding a place to stay is only one of many choices facing the traveler on a tight budget.
Here are suggestions on where to eat, what to do and what not to do from 10 New York Times correspondents in cities around the world.
Since meals can be had in most of Rio's restaurants for under $50 a couple, why not try the rare restaurant that specializes in Brazil's distinctive regional cuisine?
Opened last Nov. 15, on Brazil's Independence Day, Cafe Brasil offers spicy fish soups from the northeast ($10) and black bean and sun-dried beef stew ($7) from Minas Gerais, the native state of Leonardo Braga, the English-speaking owner.
To accompany, try a lime juice and rum caipirinha ($1.40) or a passion fruit mousse ($1.25).
Far off the tourist track on a quiet side street in Rio's Botafogo neighborhood, Cafe Brasil has a lightly bohemian ambiance of bossa nova music on the stereo and tropical plants hanging from the Mediterranean-tile roof.
Cafe Brasil is at 25 Rua Capitao Salomao, Botafogo; telephone 266-6483.Reservations help, but are not a must.
For plenty of diversion with no admission fee, head for Rio's Sunday Hippie Fair, where piranha paperweights, Amazon hammocks, fanciful kites and T-shirts depicting voluptuous women in string bikinis are among the wares.
Sprawling over Ipanema's General Osorio Square, the daylong fair makes souvenir hunting one stop.
A few tips for haggling in the warren of booths selling paintings, belts and bags: cut the asking price by 40 percent, don't flash money and wield a pocket calculator.
With Brazil's inflation, $50 should pass through the 150,000 cruzeiro mark any day now.


Cynthia Chooljian, Dane Haumesser
Cynthia Helen Chooljian, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Martin A. Chooljian of Princeton, N.J., was married there yesterday to Dane Curtis Haumesser, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Arnold Haumesser of Chesterfield, Mo.
The Rev.
Leslie Smith and the Rev.
Andrew Harpham Newman, the bride's uncle, performed the Episcopal ceremony at Trinity Church.
Mrs.
Haumesser is a bankruptcy specialist at G.E.
Capital Mortgage Services in Chesterfield.
She graduated from Wheaton College and the Katharine Gibbs School in Boston.
Her father is the president of the CH Capital Corporation, a private investment company in Princeton.


Array of Arias


Ms. Vanderbilt, Arthur Fried
Kimberly F. Vanderbilt, a daughter of Clara E. Vanderbilt of New York, was married on May 3 to Arthur J. Fried, a son of Ruth and Reuben Fried of New Hyde Park, L.I.
Justice Kristen Booth Glen of New York State Supreme Court officiated at the Conservatory Garden in Central Park.
The bride, who is keeping her name, is the director of the Eye on the Boards project of the Public Education Association, an advocacy group in New York.
Her mother is the head of the Physician's Assistants Program at Montefiore Hospital in the Bronx.


AFTER THE COLD WAR: Views From Africa; Stranded by Superpowers, Africa Seeks an Identity
Once avidly wooed by Washington and Moscow with large amounts of economic aid and modern armaments, the impoverished nations of Africa now find themselves desperate for friends.
In the last three years, superpower rivalry has been replaced by international indifference.
"With the end of the cold war, Africa has lost whatever political luster it may have once had," Michael Chege, a Kenyan political scientist working in Zimbabwe, wrote recently in the journal Foreign Affairs.
There are no compelling geopolitical, strategic or economic reasons "to catapult it to the top of the global economic agenda," he said.
"Africans must now take the initiative."


A Lifetime Fighting Racism: Was It Worth It?
To the Editor:
In September 1960, my husband and I moved to the North Shore of Long Island, New York.
We were not a little proud to be African-American teachers of science and mathematics who were integrating two of the outstanding junior high school staffs in the area.
I have to admit we had to give power of attorney to a member of the Great Neck Committee of Human Rights to obtain an apartment, but we were filled with hope.


New Doubts in New Jersey About Cuts in Sales Tax
As Gov.
Jim Florio and the Legislature barrel toward a showdown over repealing a sales-tax increase, voters who six months ago gave legislative control to Republicans largely on the basis of their promise to cut the sales tax no longer seem to be sure what they want.
Mr.
Florio said that on Monday he would veto a Republican bill to cut the state sales tax from 7 percent to 6 percent, a move estimated to cost the state $610 million in revenue.
Senate President Donald T. DiFrancesco and Assembly Speaker Garabed (Chuck) Haytaian countered that they would wait the required three days and then meet Thursday to use their overwhelming legislative advantage to override Mr.
Florio's veto.


In the Region: Westchester and Connecticut; Recent Sales
Bedford, N.Y. 860,000  Old Logging Road  4-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 6-year-old colonial; 2 fireplaces, dining room, country kitchen, pool, terrace, 3 acres; taxes $13,780.
Pound Ridge, N.Y. 315,000
208 Conant Valley Road
4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 37-year-old colonial; dining room, eat-in kitchen, family room, fireplace, new brick terrace, 2.3 acres; taxes $7,475.
South Salem, N.Y. 300,000
Mill River  5-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 269-year-old colonial; 6 stone fireplaces, library, sitting room, sun room, pantry, wine cellar, 8.2 acres; taxes $8,748.
Enfield, Conn. 108,000
11 Washington Avenue  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 52-year-old cape cod; book shelves, formal dining room, porch, 0.2 acre; taxes $1,247.
Glastonbury, Conn. 160,000
122 Indian Hill Trail  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 22-year-old raised ranch; large family room, hardwood floors, pool, 1 acre; taxes $3,216.
Westport, Conn. 510,000
7 Nassau Road  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, contemporary; private mooring, water views, open plan interior, 0.33 acre; taxes $6,138.
OTHER AREAS East Meadow, L.I. 185,000  2747 Woods Avenue  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 9-year-old high ranch; dining room, eat-in kitchen, family room, 1-car garage; taxes $5,200.
Levittown, L.I. 134,000
38 Center Lane  4-bedroom, 1-bath, 43-year-old Cape Cod; dining room, family room; taxes $3,300.
Aberdeen, N.J. 149,000
8 Ormont Lane  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 27-year-old colonial; c/a, fenced yard, large property; taxes $4,260.


The Thrifty Traveler in 10 World Cities; Tokyo
Finding a place to stay is only one of many choices facing the traveler on a tight budget.
Here are suggestions on where to eat, what to do and what not to do from 10 New York Times correspondents in cities around the world.


Sports of The Times; The Photo That Hangs Above Ewing
IN a blue bathrobe with a Knicks logo on it, Patrick Ewing was slumped in a chair, his left leg stretched out.
His left ankle, thick with tape, rested in an ice cooler.
When the Knicks forced today's seventh game of their punishing playoff series against the Bulls with a 100-86 victory Thursday night, their 7-foot center had scored 11 of his 27 points in the fourth quarter while hobbling on a sore ankle.
"How were you able to play on it?" he was asked.


Insurers and Lawyers Throw the Dirt Back at Polluters; Why They Don't Say 'Yes'
In an article on the Forum page on May 3, Eugene R. Anderson and Robert M. Horkovich, partners in the New York law firm of Anderson Kill Olick &amp; Oshinsky, wrote about the high litigation costs associated with the cleanup of toxic waste.
The article, "Why Insurance Companies Say No," cited a recent study by the Rand Institute for Civil Justice, which "reported that nearly 90 percent of the money allocated by insurance companies in Superfund claims had gone toward legal and related 'transaction' costs, rather than for cleaning up pollution."


TALES FROM THE BABY FACTORY
Your article raised several issues of importance to infertile couples.
As a doctor who works with such couples, I would like to point out that the term "assisted reproductive technologies" refers specifically to IVF and other "high tech" procedures.
While only 10 percent of couples undergoing an IVF cycle are generally successful, it should be understood that the vast majority of those seeking infertility treatment do not need IVF.
Approximately 50 percent of women who see a doctor for infertility end up with a baby.
Most of them respond to treatment regimens simpler and less expensive than IVF or GIFT.
The 10 percent figure quoted in your article may unnecessarily discourage some from seeking treatment.


A Legal Standoff On Hertz Surcharges
Four months after the Hertz Corporation slapped steep surcharges on some New York City renters, the city and state have sued, and the city has passed a law against the charges, but at the moment the parties are at a legal standoff and Hertz says its policy is working as intended.
Hertz took the action in January because, it said, renters from Brooklyn, Queens and especially the Bronx were disproportionately responsible for accidents that led to suits against Hertz and huge settlement expenses.
In New York, a car owner, including a rental car company, is responsible for damages caused to third parties, like pedestrians or other drivers.


Amsterdam
About an hour from the bustle of Amsterdam lies a sprawling nature reserve with rolling sandy hills and woodlands and, almost hidden at its heart, one of Europe's most beautiful modern art museums.
This is a generous site and its bounty has many faces.
There are tracks and paths for roaming or cycling, with more than 400 bicycles available for visitors, free of charge.
The moors and forest are alive with birds and butterflies and, less visible, red deer, mouflon, boar and roe.
Once the private hunting estate of Willem and Helene (Muller) Kroller, this land was transformed into the Hoge Veluwe National Park in 1935.
At its center, along a leafy avenue stands the Kroller-Muller National Museum.
It is an arresting building, low and sprawling, last expanded in the 1970's.
Its spacious glass walls let the forest in so that your eye wanders from the paintings inside to a sudden perspective of green space outside, usually punctuated by a sculpture.
The magnificent collection is set in an atmosphere of Zen tranquillity that makes the art more eloquent.


Lesbianism: Not a Nasty Word
To the Editor
In her article "How 'Poison Ivy' Got Its Sting"  [ May 3 ] , Laurie Halpern Benenson writes that the plot touches on "murder, incest, lesbianism, alcoholism and suicide."


An Illusion? No, Not at All
No need to rush to the eye doctor if you're seeing double and triple checks coming down Fifth Avenue.
It's a simple case of fashion going overboard for one of its classic motifs.
Last year's polka-dot epidemic is being replaced by an explosion of checks, from bold houndstooth patterns to demure ginghams.
What causes so many women to adapt a particular fabric pattern might seem like a manipulation of consumers by fashion designers, textile manufacturers and store buyers.
The truth is that the fashion industry has simply expanded what started out last year as a high-fashion ripple into a much broader market, and a much broader price range.
After years of solid-color suits, the public is evidently ready for just this sort of vitality.
And so are the ailing retail and fashion worlds.


Back to the Future


Making a Difference; Final Piece of the Puzzle
Ask a computer engineer to free-associate on the term microprocessor, and the words "Texas Instruments" are not likely to come up.
The Dallas-based semiconductor concern has long been known for making nearly every type of chip except the one that forms the actual central processor, or brain, of a personal computer.
But that changed last week, with two new products that could put Texas Instruments in the microprocessor market in a big way.
First, it announced a "Super Sparc" chip, which would run in high-powered work stations from Sun Microsystems Inc. and others using Sun's Sparc architecture.
Second came the long-anticipated confirmation that the company would team with the Cyrix Corporation of Richardson, Tex., to produce a chip compatible with the Intel Corporation's 486, which is used in I.B.M.-compatible personal computers.


Correction
A chart on May 3 about zoos in the United States misstated the opening hours and admission policy for the National Zoo, in Washington.
It is open from 9 to 6 between May 1 and Sept. 15, and from 9 to 4:30 between Sept. 16 and April 9.
There is no charge.


Selectivity Is Key
To the Editor
Michael Kimmelman's article about the Whitney Museum highlights a structural dilemma facing museums  [ "The Whitney Continues Its Search . . . for Itself," April 19 ] .
The basic mandate of an art museum is to collect, preserve, interpret and exhibit
significant
works of art.
Selectivity is key to discharging this responsibility.
But once museums bought the argument that all notions of excellence, discernment and quality are exclusionary, racist or sexist, their very underpinnings came unglued.
When art is judged not by universal standards that have evolved over centuries but by some arbitrary, shifting and intellectually indefensible notions of multiculturism, the museum degenerates into a warehouse.


The Thrifty Traveler in 10 World Cities; Rome
Finding a place to stay is only one of many choices facing the traveler on a tight budget.
Here are suggestions on where to eat, what to do and what not to do from 10 New York Times correspondents in cities around the world.


The Right Response to Riots
How should America respond to riots, with more police or more programs?
The turmoil in Los Angeles has revived the old choice -- and shown why it has always been fallacious.
America's inner cities desperately need more crime control and more social services.
That explains why the Bush Administration's "Weed and Seed" idea deserves serious support -- if a troublesome defect can be corrected and if the President is as willing to deliver money as oratory.


MAY 10-16: The Philippines; If She Loses, the Winner May Wish He Had Instead
As the vote count trickled in after the Philippine presidential election, Miriam Defensor Santiago seemed likely to finish up either as the next president of the Philippines -- or the biggest thorn in the new president's side.
The tough-talking maverick presidential candidate known in Manila newspapers as "the Mouth that Roared" has run a come-from-nowhere campaign to succeed President Corazon C. Aquino that has humbled the gargantuan political machines that control Philippine elections.


Pasadena's Pluses
To the Editor:
I sense that Mr.
Cunningham himself is verging on stereotype in his repeated comments about the problems of growing up gay in Pasadena.
I wonder if he is aware that one church in this city -- All Saints Episcopal -- is breaking new ground in its decision to celebrate and consecrate the union and covenant of same-sex couples, and to include gay men and lesbians in all areas of parish life.
Although this decision has met with general approval from the congregation, the church has been subject to weeks of loud demonstrations.


Death-Penalty Law Tightened
AFTER receiving overwhelming endorsement in both houses of the Legislature, an amendment to the state's capital punishment statute was signed into law by Gov.
Jim Florio last week, potentially reducing condemned inmates' chances of escaping the death penalty.
The new amendment follows on the heels of a resolution passed last month by the State Assembly to put a constitutional amendment on the ballot in November that would strengthen the death-penalty law.
The Senate is expected to vote on a similar resolution after a public hearing scheduled for May 26 in Paterson.


Amanda Kelly, H. Courtemanche
Amanda Clarke Horn Kelly, the daughter of Lynn D. Kelly of Bristol, R.I., and Charles Allen Horn of Westport, Conn., was married yesterday in Newport, R.I., to Howard Bock Cromey Courtemanche, a son of Pamela Bock Cromey of Tuxedo Park, N.Y.
The Rev.
Edwin H. Cromey, the groom's stepfather, performed the Episcopal ceremony in the chapel of St.
George's School.
Miss Kelly, 26 years old, who is keeping her name, is an account executive at Saatchi &amp; Saatchi, an advertising firm in New York.
She graduated from Yale University.
Her father owns Bost Enterprises Inc., a direct-marketing firm in Westport, Conn.
Her mother is the director of public relations at Trinity Repertory Company in Providence, R.I.
The bride's stepfather, C. Robert Kelly of Bristol, is the pension consultant at Metropolitan Life in Warwick, R.I.


To the Bard
Shakespeare Festival awards and a celebration of American crafts.


Ruined Tires
To the Editor: In February we were visiting Torrey Pines State Beach near La Jolla, Calif., when we were stranded by a form of medieval automobile torture.
Since we were from the East and unfamiliar with this state's cruel punishment for an accidental turn onto the wrong side of the parking lot, we turned and the car's front tires were punctured by road spikes, immobilizing the car.


Banks Holding Back On Easier Credit
"Developers Join Forces to Seek Easy Credit"  [ May 3 ]  understates the problem of credit for real estate.
Ask any commercial-mortgage broker, which is what I am, and they will tell you that the banks are generally unwilling to provide financing for developments of any kind, even ones that are 100 percent pre-leased.
And worse, lenders won't even extend existing loans on perfectly healthy properties for borrowers with perfect payment records.


Moving Outdoors
Harden off, or acclimate, tender plants that have been indoors before planting outside.
Set them outside in a cold frame or a protected spot, out of direct sunlight.
Leave them out for just a few hours at first, prolonging the time each day.
After a week, they should be adjusted to outdoor temperatures; if frost threatens, they should be covered with bushel baskets or floating row covers.
The best time to put in transplants is on an overcast, cool morning.
Don't plant in the midday sun.
Water each transplant with a half-strength solution of fertilizer, like fish emulsion, to decrease the shock of root disturbance.


The Global Village Of Photography
AS the European Community ushers in a new era in politics by way of the Common Market, the international photographic community is also bracing for great technological changes.
These two forces will be explored at the seventh annual Journees de l'Image Professionnelle, scheduled July 4-6 in Arles, France.
Vincent Bertomeu, the founder of the conference, known as JIP, said that this year's lectures and workshops will focus on electronic imaging, in which pictures are made without film and standard processing and instead are stored on electronic chips and disks.
The conference is open to professional photographers and advanced amateurs alike.


They Seemed Like Good Ideas at the Time
A collection of articles and illustrations published in scientific journals between 1865 and 1900, VICTORIAN INVENTIONS (John Murray/Trafalgar Square, Paper, $24.95) intends to foster admiration for those intrepid Victorian inventors who laid the groundwork for many of the devices that define modern life -- electrical appliances, the telephone, the airplane, X-ray machines.
But inevitably such high-mindedness is subverted by the inclusion of so many inventions that are remarkable only for their outlandish mechanical absurdity, execrable esthetics or bad taste.
One rare gem is a machine for electroplating the dead.
The dream world of the Victorian inventor was filled with the overhead clattering of pedal-propelled helicopters, miniature electric trains fetching fish and sauce from the kitchen, and prim passengers in bullet-shaped carriages free-falling from the Eiffel Tower into a pond.
The illustrations -- replete with stiff men wearing top hats and handlebar mustaches, and women in bustle skirts -- are largely responsible for the comic effect.
Aside from a brief and straight-faced introduction, Leonard de Vries, the author of "Victorian Advertisements," provides no editorial comment.
The book makes clear that whatever we inherited from the Victorians that was eminently useful, they were also responsible for the love of gadgets for the sake of gadgetry.


It Came From Outer Space
Anni Kuan, a 32-year-old fashion designer, is looking to the military-industrial complex for inspiration.
In her new showroom on West 38th Street, Ms.
Kuan sits at her buyers' table, which is made from the base of a rocket booster.
By the window, there's a table fashioned from part of a satellite-launching unit, and her samples hang on a rack that is actually a piece of a jet's exterior.


Time Was Dietrich's Most Ardent Lover
"Marlene Dietrich is a professional," Alfred Hitchcock once said.
"She's a professional actress, a professional ward rober, a professional lighting technician. . . ." Hitchcock knew his subject well, having directed her in "Stage Fright" (1950), in which she introduced one of her favorite cabaret songs, "The Laziest Girl in Town." Dietrich was a professional just-about-everything.
Even before the British astrophysicist Stephen Hawking, the incomparable Marlene understood the nature of time and used this knowledge to create a legend that, eventually, became as good as fact.


Longhorn Prospect May Spurn Football
He has been recruited as a top quarterback prospect by the University of Texas, but SHEA MORENZ, a Houston high school star, may have different plans and a different sport in mind.
He said he had been talking to the Houston Astros about an immediate baseball career.
A right fielder who hit .510 with 8 home runs for his high school team, Morenz told The Houston Post he was one of several players being considered by the Astros, who have the first pick in the June draft.


IDEAS &amp; TRENDS: Accreditation; Questions At the Top On Hospital Policy
WITHIN the medical profession, few organizations boast the power and prestige of the Joint Commission on Accreditation of Healthcare Organizations, the private accrediting agency for American hospitals.
Outside the profession, few organizations provoke as much controversy and skepticism, particularly among many government officials and consumer groups familiar with the arcane yet important world in which the Joint Commission holds sway.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on April 26 about a group of Jersey City artists described their careers incorrectly.
The artists have been in several group and solo shows, but no such show has been at Stendhal, the Manhattan gallery that represents them.
The article also referred incorrectly to Women's Health Action and Mobilization.
It supports abortion rights; it is not an AIDS advocacy group.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Political Memo; Clinton Seeks to Reintroduce Himself
When Gov.
Bill Clinton strolled into a hotel meeting room in Minnesota on Tuesday to offer an election night response to the victories he had just won in Nebraska and West Virginia, there were no balloons or music.
The candidate seemed interested only in acknowledging the latest notches on his belt and moving on.
He was "encouraged" by the results, he said.
The normally voluble Governor of Arkansas spoke about two sentences, and when he paused for questions, he was greeted with an awkward silence.


Slonimsky: You Could Look Him Up
When i went to see Nicolas Slonimsky recently, just after he had celebrated his 98th birthday with a visit to his native St.
Petersburg, Russia, the first thing he showed me was a picture of a spiky-haired Jennifer Batten, a guitarist for Michael Jackson, giving him an ardent hug.
Mr.
Slonimsky is, of course, our most accomplished musical lexicographer, having just completed yet another revision of Baker's Biographical Dictionary.
I had come to talk to him about his reflections on seeing again the city of his birth, about musical life in Russia and about his encyclopedic musical knowledge.
Yet he wanted to talk about a "slumber party" he had with Ms.
Batten and her fellow musicians.
I shouldn't have been surprised.
Even when most serious, Mr.
Slonimsky is always at play.
He has been one of this century's most active minor musical figures -- a performer, adviser, chronicler, raconteur, an assistant to Koussevitzky, a friend of Frank Zappa and John Cage.
He has the sort of ear, he says, that can identify the precise frequency of any pitch, the sort of analytical mind that can dissect the structure of highly intricate music.
But his most famous musical achievements may be his performances of Chopin's "Black Key" Etude with an orange (a feat performed on the "Tonight" show) and of a piano transcription of Wagner's "Tannhauser" Overture using a shoebrush.
That spirit of odd juxtaposition haunts his reference book "Music Since 1900," in which milestones appear alongside minutiae. (Stravinsky, we learn, had a toothache as he finished "The Rite of Spring.")


Surviving the Dreaded Dogwood Disease
PLENTY of dogwood trees are in full bloom, and when they are seen in concert with the flowers of the redbud, there is no finer springtime show.
Because of this dramatic appeal, dogwoods are still being planted, and should be.
But the fungus that has been decimating the dogwood population still exists throughout the dogwood's natural range.
Although the disease was first reported in 1978, it has not been conquered; where it runs out of control, in forested areas especially, dogwood trees have died in two to three years.
But more and more scientists are researching the problem, and the consensus is one of optimism.


Under the Gun, Some Real Bloopers
THERE were indeed grievous blunders in the semifinal elimination matches April 11-28 in Linares, Spain, to determine who will challenge Gary Kasparov of Russia in the title contest in Los Angeles in the fall of 1993.
The most spectacular were those by Anatoly Karpov of Russia (losing his queen for a rook in Game 6 against the English grandmaster Nigel Short) and by Artur Yusupov of Germany (walking into a mate in one in Game 4 against Jan Timman of the Netherlands).
Tension can do that.


Elena Piropato, Randolph Pierce
Elena Ann Christina Piropato, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Sal Piropato of Lattingtown, L.I., was married yesterday in New York to Randolph William Pierce, a son of Jacqueline V. McGowan of Naples, Fla., and the late Thursby S. Pierce.
The Rev.
James R. Covington, a Unitarian minister, performed the ceremony at the Columbus Citizens Foundation.
Mrs.
Pierce, 25 years old, is a marketing manager at Citicorp Establishment Services in Melville, L.I.
She graduated from the C. W. Post Campus of Long Island University.
Her father is an advertising managing director at The New York Times.
Her mother, Teresa Piropato, operates her own management and public relations consulting company in Lattingtown.


Heather Jane Allen and Ford Smith
Heather Jane Allen, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
David S. Allen of Sarasota, Fla., was married there yesterday to Wilburn Radford Smith 2d, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Harold B. Smith Jr. of Lafayette, Calif.
The Rev.
Richard Benner, a Unitarian minister, performed the ceremony at the home of the bride's parents.
Mrs.
Smith graduated from Vanderbilt University and received an M.B.A. degree from Harvard University.
She is a marketing executive with the Nestle Beverage Company in San Francisco.
Her father is the chairman and chief executive of Petry Television Inc., a television advertising representative in New York, and the chairman of the Boatworks, a boat dealership in Sarasota.


Hillary Barnett, Victor Bitar
Hillary E. Barnett, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Stanley Barnett of North Miami Beach, Fla., was married Friday in New York to Victor Bitar, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Georges Bitar of Beirut, Lebanon.
Justice Stanley Ostrau of New York State Supreme Court officiated at the St.
Regis.
Mrs.
Bitar, 30 years old, graduated from the Fashion Institute of Technology.
She was until recently a buyer for Bergdorf Goodman in New York.
Her father, who is retired, was an executive sales manager for the Equitable Bag Company, a shopping-bag manufacturer in New York.


Susan R. Cole, C. C. Callahan
Susan Rockwell Cole, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert R. Cole of Darien, Conn., was married there yesterday to Christopher Charles Callahan, a son of Robert F. Callahan of Greenwich, Conn., and the late Julie O'Connell Callahan.
The Rev.
Anne Kimball performed the ceremony at St.
Luke's Episcopal Church.
Msgr.
John Murphy assisted.
Mrs.
Callahan, 27 years old, graduated from Denison University.
Until recently, she was a senior manager in the estates department of Sotheby's in New York.
Her father is president of White Oak Capital Management Inc., an investment concern in New York.


Conversations/Radovan Karadzic; Understanding, and Letting Loose, Historic Hatreds in the Balkans
IN the Europe of the earlier part of this century, its history repeatedly knocked askew by events in the southeastern corner of the continent, the word Balkan became a synonym for things obscure, laden with unpleasant surprises, menacing.
It seemed like a good word to ponder approaching an encounter with Radovan Karadzic, the man who as much as any is bound up with the bizarre and frightening events in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Normally, (if anything about Bosnia's violent destruction can be called normal), Mr.
Karadzic is to be found here and there in the mountainous republic, a pimpernel of a politician who leads the 1.4 million Bosnian Serbs and their powerful militias.
But on this day, he was not moving behind a phalanx of bodyguards in the blasted precincts of Sarajevo, the Bosnian capital, or plotting strategy at his headquarters in Pale, a resort village outside Sarajevo that was base for the Alpine events in the 1984 winter Olympic Games.


SAUDI REFORM PLAN IS CALLED 'EMPTY'
Middle East Watch, a human rights group, has charged that wide-ranging reforms instituted by Saudi Arabia in the wake of the Persian Gulf war fall far short of internationally recognized standards in basic civil and political rights.
A report by the group, a division of the New York-based Human Rights Watch, says the reforms, ostensibly intended to decentralize power in the kingdom and to guarantee Saudi citizens personal freedoms, actually serve to concentrate power in the hands of King Fahd and are "either silent or tentative on the most universally recognized human rights."


North of the Border, Up Babylon Way
MEXICAN or Spanish?
Diners faced with a two-cuisine restaurant often wonder which road to take.
At Don Ricardo's in Babylon, decor is the first clue.
The flags of Spain and Mexico, plus bullfight posters appropriate to either country, offer no hints.
But serapes, sombreros and pictures of turn-of-the-century bandidos firmly fix Don Ricardo's heart south of the border.


When a Derby Winner Is Still Ignored
The winner of the Kentucky Derby was just another forgotten, mud-caked horse after today's Preakness.
In fact, he was also a somewhat sick horse.
Lil E. Tee went off as the second choice at better than 4-1, never showed a liking for the track that was soaked by a downpour Friday night and finished fifth.


Kristin Cater, James C. Biddle
Kristin Anne Cater, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John A. Cater of New Hartford, N.Y., was married yesterday in Philadelphia to James Copeland Biddle, the son of Louisa C. Duemling of Washington and James Biddle of Andalusia, Pa.
The Rev.
W.
W.
Meyer performed the ceremony at St.
Peter's Episcopal Church.
Mrs.
Biddle, 26 years old, graduated from the University of Pennsylvania.
She is an account executive with DKNY, a division of the Donna Karan fashion company in New York.
Her father owns Cater Lincoln-Mercury, a dealership in Utica, N.Y.
Mr.
Biddle, 26, also graduated from Penn.
He is the president of B.D.C.
Entertainment, an entertainment management company in New York.
His mother is a director of the Du Pont Company in Wilmington, Del.
His father, who is retired, was a president of the National Trust for Historic Preservation in Washington and a curator of the American wing at the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York.


Ms. Mosellie, Francis Serbaroli
Bernadette Mary Mosellie, a daughter of Sarah M. Mosellie and Edward J. Mosellie, both of Brooklyn, was married yesterday to Francis Joseph Serbaroli, a son of Joseph A. and Agnes C. Serbaroli of New York.
The Rev.
Francis P. Canavan performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Church of St.
Ignatius Loyola in New York.
The Rev.
William T. Wood assisted.
Mrs.
Serbaroli is a senior planner at Beth Israel Medical Center in New York.
She graduated from Brooklyn College of the City University of New York and received a master's degree in public health from Yale University.
Her father, now retired, was president of the Certified Printing Company in Brooklyn.
Her mother is an assistant at the Brooklyn College student organization center.


Think Young
At the library, on the pier, supporting art and youth.


ABOUT CARS: A Quick Trip Through the Mailbag; Some Spare Thoughts
Dear Sir:
I enjoyed reading about the 1992 Cadillac Seville STS.
However, I can't go on a trip from New Jersey to Florida without ample trunk space and a full-size spare tire.
There is not one American carmaker who has a car that carries a full-size spare.


South Africans Recess, Still at Odds on a Constitution; 2 Top Leaders Balm Wounds
Negotiations on South Africa's future remained at an impasse today, even though tension produced by a deadlock on Friday was dissipated in a meeting between President F. W. de Klerk and Nelson Mandela, the leader of the African National Congress.
The only results announced at the two-day session of the negotiating forum, the Convention for a Democratic South Africa, were a restructuring of its format and a declared willingness among the 19 political parties and other groups that are taking part to try again at the next session, hopefully by the end of June.
In the next six weeks, the convention's management committee is to try to resolve the deadlock, which has developed over guidelines for a new constitution.


Dietrich, From 'Blue Angel' to Stage Door
To the Editor:
The first time I heard of Marlene Dietrich I was in my early teens when everybody was talking about "The Blue Angel," which naturally no one of my tender age was allowed to see.
The next time she caused an uproar was during our summer vacation in St.
Wolfgang, Austria, in the late 30's when, while sitting in the front row at the Salzburger Festspiele, Toscanini conducting, she put her legs up against the balustrade behind the maestro's back.


Surviving the Dreaded Dogwood Disease
PLENTY of dogwood trees are in full bloom, and when they are seen in concert with the flowers of the redbud, there is no finer springtime show.
Because of this dramatic appeal, dogwoods are still being planted, and should be.
But the fungus that has been decimating the dogwood population still exists throughout the dogwood's natural range.
Although the disease was first reported in 1978, it has not been conquered; where it runs out of control, in forested areas especially, dogwood trees have died in two to three years.
But more and more scientists are researching the problem, and the consensus is one of optimism.


Mirabella Wins Fight for a Star Star
The astrologist Patric Walker has landed.
At least two magazines, Conde Nast Traveler and Mirabella, bid for Mr.
Walker's monthly horoscope column, which had been published in the now-defunct magazine European Travel &amp; Life.
Last week, Mirabella signed him.
"Our lives have changed since we got him," says Gay Bryant, Mirabella's editor in chief.
"He's so much more encouraging and believable than any other horoscope I know of."


Karen K. Kidder, Martin Holub
Karen Klier Kidder, a business executive, and Martin Holub, an architect, both in New York, were married yesterday.
David Lothrop, a chaplain affiliated with God's Lighthouse, performed the nondenominational ceremony at the chapel at the Church Center for the United Nations.
Mrs.
Holub, 47 years old, is the manager of professional staff recruiting for McKinsey &amp; Company in New York.
She graduated from the University of California at Berkeley.
Her first marriage ended in divorce, as did that of her fiance.
She is the daughter of Beatrice Klier of Forest Hills, Queens, and the late Harold Klier.
Her mother is the director of educational programs for the New York Academy of Sciences.


Free Sex? Not Now, Love
SHIRTWAISTS and sweater-sets are in style.
Communism, everyone agrees, is a terrible idea.
And while sex may be talked about and thought about, no one thinks anyone should actually
have
it.
The '90s are feeling more and more like the '50s all the time.


Barbados Acts To Stem Crime
In response to a notice issued by the State Department alerting prospective visitors to recent increases in crime on Barbados, the Barbados Government has announced stepped-up security efforts.
The measures include cancellation of all leaves for police officers, longer hours for the police and intensified patrols in the capital of Bridgetown and other tourist areas (the west coast beaches and the Flower Forest in the north-central part of the island among them), some including members of the military.
Until recent months, the island has had little history of crime directed against tourists, the State Department notice says, but incidents of purse snatching, pickpocketing, sexual assault and armed robbery, have been reported, particularly in Bridgetown, sometimes in crowded areas and in daylight.


Conversations/Radovan Karadzic; Understanding, and Letting Loose, Historic Hatreds in the Balkans
IN the Europe of the earlier part of this century, its history repeatedly knocked askew by events in the southeastern corner of the continent, the word Balkan became a synonym for things obscure, laden with unpleasant surprises, menacing.
It seemed like a good word to ponder approaching an encounter with Radovan Karadzic, the man who as much as any is bound up with the bizarre and frightening events in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Normally, (if anything about Bosnia's violent destruction can be called normal), Mr.
Karadzic is to be found here and there in the mountainous republic, a pimpernel of a politician who leads the 1.4 million Bosnian Serbs and their powerful militias.
But on this day, he was not moving behind a phalanx of bodyguards in the blasted precincts of Sarajevo, the Bosnian capital, or plotting strategy at his headquarters in Pale, a resort village outside Sarajevo that was base for the Alpine events in the 1984 winter Olympic Games.


She's Got Her Nerves
Carly Simon conquered her notorious fear of singing in public for one night last week.
She gave a rare invitation-only performance on Wednesday at Skep, a small basement coffeehouse at 527 Broome Street.
For almost three solid hours, Ms.
Simon (left), along with Marc Cohn, Aztec Two-Step and five other musicians, sang everything from her 1971 hit "Anticipation" to "Love of My Life," from her new album, "This Is My Life."


Stephanie LoRusso, Philip Pearson
Stephanie Elise LoRusso, the daughter of Patrick M. LoRusso and Dr.
Diane C. LoRusso of Rye, N.Y., was married yesterday to Philip Yarnall Pearson, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Stephen Pearson of Philadelphia.
The Rev.
Anita Schell-Lambert performed the Episcopal ceremony at the home of the bride's parents.
Mrs.
Pearson, 23 years old, graduated cum laude from Princeton University and is studying for a law degree at the University of Virginia.
Her father is an assistant personnel officer for Westchester County, based in White Plains.
Her mother is a diagnostic radiologist in private practice in Rye Brook, N.Y.


Picking Up Americana At Kennedy
WONDERING what happened to Hudson's, the army-navy store that disappeared from the corner of Third Avenue and 13th Street about a year ago, after 74 years in that neighborhood?
It's thriving, in miniature, at the far end of Delta Terminal 1 at Kennedy International Airport.
There, travelers heading to Western Europe make a final grab for Levi's, Schott leather biker jackets, Sebago Docksides, Woolrich sweaters, Ray-Ban sunglasses and other icons of American fashion.
"It has to say 'Made in U.S.A.,' " said Zoraida Patino, a saleswoman, on a recent Sunday.


INSIDE
America's Cup Defended
Bill Koch's America
team defeated Paul Cayard's team, Il Moro di Venezia, to defend the America's Cup on behalf of the San Diego Yacht Club. (The race ended too late for some issues of SportsSunday, Section 8.)
News Summary, Page 2


Cuban Journal: Havana and Beyond
As the taxi speeds, we pass the crumbling arches of the colonial houses that line the Malecon.
Rubble lies in front of some.
Others with no roofs or upper floors are held up by makeshift scaffolding.
The frames of windows stand empty, open to the sky.
On the lower floors, beneath the collapsed roofs, laundry hangs drying.
A rooster struts on a Baroque balcony.
Designed in 1857 by the Cuban engineer Gen.
Franciso de Albear, the Malecon was at one time prime real estate - the seafront drive of Havanna.
These formerly glorious houses were the dwellings of the privileged.
Now as many as 10 families live in a single building among the ruins.
The fading crimson, sun-drenched yellow and cobalt blue facades provide the hint of a playful past, but now they look as if they haven't been painted since the dictator Fulgencio Batista fled in 1959.
Later we learn that they are painted, but Cuba can't get seaworthy paint to protect the Malecon from ocean sprays.
This doesn't explain the rubble, the ancient scaffolding.
It's not clear whether things are being restored or just propped up.
Our car stops for a light (all the cars that don't carry tourists go through the light), and I gasp as a boy dives off the sea wall for his afternoon swim.
Young men stroll, clasping the hands of their girlfriends who walk above them, along the sea wall, in what seems to be a courtship ritual, Havanna-style.
Other people - almost exclusively young men - sit alone, facing the sea, looking north toward Florida.
They appear as if they have nothing to do.
As we begin to drive again, the last light of day catches the Malecon.
For an instant the facades become a burst of color and you can see a splendor that was.
IN 1962, I CLUTCHED A FRIEND'S HAND AS WE listened to John F. Kennedy call Castro's "bluff".
Uncomprehending, we stared at my father who sat shaking his head.
"What is it?" we asked.
"Are we going to war?" "I'm not sure," he muttered.
"I just don't know." Thus a curtain fell on an island to which one's parents sneaked away for a long weekend of gambling and frolic.
America's playground, Cuba was called, a mere 90 miles from Key West, Fla.
Now, flying down from Canada for a week's visit, it was to me a land cloaked in mystery, tinged with romance and rage.
At the bar of Havana's Hotel Inglaterra, where we are staying, black men in white linen suits with red ties, probably Jamaicans, are hunched over, doing business.
My journalist husband and I have left our somewhat Spartan room, with its small balcony overlooking the Parque Central, to sip our first smooth rum drinks.
A lone singer plays the maracas.
Two little girls in yellow crinoline, hair braided, race to the adjoining dining room, recently refurbished to its former elegance of wrought iron and tile.
Silverware clinks as waiters, who all seem to be named Ernesto or Fidel, serve grilled shrimp and sliced mangoes to German, French and Hispanic tourists, the majority of whom have that listless look that comes with the packaged tour.
Cubans themselves almost never eat shellfish or swordfish, though their seas are rich in them.
Highly valuable seafood is exported and the money goes to buy baby formula, among other things.
We pay for our drinks in dollars, just as we paid for our taxi ride.
One can actually travel throughout Cuba and never need to change money, except perhaps to buy a newspaper or ride a bus.
Faced with the loss of Soviet aid and the dire need for hard currency, Cuba has turned to tourism.
And everything in the tourist economy is done in hard currency.
Meanwhile, we are told over and over again, it is forbidden for Cubans to own dollars or even to enter the stores that carry the items that dollars will buy.
AS WE VENTURE OUT, IT IS dark and a different reality greets us.
Boys beg for Chiclets and pens, "Please for school; we have nothing to write with." When I part with my lone Bic, the boy races off without a word.
At a counter to the left of the hotel where tourists dine, a long line forms.
People lean against a wall, arms folded, resignation in their eyes.
They are waiting for "pizza," thick dough with a glop of cheese and some sauce on it, which is what their pesos will buy.
Grease oozes through the paper wrappers; no one seems eager to eat.
Crossing the Prado, we head through the Parque Central and up Empedrado Street.
A stray dog wanders into the road, without peril.
Even on this main drag there are virtually no cars because gasoline is very scarce.
We enter the maze of streets of Old Havana, lighted by occasional street lights, but guards -- either regular police or the local Committee of the Defense of the Revolution -- are everywhere.
We feel safe, but also ill at ease.
We gaze into rooms where men stare at bargain-basement television sets that offer generic soap operas or predigested news.
The streets themselves are oddly devoid of life.
There are no shops, no grocery stores.
No restaurants or places to eat.
Nowhere to go except where we are going, the Bodeguita del Medio (literally little grocery store in the middle).
Hemingway had a phrase about this restaurant that has been immortalized on a plaque in the bar, "My daiquiri in the Floridita, my mojito in the Bodeguita." Here we dine on rice and beans (the best I've ever had), excellent roast chicken, fried plantains and, of course, those rum mint juleps known as mojitos.
We are serenaded by state-paid troubadours who sing Latin love songs.
During our trip all we will hear are love songs.
CALLE OBISPO RUNS from the Plaza de Armas to the Floridita bar.
In the morning, the darkness and mystery of Old Havana lift, and the ubiquitous lines form.
Cubans, ration books in hand, stand in line for about 5 eggs a week, a chicken every 10 days, a liter of milk a day if they have small children.
The lines seem to move faster than they do in Russia, and the Cubans are jovial.
They talk as they wait, often of the shortages.
One toothless old woman walks away, shaking her head.
No potatoes that day, but her shopping bag is full of oranges and bananas.
We stop at a cigar factory to buy some cigars, and learn that we can take a tour of the state-of-the-art facility.
The workers, we are told, work eight hours a day, get six months paid maternity leave, lifetime guaranteed employment and a full pension after the age of 55, if they so choose.
I ask a woman who must be close to 60 how long she has worked (23 years in the factory) and how long she plans to continue.
She dances a rumba for me in her seat, "As long as I'm moving," she says.
Her job is to put the little bands around the cigars.
After a visit to the Museum of the Revolution, which occupies the former Presidential Palace -- the exhibition begins, without irony, with Columbus -- we head to the coffee shop of the Riviera Hotel.
If I were to make a movie about Las Vegas in the 1950's, I'd film it in Havana -- at the Floridita or at the Riviera, Meyer Lansky's old casino.
Havana itself is a kind of period piece, a kind of living museum.
What few individually owned cars are on the streets are all preblockade -- De Sotos, Hudsons, Edsels, Chevrolets, painted iridescent gold and black or red and white, puttering along on what should be their last legs.
The Riviera, too, is vintage 50's, the real thing.
Now a hotel, its casinos have been turned into cabarets and a spacious lobby with starry light fixtures and a silver bank of elevators.
We order sandwiches and malteds, which are thick and smooth.
Our waiter, who sees me scribbling, asks what I am doing.
I tell him, which I do not tell everyone, that I am an American journalist.
He then launches into a brief history of Cuban socialism and his theory of the current economic crisis.
He explains that the Cubans have food, but it is bad food.
Fastidious people that they are, they have no soap.
He leans over my arm.
"You want to write something about Cuba, just go into a hospital," he says, "See what kind of care we really get. I don't mean the tourists who come for marrow transplants or heart surgery, but the Cubans. But don't tell anyone I told you. They'll put me in jail." We give him four bars of the Ivory soap that we were told to carry with us and he thanks us profusely.
HAT EVENING "SUENO Tropical" ("Tropical Dream") is playing near our hotel and we decide to go see it.
But just as we are about to change money (the only time we try to do so), a tour arrives and we cannot get near the Inglaterra's front desk.
We ask the bartender if she will give us some change in pesos, because we want to go to the movie.
She has seen it, and says it is very funny, but she cannot give us change in pesos.
Instead, she hands us a napkin enclosing a three-peso note (worth about $3.75).
"I am not changing the money," she tells us emphatically.
"This is a gift from me." We leave her a $5 tip.
The movie, made in Cuba, is, to our surprise, a spoof on gender relations -- an abusive husband dreams his wife goes off to work every day while he stays home with the baby.
The film opens with a pregnant woman giving a man her seat on a bus.
The theater is packed, and the Cubans never stop laughing.
After much difficulty and expense (Cuba does not provide incentives for the individual tourist), we rent a car and head east toward Trinidad, the old colonial city of smugglers and pirates.
Along the way we pause for a visit to the Hemingway House in San Francisco de Paula.
Hemingway bequeathed this house to Cuba, and it is much as he left it.
Set in a grove of bamboo and palm trees, draped in bougainvillea, it feels as if Hemingway has just gone out fishing and will be back in time for his mojitos.
One of the woman guards and I strike up a conversation.
She was a young girl and a neighbor when Hemingway lived there.
"The last time I saw him was in the summer of 1960. He was walking through town and he was quite mad." She pauses, blushing slightly, "But he was a man, let me tell you that. He was really a man."
We head south.
Bougainvillea lines the median strip.
Sweet-smelling fields thick with sugar cane and plantains extend on either side.
Oxen plow the fields, though this is to save gasoline.
Indeed, we have the highway almost to ourselves.
A few guaguas (public buses) pass.
One is broken down by the side of the road.
The right lane of traffic on the main freeway out of Havana is being used by bicycles (Cuba recently imported 500,000 of them from China) and hitchhikers.
Pickup trucks carry workers from place to place and whenever one pulls up dozens pile on.
In the distance the cane fields are being burned.
Dark smoke fills the sky.
More smoke comes from the cane factories.
We leave the main road and journey into the countryside, but the map grows vague.
Roads are paved, but have no names.
They are dotted with piglets and schoolchildren in their red-and-white uniforms (literacy of those under 30 is said to be almost 100 percent).
We are lost, so we pick up our first hitchhikers -- a young couple with a baby, heading in the direction of Cruces.
He speaks a Spanish I can barely comprehend, but I learn that he works in the cane factories and owns his own house.
We leave them at Cruces and make our way to Cumanayagua, where the road divides.
We've been driving for almost six hours when I stop an old woman for directions.
She speaks for a long time, and I nod, but then I sink into the car.
My husband says, "Well, which way?"
"I didn't understand a word she said." It is the low moment of the trip.
"Try again," he says.
I get out and several men come up.
They gesticulate wildly, measuring turns, dips in the road.
I follow their hands along imaginary roads.
We drive on by the seat of our pants, past an alpine lake in a valley among mountains.
There are no road signs and a mountain range is ahead of us.
We are low on gas.
Buzzards eating road kills take flight as we drive past.
Boys gallop by on horseback, ignoring a cow that stands in the middle of the road.
We pick up an old man who is going to Trinidad.
He has spent the day cleaning fish, and the stench is nearly unbearable.
We deposit him in downtown Trinidad where we're told there is a hotel, but we find nothing.
We head for the Ancon, the large tourist hotel on the beach, where the food is self-service and the furniture glorified Best Western.
It is packed with English-speaking tourists from Montreal.
The sand seems to be imported from elsewhere.
We are there 10 minutes when the lights go out for the evening.
In the morning we visit old Trinidad and its magnificently refurbished Spanish colonial houses, complete with 19th-century plumbing.
Then we head back across the country, toward Cuba's northern beaches.
We are not far out of Trinidad when we pick up a grandmother carrying milk from her cow to her new grandson in Cienfuegos.
At the crossroads to Cienfuegos she gets out.
"Can somebody help these people get to Abreus?" she shouts.
Three people who don't know one another, two men and a woman, all jump in.
Only the woman, a nurse, is going as far as Abreus, where she tells us there is a fiesta going on.
At Abreus, we park near the main plaza, which is decorated with palm fronds; the usual music blares.
Cubans slurp ice slush and sway to the music, a kind of salsa rap.
In an alleyway is a broken-down carousel, its wooden horses like a child's drawing, hand-carved.
We stroll down a dirt road where the houses are all primitive, in some cases with thatched roofs, but very clean and well kept.
A sign in front of one reads, "Don't tie your horses here." In each home, as a kind of centerpiece, a television set, compliments of the revolution, stands.
IN THE MIDST OF MILES and miles of orange groves on the road north, we pick up a young woman with pink shoes, giant earrings and blonde hair with dark roots.
She is going to Cardenas and will send us on to Varadero.
Our rider is chatty and good spirited and we begin to talk.
I ask her where she lives and where she works.
"I live in Cardenas, but I work where you picked me up."
"It's a long commute," I say.
"Yes, it takes two hours, each way, but there is no work in Cardenas."
"What do you do?"
"I'm a dentist. Actually I'm a cranial surgeon, but I do dentistry."
I look at this young woman in pink shoes.
"You're a surgeon?" She nods.
"Isn't there some easier way for you to get to work?"
She shrugs. "Oh, people know me, they pick me up. It's not so bad."
"You don't feel . . . inconvenienced?" I ask hesitantly.
"Oh, it is temporary," she says.
"We have to work hard to overcome this period in our history."
"Well what do you think is going to happen here -- with Fidel."
"Oh, I hope nothing. I love Fidel," she says as if she is referring to her boyfriend. (We know, however, that one can go to jail for a long time for "insulting" Fidel and the jails, we have heard, are full.) "My country has given me my education, my work, my house. All the patients I treat are treated for free. I hope he lives 20 more years."
VARADERO IS ON A LONG narrow peninsula on Cuba's northern coast, with the sea on one side and a bay on the other, somewhat like Palm Beach, Fla., geographically speaking.
But the comparison stops there.
While it is a strip of fairly fancy hotels with elaborate facilities -- hotels that serve the Canadian and European tourists who come for their winter holidays, most of whom fly into Varadero and stay put -- it is peculiarly devoid of commercialism.
There are the generic Intur tiendas, which sell the same rum and cigars and chocolates and shoes throughout Cuba.
There are a few beach barbecues, but basically what you have in Varadero, besides a kind of funky Cuban version of Club Med, is a pristine turquoise sea and a white beach, the real thing.
I ask for a room with a view of the sea at the Punta Blanca, an older hotel, and we are given a stuffy room with no balcony, over a noisy discotheque.
Knowing the language is helpful here.
I return to the desk clerk, an unenthusiastic worker, and say, "We have come a long way and we are very tired, and we'd like something a little more comfortable."
So she hands me a key that opens a small house with a wraparound porch that sits at the edge of the sea.
Next door is Al Capone's old guesthouse, a magnificent stone structure with French windows and wide stone arches that face the sea.
It has been turned into an around-the-clock bar, and we beat a path between our house and Al Capone's.
We dine at a Creole restaurant where we see the one phrase of public social protest we will see on our entire trip.
Graffitied across a poster is Fidel's revolutionary motto, "Socialismo o Muerte," revised to read "Fettucini o Muerte." We eat swordfish while the pre-paid musicians play love songs.
A handsome young Cuban joins in with bongos and his lover, a European tourist with a cowbell, tries to keep up her end of the percussion.
But then a drunk old man with a Hatuey beer in each fist sings some prerevolutionary decadent lyrics and the restaurant claps along.
HAT NIGHT EL NORTE blows in; the seas rise.
In the morning it is cold and jellyfish line the beach.
We walk, bundled up, while undaunted French tourists, bodies greased, sunbathe bare-breasted along the shore.
When we return to our room, the maid has folded our towels into swans and my husband refuses to disturb them.
The next afternoon, a man who works at the hotel approaches us.
"Please, I want to ask you a favor," he says.
"Could you go into the tienda for me; I want to buy a pair of red shoes for my little girl." He displays dollars in his hands.
Then he shows us a slip of paper, about four inches long.
"That is the size of her foot," he says.
"And I have another little girl." He adds two fingers to the piece of paper.
"This size."
"You can't go buy them yourself? With dollars?"
He puts his fingers to his lips.
"I can't even have dollars, but we all keep some of our tips, everyone does it. Can you do this? As a favor?"
It is this slip of paper cut to the size of his child's foot that wins me over.
The woman who works in the tienda knows just what shoes, what size.
She gives us a knowing nod as we leave.
UR LAST NIGHT IN Havana we join a group of German tourists, who keep tapping their watches, unaccustomed to Latin time, as we await the bus to take us to a cabaret.
At last it pulls up.
The automatic doors fling open and there, sprawled across the paunch of our aging driver are a pair of long black legs, a white skirt hiked up high to the thighs.
The woman pulls down her skirt and rises with stunning indifference.
"Tropicana," she says, shuffling into her tour director's seat.
The Tropicana has been in continuous operation since 1939.
Neither war nor revolution has changed it or stopped it.
Arriving, we file past a fountain with statues of nude nymphets dangling bunches of grapes.
Mirrors are everywhere.
For several hours the rum flows at $5 a shot and the girls, dressed in G-strings and spangles, kick and writhe and gyrate.
The audience of former Eastern bloc and future European community members offers perfunctory applause and after the 25-minute finale files out despondently.
We return to the bus where our tour director in her white skirt sits smoking a cigarette.
The driver drives so slowly that the Afro-Cuban dolls on his dash barely budge.
We cruise the Malecon at a snail's pace.
The sea calm, the moon full, it is cast in blue like an opera set.
Inside the dark stairwells of what appear to be abandoned buildings lights flicker.
Two people embrace.
I peer up toward the collapsed roofs and missing top floors and there, through the empty window frames, I see the stars.
SOME WORDS OF CAUTION
The Cuban tourist industry is designed to keep you on the tourist trail.
If you follow it, Cuba will appear more or less like any other place.
But if you deviate or scratch the surface, you may see that all is not as it might appear.
One morning before breakfast I placed two phone calls -- one to our daughter in Florida, the other to a former close associate of Fidel Castro's, in Havana, whose number had been given to me.
The calls were put through without any difficulty, though the operator made an audible gulp when I said "Florida." Afterward, my husband and I went for a morning stroll along the Prado, stopping for a cup of coffee.
Then we returned to our room to leave our sweaters.
We came upon the maid in the vestibule in front of our room.
She stared at us, wide-eyed.
The door was open, and another maid stood in the doorway.
"Good morning," we said.
They didn't say anything, which is unusual in Cuba.
We walked in to find a man with a razor blade in one hand and a pencil in the other.
With the pencil, he was literally tapping the phone.
"Is something the matter?" I asked.
The man looked up, startled but smiling.
"Inventory," he said.
He had a computer printout with him, and some small silver tags.
"Oh," I smiled.
My husband stared at me, lips pursed.
The man and the two maids quickly left the room.
Later, over lunch, when we mentioned to the former Castro associate that we suspected that our phone might be tapped, she just nodded.
"Probably," she said.
Never discuss money on the phone, she told us.
Or anything of substance.
Certainly not politics or whom we might be seeing.
On another occasion we met an Ethiopian man with a Canadian passport who was traveling with two white Canadian friends.
He told us, "Everywhere I go I am stopped; they pull me over and say, 'What are you doing with tourists?' I tell them that I
am
a tourist.
When they see my passport, they let me go." MARY MORRIS RULES AND REGULATIONS
Although Cuba is constructing new hotels, often as joint ventures with European hotel companies, few Americans are signing the guest registers.
Under sanctions imposed by the United States Government, American citizens, while technically free to travel to Cuba, are prohibited from spending any money there unless they are journalists, scholars or Cuban-Americans visiting family members who live on the island.
These regulations are backed up by penalties of up to 12 years in prison and $250,000 in fines, although to date no individual traveler has been penalized.
Some back doors are open, however.
SUN HOLIDAY TOURS, Post Office Box 531, Montego Bay, St.
James, Jamaica (telephone: 809-952-5629), offers day trips from Montego Bay for $177 a person.
The excursions depart every Wednesday, and the price includes round-trip air fare, in-flight snacks, an airport reception and transportation to, and a city tour of, Santiago de Cuba.
And, for those who wish to bend the rules, package trips to Cuba can be booked through Canadian travel agencies.
Some typical prices for seven-night packages offered by AIR CANADA VACATIONS, the major purveyor of such trips, range from about $350 a person, including air fare between Montreal and Varadero Beach and accommodations in a standard beachfront hotel, such as the Punta Blanca, to about $590 a person for air fare and a suite in the new Melia Varadero Hotel.
Meal packages (breakfast and dinner daily) are an additional $119 a person, and service charges add another $109 each.
Day trips to Havana can be arranged.
A recorded advisory concerning travel to Cuba (and many other countries) is available from the State Department: 202-647-5225.


The Thrifty Traveler in 10 World Cities; Rio de Janeiro
Finding a place to stay is only one of many choices facing the traveler on a tight budget.
Here are suggestions on where to eat, what to do and what not to do from 10 New York Times correspondents in cities around the world.
Since meals can be had in most of Rio's restaurants for under $50 a couple, why not try the rare restaurant that specializes in Brazil's distinctive regional cuisine?
Opened last Nov. 15, on Brazil's Independence Day, Cafe Brasil offers spicy fish soups from the northeast ($10) and black bean and sun-dried beef stew ($7) from Minas Gerais, the native state of Leonardo Braga, the English-speaking owner.
To accompany, try a lime juice and rum caipirinha ($1.40) or a passion fruit mousse ($1.25).
Far off the tourist track on a quiet side street in Rio's Botafogo neighborhood, Cafe Brasil has a lightly bohemian ambiance of bossa nova music on the stereo and tropical plants hanging from the Mediterranean-tile roof.
Cafe Brasil is at 25 Rua Capitao Salomao, Botafogo; telephone 266-6483.Reservations help, but are not a must.
For plenty of diversion with no admission fee, head for Rio's Sunday Hippie Fair, where piranha paperweights, Amazon hammocks, fanciful kites and T-shirts depicting voluptuous women in string bikinis are among the wares.
Sprawling over Ipanema's General Osorio Square, the daylong fair makes souvenir hunting one stop.
A few tips for haggling in the warren of booths selling paintings, belts and bags: cut the asking price by 40 percent, don't flash money and wield a pocket calculator.
With Brazil's inflation, $50 should pass through the 150,000 cruzeiro mark any day now.


He's My Brother
BARRY'S SISTER
By Lois Metzger. 227 pp. New York: Atheneum. $15.95. (Ages 10 and up)


Thieves Steal $1 Million in Gems
Armed robbers in three cars forced a stretch limousine off the Long Island Expressway in Queens yesterday and robbed two German jewelry dealers of more than $1 million in gems, jewelry and cash, the police said.
The robbery occurred at 3:40 P.M. as the limousine, carrying the dealers to Kennedy International Airport, drove east on the expressway near 48th Street, two miles from the Queens Midtown Tunnel, a police spokeswoman, Sgt.
Edelle James, said.


English-Style Inn With Ambitious Menu
WHAT began as a boys' school in 1894 in Washington evolved into the Mayflower Inn in 1920.
Mild modifications were made with each change of ownership, but massive renovations by the current owners, Adriana and Robert Mnuchin, have transformed the low-key inn into a bona fide country hotel, with echoes of England in each wood-paneled, comfortably furnished public room.
The main dining room is no exception.
A spacious, carpeted room overlooks the lawn and a Shakespeare garden in progress, and is furnished with comfortably padded chairs, tables set with silver candlesticks and walls hung with traditional paintings.
The formal style of the well-lighted room is warmed by the friendly staff.
Two smaller dining areas open off the main room.


RIDING UGLY
When people speak of rodeos as a sport, they fail to take into consideration that most sports involve two willing competitors.
The bulls have no choice.


Insurers and Lawyers Throw the Dirt Back at Polluters; A Hole in Their Argument
In an article on the Forum page on May 3, Eugene R. Anderson and Robert M. Horkovich, partners in the New York law firm of Anderson Kill Olick &amp; Oshinsky, wrote about the high litigation costs associated with the cleanup of toxic waste.
The article, "Why Insurance Companies Say No," cited a recent study by the Rand Institute for Civil Justice, which "reported that nearly 90 percent of the money allocated by insurance companies in Superfund claims had gone toward legal and related 'transaction' costs, rather than for cleaning up pollution."


MOBUTU'S ZAIRE
Alan Cowell's article "Mobutu's Zaire: Magic and Decay" (April 5) describes graphically how "Africa's most durable despot" plunged a vast, mineral-rich country into decline and degradation.
Mobutu did not do the job alone.
He was aided by a century of repressive Belgian colonial rule, Western complicity in his excesses and cold-war enmities that further tore asunder the fragile new state.


Is It Retro?
FOR most of recorded history, fashions changed ever so slowly.
Half-centuries crawled by before hemlines dropped or tunics loosened.
Now the culture emits messages at a frenetic pace.
Like the shadows cast on the wall of Plato's cave, the images speed by and one can only look and wonder.
One can see sport clothes, bondage wear and a partial return to Victorian bustles on the same fashion runway (Jean-Paul Gaultier).
Or one can see clearly dysfunctional clothes, clothes that make no sense, on both the catwalk and the street.


Patricia Constantikes, Frank Colella
Patricia Sophia Constantikes, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
George D. Constantikes of Westport, Conn., was married yesterday in Bridgeport, Conn., to Francesco Gabriele Colella, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Peter B. Colella of Sheepshead Bay, Brooklyn.
The Rev.
Demetrios A. Recachinas performed the ceremony at the Holy Trinity Greek Orthodox Church.
Mrs.
Colella, 29 years old, is an associate at the New York law firm of Kronish, Lieb, Weiner &amp; Hellman.
She is a cum laude graduate of Harvard University and received a law degree from Georgetown University.
Her father is a lawyer in Westport.
Her mother, Joan Constantikes, is an agent in Fairfield, Conn., for the Northwestern Mutual Life Insurance Company.


A Night In Romania
To the Editor:
Regarding Todd Gitlin's article "World Leaders: Mickey, et al."  [ May 3 ] : One Sunday evening in Bucharest last year, during the coup in the Soviet Union, we watched the street scene from our high-rise apartment.
Children played with bits of cardboard, old tires and a dead bird.
Parents and grandparents chatted over Bulgarian beer and Turkish orange drink.
Suddenly screams poured down from the surrounding buildings.
The people below ran into their apartments, emptying the street.


Family Ties


Ms. Swinton, Randy Schoen
Elizabeth Harris Swinton, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Neil W. Swinton Jr. of Chestnut Hill, Mass., and Randy Richard Schoen, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard Schoen of LaCrosse, Wis., were married yesterday in Macon, Ga.
The Rev.
Victor Frederikson performed the ceremony at Christ Episcopal Church.


Social Events
Parties for Snug Harbor
May 17 -- The Snug Harbor Cultural Center on Staten Island will hold its annual Neptune Ball at a great many parties on Staten Island and in Manhattan to benefit the center's educational and performing arts programs.
The black-tie benefit starts with a cocktail party from 5 to 7 P.M. on the Snug Harbor grounds in Richmond.
Dinner follows at the center and at 30 private homes and restaurants.
Tickets, $125, from (718) 448-2500.


CORRECTION
The Talking column on May 3, about saving for a first home, misidentified the repository for Arbor National Bridal Registry accounts.
Depositors may open accounts by mail only, and solely at the Chase Manhattan bank on Stewart Avenue in Garden City, L.I., not at other branches.


Talking: Age Limits; Residents Fight for Privileges
WHEN age-restricted communities were first developed some two decades ago, the goal was to give older people the option of living peacefully away from noisy children and young families.
But just as more people than ever are eligible -- and thus potentially increasing demand for this living arrangement -- a growing number are having to fight harder to retain their privileges.


A STITCH IN TIME
My mother was a prolific knitter.
During the London blitz, when we would spend nights under fire in air-raid shelters, she would knit and knit and knit.


TV Planning Panels
A series of panel discussions on the planning policies for the future of New York City will be shown, starting Saturday at 10 A.M. and continuing each Saturday at the same time through July 4, on Crosswalks, on the city's new municipal cable network.
They may be seen on Channel 25 on Manhattan Cable TV; Channel 15 on Paragon Cable and on Channel 74 on cable systems in other boroughs.
The discussions are designed to enhance public participation in the City Planning Commission's creation of its first planning and zoning report, which is mandated by the revised city charter.
The topics to be discussed include how planning policies affect the economy, the environment, transportation, housing and neighborhoods.
Speakers will include government officials, community representatives and outside experts.


And the Gods of Music Said, 'Let's Boogie'
The following list of performers and concert dates is selective.
Performances are subject to change.
California
CARNAVAL SAN FRANCISCO Mission District, Fri.-next Sun. (415-824-8999).
Willie Colon, Legal Alien, Caribbean All-Stars.


The Rebound of the Celtic Legend
The skeptics who were ready to dispose of Larry Bird have been shown that Larry Liability can still operate as a legend.
The Bird Era, threatened by his alarmingly recurring back problems, will extend at least one more day, to a seventh game in the Eastern Conference semifinal playoff series between the Boston Celtics and the Cleveland Cavaliers in Richfield, Ohio, Sunday afternoon (Channel 4, 2 P.M.).
But then what?
Will the Cavalier franchise, which has lost seven of its previous nine National Basketball Association playoff series -- including four losses in decisive games -- reverse its history?
Will the Celtics, with a legacy of a 21-7 record in deciding playoff games, including 4-1 in seventh games on the road, add another successful chapter and a few happy cigars?


Francis G. Fitzpatrick, 89, Mayor And Party Leader in New Jersey
Francis G. Fitzpatrick, whose elections as the insurgent Mayor of Bayonne, N.J., and as Hudson County Democratic chairman signaled the demise of an old-line political machine 20 years ago, died on Friday at Bayonne Hospital.
He was 89 years old and lived in Bayonne.
He died of cancer, a family spokesman said.


POSTINGS: London Terrace Troubles; Whose Pool Is It, Anyway?
An Olympic-size swimming pool has become the center of a legal dispute between 721 co-op owners and 989 renters who live in the 14-building London Terrace complex in the Chelsea section of Manhattan.
The dispute arose last November, five years after four buildings in the complex, called London Terrace Towers, were converted into co-ops.
The co-op owners tried to stop the renters in the 10 other buildings, called London Terrace Gardens, from swimming in a pool all residents have used since it opened in 1930.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: May 17, 1992
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
16
THE FIRM, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $5.99.) A young lawyer learns that his firm is engaged in secret, possibly illegal activities.
2
4
AS THE CROW FLIES, by Jeffrey Archer. (Harper Paperbacks, $6.50.) A man strives to create the biggest store in the world.
3
5
"H" IS FOR HOMICIDE, by Sue Grafton. (Fawcett, $5.99.) The private eye Kinsey Millhone on the trail of perpetrators of an insurance scam.
4
16
FRIED GREEN TOMATOES AT THE WHISTLE STOP CAFE, by Fannie Flagg. (McGraw-Hill, $6.95.) An elderly woman reminisces about six decades of life in rural Alabama.
5
5
THE SECRET, by Julie Garwood. (Pocket, $5.99.) A 12th-century English belle finds romance.
6
3
ASPEN GOLD, by Janet Dailey. (Little, Brown, $5.99.) A woman returns to her native Colorado to face a choice: fame in Hollywood or love with an old flame.
7
13
LOVES MUSIC, LOVES TO DANCE, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Pocket, $5.99.) Two Manhattan women get caught in the snare of a serial killer.
8
54
THE PRINCE OF TIDES, by Pat Conroy. (Bantam, $5.99.) Complex family relationships in South Carolina's low country and New York City.
9
3
SHADOWS OF YESTERDAY, by Sandra Brown. (Warner, $4.99.) A widow in a crisis is rescued by a man who hides his past.
10
4
SKY MASTERS, by Dale Brown. (Berkley, $5.99.) The United States Air Force goes to the aid of the Philippines in a war with China in 1994.
11
5
A TIME TO KILL, by John Grisham. (Wynwood, $9.95.) Racial tensions surface during a trial.
12
2
BOY'S LIFE, by Robert R. McCammon. (Pocket, $5.99.) A boy struggles to understand the forces of good and evil at work in his small Alabama town.
13
2
THE COVENANT OF THE FLAME, by David Morrell. (Warner, $5.99.) Pursuing a murderer in New York, a woman reporter and a policeman come upon a 2,000-year-old secret global conflict.
14
4
THE SEERESS OF KELL, by David Eddings. (Del Rey/Ballantine, $5.99.) The fifth volume in the fantasy series "The Malloreon."
15
12
HEARTBEAT, by Danielle Steel. (Dell, $6.50.) A chance meeting of a man and a woman brings them long-sought happiness.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
1
4
AMERICA: WHAT WENT WRONG? by Donald L. Barlett and James B. Steele. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $6.95.) How the practices of Washington lawmakers and Wall Street deal makers have benefited a few Americans at the expense of most.
2
3
CRUEL DOUBT, by Joe McGinniss. (Pocket, $5.99.) The tribulations of a woman whose son was accused of planning her murder.
3
52
YOU JUST DON'T UNDERSTAND, by Deborah Tannen. (Ballantine, $10.) The different languages men and women speak.
4
5
JFK: CONSPIRACY OF SILENCE, by Charles A. Crenshaw with Jens Hansen and J. Gary Shaw. (Signet, $4.99.) A surgeon tells what he observed while treating the dying John F. Kennedy.
5
10
YOU'LL NEVER EAT LUNCH IN THIS TOWN AGAIN, by Julia Phillips. (Signet, $6.99.) Life in Hollywood as experienced by a producer.
6
44
A YEAR IN PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A sojourn in the south of France.
7
9
IF YOU REALLY LOVED ME, by Ann Rule. (Pocket, $5.99.) The bizarre family relationships behind the murder of the wife of an entrepreneur.
8
445
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Inspiration. (LP)
9
1
PARLIAMENT OF WHORES, by P. J. O'Rourke. (Vintage, $12.) A humorist's attempt to explain the Federal Government.
10
13
IRON JOHN, by Robert Bly. (Vintage, $11.) The passage of the male from boyhood into manhood.
11 *
126
ALL I REALLY NEED TO KNOW I LEARNED IN KINDERGARTEN, by Robert Fulghum. (Ivy, $5.95.) Inspirational essays.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
40
LIFE'S LITTLE INSTRUCTION BOOK, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $5.95.) Some 500 tips for achieving a self-fulfilling life.
2
4
LIVE AND LEARN AND PASS IT ON, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $5.95.) Morsels of what they've learned about life, from people aged 5 to 95.
3
88
THE T-FACTOR FAT GRAM COUNTER, by Jamie Pope-Cordle and Martin Katahn. (Norton, $2.50.) How to reduce fat in one's diet.
4
9
ATTACK OF THE DERANGED MUTANT KILLER MONSTER SNOW GOONS, by Bill Watterson. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $8.95.) "Calvin and Hobbes" cartoons.
5
69
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $9.95.) Principles for success.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,000 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 38,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.


Moorer Is a Knockout In Victory Over Cooper
It was hours before his heavyweight, Michael Moorer, was to fight Bert Cooper for the vacant World Boxing Organization title, and Emanuel Steward looked a bit drawn.
"Yeah, I'm worried," Steward, Moorer's manager and trainer, said Friday as he crossed the casino floor here at Trump Taj Mahal.
"Can't pretend I'm not worried. This is a tough fight. Cooper is tough."


Incessant Dripping of Hoses and Faucets
USING an outdoor faucet and garden hose for the first time in the spring sometimes results in a few unpleasant surprises, among them a leaking hose and a faucet that drips after being turned off.
Neither problem is too difficult to resolve.
Hose leaks are usually the result of cracks caused by improper storage.
Pinhole-size leaks can be temporarily repaired by covering them with waterproof duct or electrician's tape.


Knights Do Their Part but Can't Gain Playoff Berth
Before its game against the Barcelona Dragons tonight, the New York/New Jersey Knights knew the Sacramento Surge controlled part of its playoff hopes.
So the Knights did the only thing they could, routing the Barcelona Dragons, 47-0, and praying for the Surge to lose to the Ohio Glory.
Unfortunately, as the Knights (5-4) were dismantling the Dragons (5-4), Sacramento was defeating the Glory.
A victory by Sacramento clinched at least a wild-card playoff spot for the Surge and knocked the Knights out of the playoff picture.
Sacramento will play San Antonio for the North American West division championship next Saturday.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
DANCERS ON THE RUN
The 1992 Mixed Morris Ale will take place in Fairfield County next Sunday in various places from 11 A.M. to 3:30 P.M., sponsored by the Mianus River Morris of Greenwich.
As devotees of Morris dancing are aware, this is an annual gala.


Results Plus
GOLF A Wet 5-Way Lead Ray Floyd advanced to a share of the lead of the GTE Byron Nelson Classic yesterday before another storm caused an overnight postponement.
With second-round play extending into yesterday afternoon, none of the third-round starters had completed more than 11 holes when the approach of a thunderstorm forced officials to rule the day's play over.
At that point, Floyd was at nine-under par, sharing the lead with four others: Dudley Hart, John Adams, Bruce Lietzke and Jay Haas.
Hart was through seven holes of the third round, Floyd five, Adams four, Lietzke three and Haas two. (AP)


Everything Under the Sun
A CONTINENT OF ISLANDS
Searching for the Caribbean Destiny.
By Mark Kurlansky.
Illustrated. 324 pp.
Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley Publishing Company.


An Unrivaled Midwestern Creation
To the Editor:
Perhaps ginger ale would make a bigger splash in the soda marketplace if more of the brands mentioned in your article tasted like Vernors ginger ale.
Those who have sampled this Midwestern creation often agree that its flavor, color and effervescence are unrivaled by all other ginger ales.
It makes sensational floats, is a superb mixer and yet has a rich flavor that can stand on its own.
I wonder why Vernors is not more widely distributed.
LYNNE VERSELIS  Kings Park, L.I., May 7


Making a Difference; A Nice Place to Raise a Couple of Hundred Kids
Don Crawford just wants to go fishing.
He says he's tired of his showplace ranch, Crawford Farms, on 3,000 acres in Dimmit County, Tex., and tired of his hobby, breeding cutting horses, which are quick, light saddle horses trained to cut cattle out of a herd.
"I'm 58 years old, and I don't want to fool with that place anymore," Mr.
Crawford said last week in a telephone interview from Padre Island, off Texas, where he was sitting on his boat, ready for some fishing.


Mutual Funds; Another New Face at Magellan
Stewardship of the Fidelity Magellan Fund, the nation's largest mutual fund, is changing again.
About two years ago, Morris J. Smith took the reins from Peter Lynch, who took early retirement at age 46.
Mr.
Smith, 34 years old, will leave on July 1 for the same stated reason: to spend more time with his family.
Magellan will then be managed by Jeffrey N. Vinik, 33, who has built superior records at Fidelity's Contrafund and the Growth and Income Portfolio.


The Thrifty Traveler in 10 World Cities; Toronto
Finding a place to stay is only one of many choices facing the traveler on a tight budget.
Here are suggestions on where to eat, what to do and what not to do from 10 New York Times correspondents in cities around the world.


ABOUT CARS: A Quick Trip Through the Mailbag; Logic Flew the Coupe
Dear Sir:
I have been the owner of two-door General Motors cars for the past 40 years, and I now own a 1988 two-door Buick LeSabre, a car that pleases me and that I planned to replace with a '92.
Much to my surprise, I learned that Buick is no longer producing this model.
I was disappointed to learn this and am now considering the purchase of a Japanese car.


Solemn Parting


A STITCH IN TIME
I was happy to learn that, according to Perri Klass's definition, I am successful.
As editor in chief of Vogue Knitting magazine, I
can
knit at work, and no one ever tells me to stop.
A group of my friends (five professional women) gathers to knit once a month.
Since one member works for an investment company and shares advice and tips, we've dubbed ourselves "Stock 'n' Knit."


Mission Accomplished: Errant Satellite Rescued


Nedda A. Buchen, Paul M. Gilbert
Nedda Aleen Buchen, the daughter of Dr.
Irving H. Buchen of Melrose Park, Pa., and the late Dorothy Buchen, was married yesterday evening to Paul Michael Gilbert, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Ronald J. Gilbert of New York.
Rabbi Joel S. Goor performed the ceremony at the Carlyle Hotel in New York.
Mrs.
Gilbert, 31 years old, graduated cum laude from the University of Pennsylvania and received a master's degree in social work from Columbia University.
She is the national director of corporate programs for the Princeton Review, which operates test-preparation courses.
Her father, a writer, is the dean of academic affairs at Pennsylvania State University.
Her stepmother, Devi Buchen, a soprano, is an assistant professor of music at Penn State.


Pine Bluff Outruns Alydeed to Win Preakness
Thoroughbred racing lost any chance to produce its 12th Triple Crown winner when Pine Bluff outran 13 rivals today to win the 117th Preakness by three-quarters of a length over Alydeed, while Lil E. Tee, the winner of the Kentucky Derby, finished five lengths back in fifth.
It was just two weeks after the chase for 3-year-old honors suffered a dramatic jolt when Lil E. Tee came out of Arkansas as a 17-1 long shot and beat the international star Arazi as well as Pine Bluff.
And that was three weeks after Pine Bluff had nipped Lil E. Tee by a neck in the Arkansas Derby.


Eunice Johnson, Vincent Panetta
Eunice Clapp Johnson, the daughter of the late Mr. and Mrs.
Stuart H. Johnson Jr., and Vincent J. Panetta Jr., the son of the late Mr. and Mrs.
Vincent J. Panetta, were married yesterday at the Wellesley College Chapel in Wellesley, Mass.
Bishop G. P. Mellick Belshaw of the Episcopal Diocese of New Jersey and the Rev.
Laurie Rofinot, an Episcopal minister, officiated.
Mrs.
Panetta, 26 years old, graduated from Harvard University.
Until recently she was a television news producer for the Monitor Channel in Boston.
Her father was a lawyer in Washington and a counsel to the House Judiciary Committee in the 1960's.
Her mother, Katharine S. Johnson, was the chairwoman of Save Our Seashores, an environmental advocacy group in San Francisco.
The bride's grandfather, Clarence A. Southerland, was chief justice of the Delaware Supreme Court.


Is That All There Is?
NAME: -- Arianna Stassinopoulos Huffington.
IDENTITY: -- Cambridge-educated biographer of Maria Callas and Pablo Picasso.


Redistricting Refrain: Why Me?
Representative Frank Horton, who has represented the Rochester area since 1963, thinks the Legislature's foremost consideration in drawing new Congressional districts should be seniority.
Representative Louise M. Slaughter, who represents Monroe County, believes protecting the three women in New York's Congressional delegation should be a priority.


Whose Honor Is It, Anyway
SARAH LAWRENCE COLLEGE feels it is unseemly to pay more than a token honorarium for its commencement speakers.
"We do not consider this an ordinary speaking engagement," said Diane Fusili, the public affairs director of that small, select liberal arts college in Bronxville, N.Y..
"Our graduation is an opportunity for the speaker to meet with a small group of students who will do very interesting things with their lives."
Those fine sentiments seem almost quaint in this age of fevered competition between colleges to secure the hottest speakers of the moment.
Sarah Lawrence had its heart set on Maya Angelou, the celebrated black writer and poet.
So did 20 other colleges, a few of which also felt their seniors were interesting.
And Ms.
Angelou, who has already received more than 50 honorary degrees (Phil Donahue, in comparison, has 4; Elizabeth Dole has 22) regards a graduation as a speaking engagement.
Her fee for commencements -- $10,000, not including transportation and hotel accommodation for herself and an aide, quite reasonable in today's market -- is higher than most college honorariums .


The Thrifty Traveler in 10 World Cities; London
Finding a place to stay is only one of many choices facing the traveler on a tight budget.
Here are suggestions on where to eat, what to do and what not to do from 10 New York Times correspondents in cities around the world.


Nancy Jill Pato, Ronald Goldberg
Nancy Jill Pato, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Murray Pato of New York, was married last night in West Orange, N.J., to Ronald Scott Goldberg, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Howard Goldberg of North Caldwell, N.J.
Rabbi Norman R. Patz performed the ceremony at the Crestmont Country Club.
Mrs.
Goldberg, 26 years old, is a banking officer at Bankers Trust Company in New York.
She graduated magna cum laude from George Washington University and received a master's degree in real-estate investment and development from New York University.
Her father is employed in New York by the State Attorney General's Office.


The Right Inference, Drawn From the Lead
THERE was a marked Polish flavor about the results of the Cavendish Invitational Charity Pairs in New York City two weeks ago.
Two Polish experts, Pyotr Gawrys and Krzysztof Lasocki, seemed headed for victory, but they were overtaken as a result of a powerful stretch drive by two players who might be called Polish-Israeli-Americans.
One of the winners was Amos Kaminski, who was born in Israel of Polish parents, came to New York City four decades ago as a graduate student and became fascinated by bridge.
The other was Sam Lev, who was born in Poland but lived most of his life in Israel.
Since settling in Forest Hills, Queens, in 1989 he has made a major impact on the American national scene, winning two major titles and finishing second twice in a 25-month period.


Recall Context Of Graves's Slash
To the Sports Editor:
I found Joe Lapointe's column "Rangers Are Tainted Into Corner" (The Times, May 8) inaccurate, reactionary and myopic.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article in the Arts and Leisure section on March 29 about boxing films misidentified the source of an anecdote about the trainer Al Silvani.
In a letter dated April 23, Ronald K. Fried, author of "Corner Men: Great Boxing Trainers," has pointed out that the anecdote is from his book. (A further editing lapse delayed this correction after the letter was received.)


Stressing the Positives In American Society
In the days after the Rodney King case of alleged police brutality by the members of the Los Angeles Police Department, the nation has become preoccupied with searching for the right and wrong in the case.
I'm not too sure if any of us can find those answers.
Perhaps we should change our emphasis.
Television and the written press should stress the positives that occur in our society rather than these horrific negatives we are experiencing.


Negotiations on South Africa's Future Stall


Ms. Kugelman, Patrick Freydberg
Sarah Dean Kugelman, an assistant product manager for L'Oreal Cosmetics and Fragrances in New York, was married last evening to Irwin George Freydberg Jr., a manager of institutional properties for the New York real-estate firm of Douglas Elliman-Gibbons &amp; Ives.
Rabbi A. Bruce Goldman conducted the ceremony at the University Club in New York, assisted by the Rev.
C.
Carter Via, a Presbyterian minister.
Mrs.
Freydberg, 28 years old, graduated cum laude from Tufts University and received an M.B.A. from Columbia University.
She is the daughter of Harriet Walley Lohman and Arthur E. Kugelman, both of New York.
Her father, who is retired, was an associate creative director of the D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles advertising agency.
Her mother is the president of the Harriet Walley Associates advertising agency in New York.
Her stepfather, Arthur J. Lohman, is the president of the Lohman Organization, a New York agency specializing in real-estate advertising.


Is That All There Is?
NAME: -- Arianna Stassinopoulos Huffington.
IDENTITY: -- Cambridge-educated biographer of Maria Callas and Pablo Picasso.


Annie Towe and George Egan
GEORGE EGAN and Annie Towe are informally known as the "Yes! Yes! Yes!" couple.
"When George asked me to marry him, I started saying 'Yes! Yes! Yes!' before he even got his proposal out," Mrs.
Egan said.
"So 'Yes! Yes! Yes!' became a slogan for the wedding. It's been on every napkin at almost every party since July."
And there were a lot of parties: a high tea, a hoedown and a slew of showers -- an all-white shower, a paddle-tennis shower, a compact-disk shower, a fun-and-games shower and an around-the-clock shower where guests gave Ms.
Towe a present for every hour of the day.
"I got egg cups for breakfast, loose tea for teatime, lingerie for 3 A.M.," she said.
Starr Collins, a friend of Mrs.
Egan from school, said, "For months, my refrigerator was just blanketed with Annie-and-George invitations."


Open Season on Fare Beaters
At 9:35 A.M., James Robitsek, a transit police officer wearing a baseball cap, black leather jacket and jeans, is leaning against a pillar in a midtown subway station, watching intently as dozens of commuters drop their tokens into the turnstile and pour on to the platform.
When an uptown local enters the station at 34th and Eighth Avenue, a man yanks open an exit gate and rushes through without paying.
In seconds, Officer Robitsek is at his side, asking politely if he has a pass.


Dr. Popovitch, Dr. Ikeguchi
Dr.
Alexandra Popovitch, the daughter of Lyoubomir Popovitch of Upper St.
Clair, Pa., and Joan Ross Popovitch of New York, was married yesterday to Dr.
Edward Ikeguchi, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Takumaro Ikeguchi of Whitestone, Queens.
The Rev.
Dorsey McConnell performed the Episcopal ceremony at the Church of the Epiphany in New York.
The bride, 26 years old, and the bridegroom, 24, will begin residencies next month at the Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center in New York, she in internal medicine and he in urology.
She graduated magna cum laude from Yale University, and she and her husband received their medical degrees from Columbia University.
Her father is a computer consultant in Upper St.
Clair.
Her mother is the coordinator of the M.D.-Ph.D. program at Columbia.


Conversations/Radovan Karadzic; Understanding, and Letting Loose, Historic Hatreds in the Balkans
IN the Europe of the earlier part of this century, its history repeatedly knocked askew by events in the southeastern corner of the continent, the word Balkan became a synonym for things obscure, laden with unpleasant surprises, menacing.
It seemed like a good word to ponder approaching an encounter with Radovan Karadzic, the man who as much as any is bound up with the bizarre and frightening events in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Normally, (if anything about Bosnia's violent destruction can be called normal), Mr.
Karadzic is to be found here and there in the mountainous republic, a pimpernel of a politician who leads the 1.4 million Bosnian Serbs and their powerful militias.
But on this day, he was not moving behind a phalanx of bodyguards in the blasted precincts of Sarajevo, the Bosnian capital, or plotting strategy at his headquarters in Pale, a resort village outside Sarajevo that was base for the Alpine events in the 1984 winter Olympic Games.


Briton Confident on Vote for European Union
Prime Minister John Major remains confident that the House of Commons will ratify a controversial treaty on European union despite the latest withering blast against the growing power of the European Community and Germany by his predecessor, Margaret Thatcher, according to his aides.
With the debate set to begin on Wednesday, Mrs.
Thatcher warned in a speech to business leaders and diplomats in The Hague on Friday that the more federal, centralized European Community envisioned by its executive commission in Brussels and by most Continental governments would bring "insecurity, unemployment, national resentment and ethnic conflict."


Her 'Hardest Role' Is a Winning One
BESSIE is as good as a person gets.
Herself terminally ill, she is a caregiver of unbounded selflessness both to her bedridden dying father, Marvin, and to her incapacitated Aunt Ruth.
And she also comforts other members of an eccentric, dysfunctional family.
What's the payoff for Bessie?
Loving.
"I am so lucky to have loved so much," she says.
"I am so lucky."


Aging Baby Boomers Take Fresh Look at a Milestone
As the baby boom generation approaches menopause, the once-taboo topic is provoking frank talk among women accustomed to raising their voices and getting their way.
And the sheer number of these women is creating huge new markets for menopause remedies and clinics, and is inspiring books and workshops about the change of life, 1990's style.


Justine Cuccia, G. S. Banning 3d
Justine Gayle Cuccia, a daughter of Josephine Ferro Cuccia of Jamaica Estates, Queens, and the late Joseph F. Cuccia, was married yesterday in Silver Spring, Md., to George Samuel Banning 3d, a son of Dr.
George Banning Jr. of Silver Spring and the late Daisy Banning.
The Rev.
Gladys Bowers performed the Episcopal ceremony at the home of the bridegroom's father.
Mrs.
Banning, 30 years old, is an associate in the law firm of A. H. Michael Rankin in Upper Marlboro, Md.
She graduated from Syracuse University and received a J.D. from Catholic University.
Her mother is a lawyer in New York, as was her father.


In the Region: Long Island; Recent Sales
East Meadow 185,000  2747 Woods Avenue  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 9-year-old high ranch; dining room, eat-in kitchen, family room, 1-car garage; taxes $5,200.
Levittown 134,000
38 Center Lane  4-bedroom, 1-bath, 43-year-old Cape Cod; dining room, family room, 70- by 100-foot lot; taxes $3,300.
Merrick 150,000
1715 Yale Road  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 60-year-old Tudor; dining room, eat-in kitchen, attic; taxes $4,000.
Mineola 195,000
168 Brown Street
4-bedroom, 2-bath, 43-year-old Cape Cod; dining room, eat-in kitchen, finished basement, 1-car detached garage; taxes $3,800.
Wantagh 160,000
827 Jay Drive  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 41-year-old ranch; dining room, basement, 1-car detached garage; taxes $3,700.
Williston Park 170,000
179 Capitol Avenue  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 60-year-old colonial; dining room, eat-in kitchen, 2-car garage; taxes $2,800.
OTHER AREAS South Salem, N.Y. 300,000  Mill River  5-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 269-year-old colonial; 6 stone fireplaces, library, sun room, pantry, wine cellar, 8.2 acres; taxes $8,748.
Enfield, Conn. 108,000
11 Washington Avenue  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 52-year-old cape cod; book shelves, formal dining room, porch, 0.2 acre; taxes $1,247.
Aberdeen, N.J. 149,000
8 Ormont Lane  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 27-year-old colonial; c/a, fenced yard, large property; taxes $4,260.


Conversations/Radovan Karadzic; Understanding, and Letting Loose, Historic Hatreds in the Balkans
IN the Europe of the earlier part of this century, its history repeatedly knocked askew by events in the southeastern corner of the continent, the word Balkan became a synonym for things obscure, laden with unpleasant surprises, menacing.
It seemed like a good word to ponder approaching an encounter with Radovan Karadzic, the man who as much as any is bound up with the bizarre and frightening events in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Normally, (if anything about Bosnia's violent destruction can be called normal), Mr.
Karadzic is to be found here and there in the mountainous republic, a pimpernel of a politician who leads the 1.4 million Bosnian Serbs and their powerful militias.
But on this day, he was not moving behind a phalanx of bodyguards in the blasted precincts of Sarajevo, the Bosnian capital, or plotting strategy at his headquarters in Pale, a resort village outside Sarajevo that was base for the Alpine events in the 1984 winter Olympic Games.


Democrats Drop Barrier To Primary for Senate
Democratic officials in New York say it is likely that all four of the announced candidates for the party's nomination for the United States Senate will get on this September's primary ballot without the costly and cumbersome burden of gathering petition signatures.
The state Democratic committee chairman, John A. Marino, has stepped up efforts to get the four -- including the Rev.
Al Sharpton, who many politicians expect to be forced to pursue the petition route -- officially placed on the ballot by the delegates to the state party convention in Albany later this month.


Sylvia Syms, One of Pop's Great Storytellers
On April 27, three days before opening night at the Algonquin Hotel's Oak Room, Sylvia Syms settled into a booth at a coffee shop on the East Side of Manhattan for what would turn out to be her final interview.
"This may be my last time on the pike," she said about the engagement.
The extended Oak Room booking was a rare outing for a performer whose health problems, including emphysema, had limited her recent work to benefits and one-nighters.
As she left the stage last Sunday, almost midway through the five-week engagement, the 74-year-old Miss Syms collapsed and was taken to St.
Clare's Hospital; she died of a heart attack.


Confronting School Ills, Alabama Looks to Tax
About a year ago, a General Motors executive told state officials here just how close Alabama had come to landing the company's new Saturn plant, its thousands of jobs and millions of dollars in salaries and tax revenues.
The state's package of incentives had been among the best, the executive said, but company officials lacked confidence that Alabama was committed to a well financed education system that could supply the trained workers needed for the plant.
Instead, the executive said, G.M. had chosen Tennessee because of that state's willingness to undertake education reforms and to commit itself to long-term financing to pay for improvements in its public schools.


MAY 10-16: Congress; Risking an Amendment To Balance the Budget
Constitutional amendments are usually approved only after long debate, but in their eagerness to appear fiscally responsible, the Senate and House just might approve a far-reaching balanced budget amendment over the next few weeks.
Senator Paul Simon, the Illinois Democrat sponsoring the proposal with the widest support, argued that an amendment would force the White House and Congress to get serious about eliminating the deficit and "make the painful choice that candidly neither political party is willing to make right now." Next year, interest on the national debt will for the first time be the largest item in the Federal budget.


U.S. to Help Retrieve Data on Iraqi Torture of Kurds
The United States military is in the middle of a sensitive operation in northern Iraq to spirit out of the country a huge cache of Iraqi Government records and videotapes documenting what Kurdish leaders call a campaign of torture and execution that killed tens of thousands of Kurds in recent years.
Human rights organizations say they will use the documents to determine whether the Baghdad Government of Saddam Hussein could be charged with violating the 1948 United Nations convention on genocide.
The convention, which outlaws repression and killings intended to destroy "in whole or in part" any national ethnic group, was signed by Iraq in 1959.


Kristina Grimm, R. H. McCooey Jr.
Kristina Marie Grimm, the daughter of Mrs.
Anthony B. Suso of Fair Haven, N.J., and Richard T. Grimm of Shark River Hills, N.J., was married yesterday to Robert Herbert McCooey Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
McCooey of Rye, N.Y.
The Revs.
James F. Dolan, Michael F. Ford and Michael G. Pierce officiated at the Roman Catholic Church of the Nativity in Fair Haven.
Mrs.
McCooey, 25 years old, is a personnel administrator at the Whitney Museum of American Art in New York.
She and her husband graduated from the College of the Holy Cross.
Her father is the president of Grimm-Jones Inc., a chemical-equipment marketing concern in East Brunswick, N.J.
Her stepfather is a senior programs analyst at the Syscon Corporation, a software consulting company in Shrewsbury, N.J.


Appealing to the Delegates for Re-election


America   Successfully Defends The Cup
Bill Koch, the billionaire oil heir who called on science in his quest to defend yachting's oldest and most illustrious trophy, proved to the world today that technology rules the waves.
Koch's America
team defeated Paul Cayard and his Il Moro di Venezia team by 44 seconds to defend the America's Cup on behalf of the San Diego Yacht Club.


Selectivity Is Key
To the Editor
Michael Kimmelman's article about the Whitney Museum highlights a structural dilemma facing museums  [ "The Whitney Continues Its Search . . . for Itself," April 19 ] .
The basic mandate of an art museum is to collect, preserve, interpret and exhibit
significant
works of art.
Selectivity is key to discharging this responsibility.
But once museums bought the argument that all notions of excellence, discernment and quality are exclusionary, racist or sexist, their very underpinnings came unglued.
When art is judged not by universal standards that have evolved over centuries but by some arbitrary, shifting and intellectually indefensible notions of multiculturism, the museum degenerates into a warehouse.


Marea Armenti, T. E. Dumbauld
Marea Ann Armenti, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Nicholas P. Armenti of Hope, N.J., was married yesterday to Theodore Eugene Dumbauld, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Mark E. Dumbauld of Troy, Ohio.
The Rev.
Edward J. Fleming performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the home of the bride's parents.


Corrections
An article on the "All About" page last Sunday about Japanese art purchases misidentified the buyer of Vincent van Gogh's "Irises" for $53.9 million.
It was an Australian, Alan Bond, not a Japanese.


Picking Up Americana At Kennedy
WONDERING what happened to Hudson's, the army-navy store that disappeared from the corner of Third Avenue and 13th Street about a year ago, after 74 years in that neighborhood?
It's thriving, in miniature, at the far end of Delta Terminal 1 at Kennedy International Airport.
There, travelers heading to Western Europe make a final grab for Levi's, Schott leather biker jackets, Sebago Docksides, Woolrich sweaters, Ray-Ban sunglasses and other icons of American fashion.
"It has to say 'Made in U.S.A.,' " said Zoraida Patino, a saleswoman, on a recent Sunday.


Authenticity Tests
To the Editor: I enjoyed reading Jeannie Ralston's tale of how she flunked "The Trekker Authenticity Test" (March 29).
But the fact that she took the criticism that "leisurely trekkers were insulating themselves from the indigenous culture by not living as the locals did" seriously enough to assure us that she spent 10 days living in a Sherpa home and attended Sherpa weddings and a Sherpa funeral makes me wonder how emancipated she really is from the idea that there's a right and a wrong way to vacation.
Suppose she had chosen to check into the Hilton and do her socializing with other tourists -- would that have been so terrible?
Whose vacation is it, anyway?
FELICIA ACKERMAN Providence, R.I.


Insurers and Lawyers Throw the Dirt Back at Polluters; Unfair and Unfeasible
In an article on the Forum page on May 3, Eugene R. Anderson and Robert M. Horkovich, partners in the New York law firm of Anderson Kill Olick &amp; Oshinsky, wrote about the high litigation costs associated with the cleanup of toxic waste.
The article, "Why Insurance Companies Say No," cited a recent study by the Rand Institute for Civil Justice, which "reported that nearly 90 percent of the money allocated by insurance companies in Superfund claims had gone toward legal and related 'transaction' costs, rather than for cleaning up pollution."


Lisa Lautenberg, Douglas Birer
Lisa Ann Lautenberg, a daughter of Senator Frank R. Lautenberg of Secaucus, N.J., and Lois Lautenberg of Montclair, N.J., was married last night in New York to Douglas Keith Birer, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert Birer of Fort Lauderdale, Fla.
Rabbi Harvey Goldman performed the ceremony at the Pierre Hotel.
Mrs.
Birer, 27 years old, graduated from Colgate University.
She was until recently a sales representative for Moody's Investors Service in New York.
Her father, a Democrat, is a United States Senator from New Jersey.


Report from Paris
A strong, long, linear silhouette was the most important look to come out of the Paris collections for fall.
It had the effect of stretching the figure.
The designers who understood it interpreted it in their own unique ways.
The ones who didn't were left eddying in a backwater of pleasant but familiar fashion.
There were, in fact, lots of ideas tossed out in these collections, making it a very good season.
Interestingly, the approach to evening wear has changed.
The casual cashmere look, a signature of the late American designer Halston, showed up on many Paris runways.


Think Young
At the library, on the pier, supporting art and youth.


Deirdre Scudder, Peter Martin
Deirdre Watson Scudder, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
David W. Scudder of Ipswich, Mass., was married yesterday in Ipswich to Peter Shelton Martin, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard S. Martin of Summit, N.J.
Anne L. Holland, a justice of the peace, performed the ceremony at the Castle Hill estate.
Mrs.
Martin, 29 years old, is a lawyer with the Boston law firm of Hemenway &amp; Barnes.
She is a graduate of Trinity College in Hartford, and received her law degree from Boston College.
Her father is a partner in Wellington Management Company, a Boston investment company.
Her mother, Marie Louise Scudder, is a kindergarten teacher at the Brookwood School in Manchester-by-the-Sea, Mass.


Empty Sound Stage
You can tell a lot about a place from its baby grand, and Harry's Bar on the Via Veneto is no exception.
There's the electronic keyboard perched on top of it, for instance, and the glaring white letters emblazoned on its flank to advertise one of Rome's piano-hire stores.
All that adds up to a lot less than chic and says a lot, too, about what has happened to this most famous of Rome's streets since Federico Fellini began filming "La Dolce Vita" here in 1958.
If the piano in Harry's Bar is anything to go by, the sweet life has soured a lot along the way.


A Surge of Incumbents Opts Out
With 55 voluntary departures and seven involuntary ousters in primary contests, the House of Representatives has already guaranteed itself more new members next January than at any time since 83 freshmen were elected during the 1982 recession.
The postwar mark of 118 in 1949 is clearly within reach.
Seven Senate retirements may matter less, but critics of Congress, within and without, are chortling over the impending House changes, hoping to see a new tone and purpose.
And surely the freshmen will pronounce themselves perk-free.
Some skeptics, like Thomas E. Mann of the Brookings Institution, foresee a freshman class that "perfectly represents the electorate, with lots of anger and self-pity and not a clue as to what to do."


Golfing Fan Fills In the Missing Links
AT a time when golf is booming and most courses are stretched to the limit, golfers often encounter a variety of frustrations while trying to get in a round on a public course.
Even finding the entrance to a strange course can pose a problem.
"It's usually pretty easy to find the golf course, but not the way to get in," said Brian Harvey of Avon.


Corrections
A picture caption with the Vows column in Styles of the Times last Sunday misstated the wedding date of Kyoko Soda and Shuji Nakano.
They were married on May 1.


2 Men Die in Boating Accident in Jamaica Bay
A small boat rammed a sandbar in Jamaica Bay yesterday afternoon and flung its three passengers into the cold, murky water, killing two of them, the police and the United States Coast Guard said.
The boat, a 12-foot runabout with an outboard motor, was cruising in Pumpkin Patch Channel, west of Cross Bay Boulevard as it runs from Howard Beach to the Rockaways, in Queens.
The boat hit a submerged sandbar and flipped over at 5:30 P.M.


E. Terri Herman and Timothy John Hurley
E.
Terri Herman, a senior vice president of Dillon Read &amp; Company, the New York investment banking firm, was married yesterday evening to Timothy John Hurley, a wine consultant for Winebow Inc. in New York.
James Ketchum, a town justice of East Hampton, L.I., performed the ceremony at the Americas Society in New York.


Ryun Scores Materialism in Sports
JIM RYUN, the 47-year-old former world record-holder in the mile, thinks today's American athletes are more interested in making money than improving their performance.
"We've become a little fat," Ryun said at a Fellowship of Christian Athletes banquet in Tulsa, Okla., Friday night.
"We used to have a purist attitude, but I don't know if we can revive that. The country has a material interest."


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-15  ABANDONED IN AFRICA
Once avidly wooed by Washington and Moscow with economic aid and modern weapons, the impoverished nations of Africa find themselves desperate for friends.
Superpower rivalry has been replaced by international indifference.  1  Negotiations on South Africa's future remained at an impasse.  12  SUSPICIOUS LAB IN NORTH KOREA
The head of the International Atomic Energy Agency said that a mysterious building in North Korea could function as the core of a nuclear weapons program if outfitted with additional equipment.  1  MISSION TO EXPOSE IRAQI ABUSES
The United States military is trying to spirit a huge cache of Government records and videotapes out of Iraq to document what Kurdish leaders call a campaign of torture and execution that has killed tens of thousands.  3  Turkey clashes with Kurds, and Iraqi Kurds postpone a vote.  3  Saudi Arabia is accused of deficiencies in basic civic rights.  13  DIETRICH BURIED IN BERLIN
Marlene Dietrich, the film star who embodied not only the fantasies of millions but also the complex German psyche, was buried in her native Berlin, where people are still not sure what to make of her.  8  U.N.
CONVOY FLEES SARAJEVO
With fresh battles erupting around them, United Nations peacekeepers in effect dismantled their headquarters in Sarajevo, the capital of Bosnia and Herzegovina.  10  West Europeans balk at taking risks to help embattled Bosnia.  10  LAOS MISSES SOVIET AID
When a Soviet Union existed, it was the main source of economic, technical and military sustenance for impoverished Laos.
Relations have since hit bottom, and military and civilian aid has been canceled.  15  The Pentagon removes drug radar systems from Peru's jungle.  11  The Swiss debate whether to keep their international aloofness.  7  National 18-31  S.&amp; L. BAILOUT ESTIMATE DIPS
After years of steadily higher forecasts of the cost of rescuing the savings and loan industry, a senior Federal regulator for the first time has issued a lower estimate.  1  BABY-BOOMERS AND MENOPAUSE
As the baby-boom generation approaches menopause, the once-unspoken topic is provoking frank talk among women accustomed to raising their voices and getting their way.
And the sheer number of these women is creating huge new markets for menopause remedies and clinics and inspiring books and workshops about the change of life, 1990's style.  1  AFTER THE RIOTS
News analysis: The White House shows little sign of beginning work on a broad agenda of new programs to revive the nation's cities.  1  Thousands marched in Washington to demand urban aid.  22  After the violence, U.S.C. strives to preserve its reputation.  24  The Los Angeles District Attorney is a wounded candidate.  26  CALIFORNIA'S ELECTION NEARS
Political experts are still not sure exactly how California's political climate has been affected by the riots or how long-lasting any changes might be.
But with the primary there now little more than two weeks away, campaign activity has started up again.  20  INDIANS AND SOVEREIGNTY
A gambling dispute between the Government and an Indian tribe in Arizona has again raised an issue that easily transcends wagering itself and cuts to the core of a centuries-old struggle: self-rule of Indian lands.  18  EDUCATION DRIVE IN ALABAMA
Stung by past failures to attract jobs and the accompanying salaries and tax revenue, the Alabama Legislature is set to vote on scheduling for referendum a vast package of state and local tax increases.  18  Regional 33-47  U.S.
IS RUNNING TEAMSTERS LOCAL
Asserting that labor racketeering plagues the air freight business at Kennedy International Airport, the Federal Government is trying to clean up a teamsters local with a history of mob ties.  33  CRACKDOWN ON FARE-BEATERS
The New York City transit police is making a concerted effort to arrest riders who evade subway fares.
Officers have turned up many people wanted for more serious crimes.  33  DINKINS IS GOING ON TRIP
When Mayor Dinkins leaves tomorrow on a four-day trip to Puerto Rico and the Dominican Republic, many of the Hispanic leaders he had hoped would accompany him will not.  35  PRIVATE AID FOR PUBLIC WORK
With local governments strapped for funds, private donors are helping support public causes.  40  New Jerseyans are uncertain about sales tax, poll shows.  41  Details mar New York State redistricting.  40  Obituaries 46
Dr. Arthur B. Voorhees Jr., developer of artificial arteries.


On the Beach at Cannes With the American Force
IS THIS BEAUTIFUL BEACHFRONT A playground or a battlefield?
It may be both.
The Cannes International Film Festival, the world's most glittering trade convention, appears to be at an important turning point this year, one that may have serious long-term effects on film makers of the future.
At issue is the Americanization of this influential festival and the simultaneous disappearance of almost all the film world's old guard.
Perhaps Cannes is simply filling a vacuum by incorporating such a high percentage of American work.
Or it could be helping to perpetuate that vacuum by overlooking more modest, less showy talents from other parts of the world.
The year that brought Euro Disneyland is not the best year for a calm discussion of this question.
And this Cannes festival, which happens to be the 45th, did not begin on a neutral note.
By choosing "Basic Instinct" as its opening attraction, the festival appeared to be casting its lot with the most lurid aspects of Hollywood exploitation.
It hardly helped that the opening-night ceremony featured a tribute to movie producers, as performed by a bevy of bathing-suited, banana-eating models.
The French press had a field day with discussions of bad taste both on and off the screen.


Incessant Dripping of Hoses and Faucets
USING an outdoor faucet and garden hose for the first time in the spring sometimes results in a few unpleasant surprises, among them a leaking hose and a faucet that drips after being turned off.
Neither problem is too difficult to resolve.
Hose leaks are usually the result of cracks caused by improper storage.
Pinhole-size leaks can be temporarily repaired by covering them with waterproof duct or electrician's tape.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
LAST PERSON RURAL Essays. By Noel Perrin. Godine, $21.95.


The World; Poland: Practical Politics Vs. Economic Necessity
COMMUNISM'S mis-wired economic sys tem the wrong factories making the wrong widgets in the wrong places -- was wrenched into being by dictatorial fiat.
Now, the countries of Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union are trying to pry it apart with the considerably less coercive tools of parliamentary democracy.
The task would be daunting in the best of times.
And these are hardly that, with recession stalking the region.
Prodded by the International Monetary Fund to achieve relatively balanced budgets, the former Soviet satellites are dutifully raising taxes, cutting social security and making tough economic and political choices.
But the balance between what must be done and what voters will permit is a delicate one, and it can be upset at any moment, either by elections or street protests.


The Bloopie Awards
NOW FOR THE moment all Madison Avenue has been waiting for.
The copywriters are lined up, nervously tittering and editing among themselves; the nominations have been pouring in from irate consumers; the judges have called in their judgment calls.
We're ready for the coveted 1992 Bloopie Awards.
Never has the competition for the Most Egregiously Misplaced Modifier Bloopie been hotter.
Among the candidates:


She's Got Her Nerves
Carly Simon conquered her notorious fear of singing in public for one night last week.
She gave a rare invitation-only performance on Wednesday at Skep, a small basement coffeehouse at 527 Broome Street.
For almost three solid hours, Ms.
Simon (left), along with Marc Cohn, Aztec Two-Step and five other musicians, sang everything from her 1971 hit "Anticipation" to "Love of My Life," from her new album, "This Is My Life."


Technology; Dazzling Graphic Artistry From Humble PC's
Spreadsheets and word-processing programs are still the best-selling classes of software for personal computers, but graphic arts software has become a big business as well.
Estimates for 1991 graphics software sales range from about $160 million to more than $275 million, depending on how the segment is defined.
The impressive sales of graphics software are attributable in large part to the dazzling technological capabilities now offered to personal computer users.
The falling price of computer memory, hardware improvements and advances in programming have put graphics tools unimaginable a decade ago in the hands of users of relatively inexpensive devices like Apple Macintoshes, I.B.M. personal computers and their clones.


In Tune With 'Boys in the Band'
To the Editor:
As someone who was gay long before Stonewall or the AIDS crisis, I tire of seeing "The Boys in the Band" continually trashed by younger gay men who never lived through our times  [ "After AIDS, Gay Art Aims for New Reality," April 26 ] .


Beyond the Transcripts Of Court Reporters
"Court Reporters Upset by Plan for Recordings"  [ May 3 ]  touched on several matters and seemed to ignore others.
I have been part of more court procedures resolving less than most people you could find.
Almost all were taken down stenographically.


Bridge Experts Fight for U.S. Team Spot
A group of world bridge champions were fighting this afternoon to earn the right to defend their titles.
Bob Hamman and Bob Wolff, both of Dallas, Eric Rodwell of West Lafayette, Ind., Jeff Meckstroth of Tampa, Fla., and Seymon Deutsch of Laredo, Tex., who won the World Olympiad Team Championship four years ago in Venice, were leading in the final playoff to determine the United States team for 1992, and if they maintain their lead they will return to Italy in August, to the small town of Salsomaggiore, in search of a repeat victory.
Their sixth player here is Michael Rosenberg of Manhattan, who replaces the late James Jacoby.


N.H.L. Thuggery Caught on Video
To the Sports Editor:
I was recently visiting an indoor amusement part that featured various rides and video games.
When I came upon the hockey version, I was reminded how realistic these video games have become.


The Slogan Search Hasn't Yet Been Buttoned Up
BY most standards, James G. Blaine ran a disappointing race for President in 1884.
But at least he had a great slogan.
Against Grover Cleveland, the father of an illegitimate child, Blaine forces produced the unforgettable: "Ma, Ma, Where's my pa? Gone to the White House, Ha! Ha! Ha!" In response, Cleveland supporters offered the equally poetic: "Blaine! Blaine! James G. Blaine! The continental liar from the state of Maine."


Rushing to the Sea of Quality
To the Editor:
In "The Lemmings Who Love Total Quality" (Forum, May 3), the authors could add one more item to their list of self-defeating characteristics that flaw many companies' approach to "total quality": a lack of communication between management and workers.


Bolstering Self-Esteem to Reduce Pupils' Stress
THE 22 students in Margaret Arnoldo's fourth-grade classroom at the Coman Hill School here are oblivious to the tempting early spring sunlight that filters onto their desks as they focus intently on that morning's writing project.
Most look up with relief when a visitor, Dr.
Kevin Kalikow, enters the room, and they enthusiastically wave their hands to answer his questions.
These students in the Byram Hills School District aren't displaying their knowledge in reading, math or social studies.
Instead, they're eager to discuss what it feels like to be left out of lunchtime cliques, have trouble with schoolwork or bad dreams, live with a disabled sibling or cope with the divorce of their parents.


Unscrambling Africa
THE BLACK MAN'S BURDEN
Africa and the Curse of the Nation-State.
By Basil Davidson. 355 pp.
New York: Times Books/Random House. $24.


New &amp; Noteworthy
TWO GIRLS, FAT AND THIN, by Mary Gaitskill. (Bantam, $6.99.) Dorothy and Justine differ in body type but have a common bond in their sexually brutalized childhoods and their emotionally isolated adult lives.
This novel's focus is their friendship, which has the potential to redeem them or wound them even more.
Last year our reviewer, Ginger Danto, admired the author's "fine storyteller's pace" and said that "we are drawn along, loath to abandon this grim story."
HUNTING MR.
HEARTBREAK: A Discovery of America, by Jonathan Raban. (Harper Perennial, $12.) Europeans were making our country the subject of literary critiques long before Alexis de Tocqueville recorded his first observations on democracy.
Mr.
Raban, English by birth, takes as his inspiration another Frenchman: J. Hector St.
John de Crevecoeur ("Mr. Heartbreak"), an emigre who wrote about his experiences in America during and immediately following the Revolutionary War.
Mr.
Raban's period is 1988 to 1990, during which he sailed to New York (where he imagines the end of the world might take place), visited the South and ultimately settled in Seattle.
"He has a gift for vivid observation, description, anecdote and personal encounter," Justin Kaplan said here last year.
Harper Perennial is also issuing two of the author's earlier autobiographical books: FOR LOVE &amp; MONEY: A Writing Life, 1969-1989 ($10), and OLD GLORY: An American Voyage ($12), in which he describes living out his dream of traveling the Mississippi River like Huckleberry Finn.


The Thrifty Traveler in 10 World Cities; New York
Finding a place to stay is only one of many choices facing the traveler on a tight budget.
Here are suggestions on where to eat, what to do and what not to do from 10 New York Times correspondents in cities around the world.


Love and Surprise in a Vine
THERE is something a little racy about a flowering vine.
It's not a plant that is content to just sit there quietly, keeping its blouse tucked in and its skirt over its knees.
It loves to ramble, reaching into a pear tree or a corkscrew willow, winding up some ugly old telephone pole or curling itself about almost anything you give it, be it string, wire or a weedy sapling cut from the backyard.
Once you are hooked on climbers, your garden and your house -- or your fire escape -- may be in the lovely danger of disappearing beneath the blooms of perennial woody vines like clematis, akebia, honeysuckle (I have goldflame, a tamed one that doesn't act like kudzu, the vine that ate the South) and the white doilies of climbing hydrangea.
But there are many annual tropical vines that can be planted from seed right now, in pots or the ground, that will bloom by late summer.


Elizabeth Hurley, Wray Blattner
Elizabeth Johanna Hurley, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John J. Hurley of Hilliard, Ohio, was married yesterday to James Wray Blattner, the son of Donald J. Blattner of Red Bank, N.J., and the late Janet C. Blattner.
The Rev.
Wilma Quantrille performed the ceremony at the United Methodist Church in Tenafly, N.J.
Mrs.
Blattner, 29 years old, graduated from George Washington University, from which she also received a law degree.
She is a corporate lawyer with the Dayton, Ohio, firm of Coolidge, Wall, Womsley &amp; Lombard.
Her father retired as a liaison officer for the Health, Education and Welfare Department in Washington.


Barrie H. Daniels, David C. Markowitz
Barrie Helen Daniels, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Richard A. Daniels of Oakhurst, N.J., was married last night in Elberon, N.J., to David Charles Markowitz, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Erwin G. Markowitz of Worcester, Mass.
Rabbi Joseph Goldman performed the ceremony at Temple Beth Miriam.


Quotation of the Day
"The flames that rose in Los Angeles have died, but dust from the city's ashes remains on each of us. We knew how close we were to the fire, and we must stop the anger and the pain before it is too late." -- MAYOR DAVID N. DINKINS  [ 22:4. ]


What to Do on Your Summer Vacation
It's that time of year when people start heading in all directions to satisfy their culture lust.
Puzzle solvers are invited to do the same.
Eight of the capitalized clues in the puzzle will lead -- whether by pun or anagram -- to the names of festivals.
The answers to the four other capitalized clues describe the attractions to be found there.
The four letters that belong in the circles may help with the finer points.


Victoria Carothers, Kenneth MacDonald
Victoria Ann Carothers, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Jerry D. Carothers of Torrance, Calif., was married yesterday in Redondo Beach, Calif., to Kenneth Gilbert MacDonald, the son of the late Mr. and Mrs.
Gilbert C. MacDonald of Chappaqua, N.Y.
Msgr.
Michael Lenihan officiated at St.
Lawrence Martyr Roman Catholic Church.


In the Past, Police Reorganization Followed Scandals
Lee P. Brown is hardly the first New York City Police Commissioner to try to revamp the department.
But unlike Mr.
Brown, several other commissioners in the last 70 years undertook the task in the wake of corruption scandals.
On July 16, 1912, hours before he was to testify before a grand jury about payoffs to the police to protect his Manhattan gambling parlors, Herman (Beansy) Rosenthal was shot to death by four gunmen on Broadway.
Lieutenant Paid the Price
The murder led to the exposure of a protection racket led by Police Lieut.
Charles Becker, assigned by Police Commissioner Rhinelander Waldo to uncover gambling dens.
Lieutenant Becker went to the electric chair for engineering Mr.
Rosenthal's murder.


Aftermath


And the Gods of Music Said, 'Let's Boogie'
The following list of performers and concert dates is selective.
Performances are subject to change.
California
CARNAVAL SAN FRANCISCO Mission District, Fri.-next Sun. (415-824-8999).
Willie Colon, Legal Alien, Caribbean All-Stars.


Finding Those Who Owe Child Support
The article "State Hunts 300,000 Who Owe Child Support" (April 26) reports that there are in New Jersey alone "some 300,000 parents who owe an estimated $1.3 billion." Incredible!
Now that tests are capable of positively identifying a child's father, why don't we use them to do just that?
With his Social Security number on nationwide computers, a percentage of his salary could be withdrawn and sent directly to his children -- no matter what state he is employed in.


CULTURAL BAGGAGE
As persuasive a writer as Barbara Ehrenreich is, she doesn't convince me of the legitimacy of a "race of none" (Hers: "Cultural Baggage," April 5).


Incessant Dripping of Hoses and Faucets
USING an outdoor faucet and garden hose for the first time in the spring sometimes results in a few unpleasant surprises, among them a leaking hose and a faucet that drips after being turned off.
Neither problem is too difficult to resolve.
Hose leaks are usually the result of cracks caused by improper storage.
Pinhole-size leaks can be temporarily repaired by covering them with waterproof duct or electrician's tape.


Currency; A Sharp Drop for the Dollar
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen
129.75
132.53
137.35
per Dollar
German Mark
1.6095
1.6440
1.7375
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar
1.2021
1.2031
1.1494
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound
1.8235
1.7985
1.7120
U.S. Dollar per British Pound
Gold
$338.50
$335.40
$354.75
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


A Dogfight Over Deregulation: The New Deal On Fares Deserves Applause ... Only if You Support Price-Gouging
Dear Fred:
I have your letter commenting on my April 19 piece in The New York Times on the folly of domestic airline pricing deregulation.
Let me rebut your allegations point by point:
1) The tone of my piece was not "choleric" but was instead an admirably restrained exercise in disgust at the media spin given to the pricing changes initiated by American Airlines.


Living the Wrong Dream
The former Soviet Union is chockablock these days with idealistic Americans and Europeans who want to help develop a new way of life there -- capitalism.
In 1932, 25-year-old Margaret Wettlin traveled to Moscow thinking that, for a year, she could help to nurture a different social experiment under way there at the time -- Communism.
The Soviet people's awakening to the sins and lies of the past, and their resolute public rejection of more than 70 years of the aftereffects of the Bolshevik Revolution, will almost surely save the energetic Western bankers, lawyers, social workers and do-gooders of today from experiencing what Ms.
Wettlin did when she taught English in Russia, fell in love and stayed to witness a remarkable chunk of history that she writes about, simply and elegantly, in FIFTY RUSSIAN WINTERS: An American Woman's Life in the Soviet Union (Pharos, $22.95).
In "Ten Days That Shook the World," John Reed deified Lenin and the Bolsheviks, and for his unflinching praise earned himself a burial place in the Kremlin wall.
When her journey began, Ms.
Wettlin, too, was idealistic and eager, and she remained so through World War II, the beginning of the Stalinist purges, the arrests of friends.
She married Andrei Yefremov, a theater director and protege of Stanislavsky, had two children and lived for a spell in Mongolia to better serve the cause.
So devoted was she that she even willingly worked for the dreaded K.G.B.
But the inevitable disillusionment set in, and her book traces the painful breakdown of her own idealistic dreams through the breakdown of the vast Soviet state and her own return to the United States in 1980. (Ms. Wettlin, who has translated Gorky, Tolstoy and Pasternak, now lives in Philadelphia.) Ms.
Wettlin is honest, remarkably so at times, and because she is an American who lived through these times, she speaks in a familiar voice about a history that is usually too horrific and bizarre for an outsider to understand.


Stories for Girls About Girls Who Write Stories
" 'EMILY,
why
do you want to write? Give me your reason.'
" 'I want to be famous and rich,' said Emily coolly.


Corrections
An article in Styles of the Times on May 3 about the arm as a fashion object misidentified two muscles in the upper arm.
They are the biceps and the triceps.


LeMond's Prediction Is About to Come True
All week, Greg LeMond has been saying that the 11-day, 1,000-mile Tour Du Pont bicycle race would come down to the final stage on Sunday, a 13.7-mile time trial in Washington.
Today, his prediction came true, which pleased America's most successful and most celebrated rider, the race sponsors who realize his public-relations value and perhaps 95 percent of American cycling aficionados who idolize him.


Is That All There Is?
NAME: -- Arianna Stassinopoulos Huffington.
IDENTITY: -- Cambridge-educated biographer of Maria Callas and Pablo Picasso.


Trammell Out With Ankle Fracture
Detroit shortstop ALAN TRAMMELL was put on the 15-day disabled list yesterday because of a fractured right ankle.
Trammell, a six-time All-Star, was helped off the field Friday night after injuring the ankle while beating out an infield single in the first inning against Kansas City.


What to Subsidize in Israel
Settlements: No word has sown more discord between Israel and the United States.
Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir vows to keep building Jewish settlements in the disputed West Bank, whatever the cost.
Now his main rival in the June 23 election says otherwise.
Yitzhak Rabin, former Prime Minister and Defense Minister, asserts that money now lavished on these settlements should go instead to jobs and housing for 332,0000 immigrants from the former Soviet Union.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
YEARLY MORRIS DANCES
The country festival known as the 1992 Mixed Morris Ale will take place in Westchester on Saturday in various spots from 11 A.M. to 4 P.M.
The host will be the Mianus River Morris of Greenwich.
No one seems to know for sure where the name Morris originated, but an ale is a country festival where ale is the main drink.
In the England of Shakespeare's time, the festivals were usually held outside a pub.
In this country, the Mixed Morris Ale has become a yearly event.


Madness
AT the New York Public Library's children's book fund benefit on Monday, the tables in the Celeste Bartos Forum, where dinner would be served, were artfully strewn with children's party favors: pinwheels, yo-yos, tops, sailor and pirate hats, plastic dinosaurs, inflatable globes and clip-on glow-in-the-dark hoop earrings.
It was late in the benefit season, after all, and some attention spans may have been getting short.
Outside, a small crowd on Fifth Avenue watched the guests arrive by taxi and limousine.
Before ascending the canopied steps to Astor Hall for cocktails -- where actors playing Mother Goose, the Cowardly Lion, the Tin Man, the Pied Piper and Raggedy Ann had joined Warner LeRoy and Louise Grunwald on the receiving line -- they had to get past the Mad Hatter.
This was more difficult than it sounds, because the Mad Hatter is a somewhat hysterical character.


Penn Station II: A Post Office?
In 1963, when workers began dismantling the soaring Doric columns and three-ton stone eagles of the original Pennsylvania Station, a restaurant waiter inside remarked: "This city's got the right name:
New
York. Nothing ever gets old around here."
But today, old is good.


MAY 10-16: From Russia With Cash; Arrests of Spies Suggest The Game Is Still On
The Berlin Wall has fallen and the Soviet Union is no longer, but events over the last month suggest that not all spies have come in from the cold.
Some may merely be after salable secrets.
The arrest last month of five Belgians and the expulsion of four Russians, including two diplomats, followed the discovery of what officials here called a sophisticated ring that passed secrets of advanced technology to both the former Soviet Union and the Yeltsin Government.


Evoking Billie Holiday In Anecdote and Song
FIRST the audience hears haggling backstage.
"I won't go on," says the singer.
Then the introduction: "A legend in her own time."
Clutching a gardenia and finding her way into the spotlight and into the first song with great effort, Miche Braden evokes the unbearable sadness of Billie Holiday nearing the end of her life in "Lady Day at Emerson's Bar and Grill," which concludes the Boston Post Road Stage Company's season at the Westport Country Playhouse.


Close Votes Show Methodists Are Evenly Divided
A gasp greeted the results on Monday when delegates to the United Methodist Church's governing body finished voting on whether to move the denomination's largest agency out of New York.
A decision fraught with symbolism, affecting the lives of 400 employees and possibly costing $18 million, had been made by 15 votes out of 955.


After the Pay Revolution, Job Titles Won't Matter
While many shareholders and management experts have been training their critical spotlight on executive compensation in recent months, a number of companies are engaged in a quiet but momentous revolution that is redrawing paychecks -- and careers -- much lower on the organizational chart.
At the heart of the new pay scheme is the notion that people should be paid not for how many people they supervise or how much power they have, but for how much knowledge they bring to their work.
The concept is variously known as "pay for skills," "skill based pay" or "knowledge based compensation."
"Pay-for-skills values learning instead of control," said Marc Sternfeld, a managing director at Salomon Brothers, which is instituting such a system at a new facility in Tampa that will handle much of the investment banking firm's back-office paperwork.


Data Update
*4*INDEXES OF HOUSING COSTS
N.Y.-Northeast N.J. area*
% change from
% change from
Apr. 92
Mar. 92
Apr. 91
Rents
178.5
-2.0
+3.6
Homeowner's costs
178.5
+0.7
+6.6
Fuel and utilities
104.3
-0.2
0.0
*4*Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics
*4**Five counties of New York City plus Nassau, Suffolk, Westchester
*4*Rockland, Putnam, Bergen, Essex, Morris, Union, Hudson, Middlesex
Somerset and Passaic.
Indexes: 1982-84=100
*4*MORTGAGE INTEREST RATES (Averages)
Last Week
Previous Week
Year Ago
New York
Conventional (30-yr)
8.93
9.03
9.72
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
6.04
6.14
7.35
New Jersey
Conventional (30-yr)
8.80
8.89
9.55
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.80
5.88
7.28
Connecticut
Conventional (30-yr)
8.83
8.93
9.59
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.86
5.94
7.10
Co-ops (N.Y.)
Conventional (30-yr)
9.06
9.15
9.90
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
6.42
6.51
7.75
*4*Indexes for Adjustable-Rate Mortgages*
1-yr. Treasury security
4.25
4.34
6.13
National Mortgage Contract Rate
8.14
8.14
9.26
*Rates on most adjustable mortgages are set 1 to 3 percentage points above these indexes.  (Source: HSH Associates)


Negotiators Report Progress in Talks On Drivers Dispute
Negotiations between The New York Times, a drivers union and a delivery wholesaler reported "some progress" yesterday, the third day of talks aimed at resolving the bitter 11-day labor dispute, a spokesman for a panel of intermediaries said.
"They've broken up into subcommittees," said the spokesman, Frank Mazza, who indicated that the parties expected to continue talking at an undisclosed site through much of last night.
"They are making some progress," Mr.
Mazza continued, "but unless all pieces fall into place there can be no agreement."


A Free Concert in Rye Establishes a Memorial
MUSIC filled Heinz Pulvermann's life, and now, 20 years after his death, a free community concert will be held here in his memory.
The concert, next Sunday at 3 P.M. at Rye High School, will feature the United States Military Academy Band of West Point and the bass baritone Jerome Hines, who has performed for 41 seasons with the Metropolitan Opera.
Mr.
Pulvermann was a longtime Rye resident who died in 1972 at the age of 76.
A prominent German-Jewish industrialist who fled Nazi Germany in 1936, Mr.
Pulvermann became an industrial consultant in the United States.
Next week's concert, to be sponsored by the newly established Pulvermann Foundation, was the inspiration of his 79-year-old widow, Gretchen, who said she wanted "to thank my husband" in the musical language he loved for all he had meant to her.


Emily Grossman, Philip Zisman
Emily Grossman, a daughter of Sari and Alvin Grossman of New York, was married yesterday at her family's weekend house in Pawling, N.Y., to Philip Andrew Zisman, the son of Sylvia and Milton Zisman of Springfield, N.J.
Regina Ryan, a justice of the peace in Sherman, Conn., officiated.
Ms.
Grossman, who is keeping her name, graduated from Williams College.
She is an illustrator and textile artist in New York.
Her father, a freelance publications designer, teaches graphic design at Parsons School of Design in New York.
Her mother is an elementary-school teacher at the Village Community School in New York.


Garden of Love and Poison, With Music
IF everything about "Rappaccini's Daughter," a morose little musical put on by the Blooming Grove Theater Ensemble, weren't so dead earnest, one might have a bit of fun with it.
But Robert Mitchell, the composer, the lyricist and the librettist, means to give us a no-kidding adaptation of Nathaniel Hawthorne's tale of romance, morality and mysticism.
The place is Padua; the year is 1840.
The grim Dr.
Rappaccini, who distills plants into potent medicine -- read poison -- keeps his daughter walled in his own little secret garden of horrors.
Her name is Beatrice, but he calls her Daughter, and she calls him Father.


On the Run


McGwire Overpowers Showalter's Strategy
The game was only in the fifth inning, but the confrontation between Tim Leary and Mark McGwire was going to be monumental in deciding the outcome of this clash between the Yankees and the Oakland Athletics.
Even a first-grader could figure that out.
The Yankees were leading by 3-2 with two outs and the bases loaded.
Baseball's leading home run hitter was opposing the pitcher who last season recorded the highest earned run average in Yankee history.


The Executive Computer; Technical Support, the Way the Big Software Companies Do It
A computer user has a problem, and in many offices, the response usually goes like this:
Step One: The user ignores the manual and calls the tech support department.


Insurers and Lawyers Throw the Dirt Back at Polluters; An Absurd Conclusion
In an article on the Forum page on May 3, Eugene R. Anderson and Robert M. Horkovich, partners in the New York law firm of Anderson Kill Olick &amp; Oshinsky, wrote about the high litigation costs associated with the cleanup of toxic waste.
The article, "Why Insurance Companies Say No," cited a recent study by the Rand Institute for Civil Justice, which "reported that nearly 90 percent of the money allocated by insurance companies in Superfund claims had gone toward legal and related 'transaction' costs, rather than for cleaning up pollution."


IDEAS &amp; TRENDS: The Supreme Court v. Prisoner Appeals; Indigent Defendants, Overworked Lawyers
THE trend of the United States Supreme Court toward limiting appeals to the Federal system has been evolving for some time.
But when the Court this month voted 5 to 4 that Federal courts need not hear cases from state courts even when a prisoner received inadequate legal representation, the ruling highlighted the conflict between a Supreme Court intent on limiting appeals and a justice system often unable to provide adequate representation for the poor.
The question raised by the ruling is whether it will serve as a spur to upgrade the quality of that representation or whether it will simply accentuate the degree to which the quality of a person's justice will depend on the ability to pay for it.


Message At Indy Shifts To Safety
Speed had been the main topic here this month, as laps in the 230-mile-an-hour range became almost routine and Roberto Guerrero won the pole for the 1992 Indianapolis 500 with a dizzying leap of more than 7 miles per hour beyond the old qualifying record.
But on Friday afternoon, the topic suddenly turned to safety.
Jovy Marcelo, a 27-year-old driver from the Philippines who was making his first attempt to qualify for this race, was killed when his car spun and struck the wall in Turn 1 at the Indianapolis Motor Speedway.


Prague Hotels
To the Editor: Concerning your article, "What's Doing in Prague," (March 22) I am curious to know why you did not mention the American-style Hotel Atrium for moderately priced, very comfortable accommodations.
The largest hotel in Czechoslovakia, it was opened in the summer of 1991 and is conveniently located two or three subway stops from Wenceslas Square.
I stayed there in January and recommend it highly.
I purchased a three-day package for $264 through Cedok, which included breakfast, one dinner at a local restaurant, a cultural performance, a half-day city bus tour and walking-shopping-historical tour.


Making a Difference; The Big Cheese at Thrifty
Call him Jim, not Mr.
Philion.
And his title?
For now, it's president and chairman-designate of Thrifty Rent-A-Car System Inc., but his business card may soon read "The Big Cheese."
The new informality is part of a "strategic personality" change that James R. Philion is trying to work at Thrifty, a Chrysler Corporation subsidiary based in Tulsa, Okla.


Bessie Ballantine, Adrian Overholser
Elizabeth Parke Ballantine, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Percy H. Ballantine of Andover, N.J., was married yesterday to Adrian Louis Overholser, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Winfred Overholser Jr. of New York.
The Rev.
C.
Hugh Hildesley officiated at the Episcopal ceremony at the Church of the Heavenly Rest in New York.
Mrs.
Overholser, 36 years old, and known as Bessie, is a conservator with Building Conservation Associates Inc. in New York.
She is a graduate of Barnard College, and is a descendant of Peter Ballantine, the founder of P. Ballantine &amp; Sons breweries, in Newark.
Her father, who is retired, was a senior vice president of the Sussex and Merchants Bank, a division of Midlantic National Bank, in Newton, N.J.


Karen Williams, Andrew Zuckert
Karen Lee Williams, a daughter of Waltraud Williams and Richard E. Williams, both of Upper Nyack, N.Y., was married May 9 in Old Greenwich, Conn., to Andrew Mack Zuckert, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Donald M. Zuckert of New Castle, N.H., and Old Greenwich.
The Rev.
Edward Danks, a Presbyterian minister, officiated at the home of the bridegroom's parents.
Mrs.
Zuckert, who is 26, graduated from the School of the Art Institute of Chicago.
She is the assistant to the director of the Snyder Fine Art Gallery in New York.
Her father, who is retired, was a technical research associate at General Foods Corporation in Tarrytown, N.Y.


Annie Towe and George Egan
GEORGE EGAN and Annie Towe are informally known as the "Yes! Yes! Yes!" couple.
"When George asked me to marry him, I started saying 'Yes! Yes! Yes!' before he even got his proposal out," Mrs.
Egan said.
"So 'Yes! Yes! Yes!' became a slogan for the wedding. It's been on every napkin at almost every party since July."
And there were a lot of parties: a high tea, a hoedown and a slew of showers -- an all-white shower, a paddle-tennis shower, a compact-disk shower, a fun-and-games shower and an around-the-clock shower where guests gave Ms.
Towe a present for every hour of the day.
"I got egg cups for breakfast, loose tea for teatime, lingerie for 3 A.M.," she said.
Starr Collins, a friend of Mrs.
Egan from school, said, "For months, my refrigerator was just blanketed with Annie-and-George invitations."


Wimbledon Making a Day For the Queue
Last summer, bad weather at Wimbledon made an unscheduled day of tennis necessary.
On that day, a Sunday, all seats were sold to those who lined up for them.The spectators were less formal and more enthusiastic than the usual Wimbledon crowd -- they even did the wave -- and the players and organizers were delighted, according to John Curry, chairman of the All England Club.
Seeking to re-create something of that atmosphere, the organizers of Wimbledon will make 2,000 of the 13,100 center court tickets available for June 27, the first Saturday of this year's tournament, to those who queue (to use the Briticism) to buy them that day.
Each day Wimbledon puts about 11,000 of the 28,000 tickets for that day on sale at the gate, but only 600 to 800 are for center court.
The center-court seats are sold at the gate only through Wednesday of the second week (none for the last four days).


Where Terpsichore Spends the Summer
The following is a selective list of summer dance festivals and events.
It is national in scope but concentrates on the Northeast.
California
ANNUAL SUMMER ARTS PERFORMANCE FESTIVAL Arcata, July 5-Aug. 1 (707-826-5401).
Presented by the California State University at Humboldt, John van Duzer Theater: Loretta Livingston and Dancers (July 11); Lola Montes Company and Carol Tetan's Dance Through Times(July 14); Urban Bush Women (July 24); San Francisco Mime Troupe (July 25); Tandy Beal and Company (July 28).


New York
My little piece of paradise sits ready and waiting about 55 miles from Grand Central Terminal.
When the weekend Anschluss overtakes the Hamptons, I head the other way, north up the Hudson to Cold Spring, N.Y.
The town puts on no airs.
It's called Cold Spring because it has a cold spring.
It has a main street called Main Street.
The restaurant at the train depot is called the Depot.
And the town's largest inn, which faces the Hudson, is called the Hudson House.


Penalties As Compensation?
To the Sports Editor:
If John Ziegler had any intestinal fortitude, he would have penalized the Rangers by suspending both Adam Graves and Mark Messier for the balance of the playoffs.


Liesl Schillinger, Ian W. Jackman
Liesl Katharine Schillinger, the daughter of Drs.
John and Elisabeth Schillinger of Potomac, Md., was married in New York yesterday to Ian Wallace Jackman, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John Jackman of Amersham, England.
The Rev.
Charles Scott performed the ceremony at Grace Episcopal Church.
Ms.
Schillinger, 25 years old, will keep her name.
A cum laude graduate of Yale University, she is a fact checker at The New Yorker and a freelance writer.
Her father is the head of the foreign languages departmentat American University.
Her mother is a professor of communications at Mount Vernon College.


The Right Inference, Drawn From the Lead
THERE was a marked Polish flavor about the results of the Cavendish Invitational Charity Pairs in New York City two weeks ago.
Two Polish experts, Pyotr Gawrys and Krzysztof Lasocki, seemed headed for victory, but they were overtaken as a result of a powerful stretch drive by two players who might be called Polish-Israeli-Americans.
One of the winners was Amos Kaminski, who was born in Israel of Polish parents, came to New York City four decades ago as a graduate student and became fascinated by bridge.
The other was Sam Lev, who was born in Poland but lived most of his life in Israel.
Since settling in Forest Hills, Queens, in 1989 he has made a major impact on the American national scene, winning two major titles and finishing second twice in a 25-month period.


Pamela V. Rubin, Bruce Gilchrist
Pamela V. Rubin, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
W.
Roebling Vogeley of Pleasantville, N.Y., and Dr.
Bruce Gilchrist, the son of the late Mr. and Mrs.
Charles Gilchrist of King's Lynn, England, were married yesterday.
The Rev.
Timothy S. Ives performed the ceremony at the First Congregational Church in Chappaqua, N.Y.
Mrs.
Gilchrist, 56 years old, attended Swarthmore and Barnard Colleges and received a law degree from Pace University.
She retired from private practice in Mount Kisco, N.Y., and is doing research for the New Castle (N.Y.) Historical Society.
Her first marriage ended in divorce.


Whose Honor Is It, Anyway
SARAH LAWRENCE COLLEGE feels it is unseemly to pay more than a token honorarium for its commencement speakers.
"We do not consider this an ordinary speaking engagement," said Diane Fusili, the public affairs director of that small, select liberal arts college in Bronxville, N.Y..
"Our graduation is an opportunity for the speaker to meet with a small group of students who will do very interesting things with their lives."
Those fine sentiments seem almost quaint in this age of fevered competition between colleges to secure the hottest speakers of the moment.
Sarah Lawrence had its heart set on Maya Angelou, the celebrated black writer and poet.
So did 20 other colleges, a few of which also felt their seniors were interesting.
And Ms.
Angelou, who has already received more than 50 honorary degrees (Phil Donahue, in comparison, has 4; Elizabeth Dole has 22) regards a graduation as a speaking engagement.
Her fee for commencements -- $10,000, not including transportation and hotel accommodation for herself and an aide, quite reasonable in today's market -- is higher than most college honorariums .


Q and A
Medical Insurance Abroad
Q.
Could you list companies that cover medical expenses for travelers going out of the country? -- F. Richard Lill, Normandy Beach, N.J.


Aloft on the Breeze, Charms to Soothe The Savage Breast
The following list is selective, and programs are subject to change.
More information is available through individual ticket offices.
Alaska
FAIRBANKS SUMMER ARTS FESTIVAL July 24-Aug. 9 (907-479-6778).
Workshops and concerts on the University of Alaska campus.


Fickle Finger Concerns Saberhagen
The game's final determination for Bret Saberhagen was made in the clubhouse Friday night before the sixth inning: There was too much pain to pitch anymore.
The night's dominant question, then, was left to discolor the mood in the visitors' clubhouse here after the Mets beat the Dodgers, 4-1: When will Saberhagen be able to pitch again?


POSTINGS: East Side Project; Endangered-Properties List
The late Halina Rosenthal never stopped looking for ways to strengthen and expand landmark regulation, particularly on the Upper East Side.
So it seems appropriate that she is being commemorated by a new fellowship whose first intern is to help compile a list of the 11 "Most Endangered Properties" on the Upper East Side.


A STITCH IN TIME
A quiet smile crossed my face as I read "A Stitch in Time." To think, the revolution against macho medicine might be won with the comforting click of knitting needles.
Now I will feel more powerful when I unsheathe my weapons, knowing I am not alone.
Now, on to the bastions of corporate meetings and courtrooms.
PAULA S. KRAUSER, M.D.
Edison, N.J.


Glenn Harrell, John Helmers
Adele Glenn Harrell, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
L.
Parker Harrell Jr. of Washington, was married there yesterday to John Byron Helmers, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Gordon B. Helmers of Spartanburg, S.C.
Canon Charles Martin was assisted by the Rev.
Caroline S. Pyle at the St.
Alban's Episcopal Church ceremony.


The Enchantment of Design on Design
The French Cabinets and English punch bowls up for sale this week from the collection of Jaime Ortiz-Patino are the most pictorial furnishings to be auctioned in memory.
Emblazoned on the 18th-century furniture are Japanese lacquered landscapes, floral still lifes and hunting scenes, while the 17th-century silver is exquisitely engraved with Chinese gardens, scholars in quirky caps and a jockey racing his horse.
Mr.
Ortiz-Patino's delight in decorated surfaces is seen throughout his collection of 170 furnishings and Old Master paintings, all of which are for sale at Sotheby's in New York from Wednesday to Friday.
The auction is estimated to total $23 million to $32 million.
Bought over the last 25 years to furnish his home in Geneva, the collection is being sold because Mr.
Ortiz-Patino, an heir to a Bolivian tin fortune, no longer lives in Switzerland.


Parents Try to Unload Duties on the Schools
Carol Grober's letter  [ "How a School District Deals With Death," April 26 ]  is eyebrow raising -- but not in the way she intends.
Schools are being overloaded with unrelated chores that individual students, their families, religious leaders and institutions, and society at large, should be responsible for as part of the socialization process regarding their children -- baby sitting, known as "day care" for infants, adolescents and seniors, as by Boces; driver education; reading to incapacitated adult infants and adolescents, called "talking books" or "books on tape," grieving, etc.


District Attorney, Fond of Publicity, May Be Wilting in Spotlight's Heat
Two years ago, Ira Reiner, the Los Angeles County District Attorney, was the favorite in the race for California attorney general and from there, the political oddsmakers said, he might even have a shot at the governor's mansion.
But now, wounded by his office's failure to win convictions in the Rodney G. King beating case, Mr.
Reiner faces a strong challenge in the election on June 2 and may even lose his post.


Q and A
Capital Gains Exclusion Question: I purchased an apartment in 1977 for $40,000 and put $60,000 into improvements.
When I sold the apartment in 1989 the net profit was $405,000.
In October of 1990 I bought an apartment for $260,000 and put $95,000 into the improvements.
I am past 55 years and have not used my one-time exclusion on the gain.
Assuming I sell it for $355,000 or more, would I have to pay capital gains tax? . . .
Josephine Viscardo, Manhattan  Answer: Maybe not.
The rules for the one-time exclusion of tax on the gain for sellers 55 years of age or older require that they have lived in their residences for three of the five years prior to the date of sale.
To take advantage of the rule, you would not be able to sell until October of 1993.
And if the profit is more than $125,000, you would be required to pay tax on the difference.


Topics of The Times; Mr. McDade's Duty
Indicted recently on Federal bribery and racketeering charges involving abuse of his office, Representative Joseph McDade of Pennsylvania clings to his role as the ranking Republican on the House Appropriations Committee and its military subcommittee.
If Mr.
McDade can't see the wisdom of relinquishing these posts until the charges are resolved, his G.O.P. colleagues ought to force the issue.
The five-count indictment accuses Mr.
McDade of taking more than $100,000 in bribes and gifts from five military contractors and an industry lobbyist.
In return, prosecutors say, Mr.
McDade used his influence to obtain Government contracts for the companies.
Mr.
McDade denies the charges.
Resolving the case could take years.


At Work; Young, Black, Male -- and Elite
The voice of Imar Hutchins picks up speed when he begins to talk about FreeForm Academy, the educational venture he will immerse himself in full time after he graduates from Morehouse College in Atlanta this afternoon.
"Privatization is coming in public education. We want to see a network of hundreds of FreeForms. A national system." The 21-year old senior laughs a little at his own sincerity but continues: "I wake up in the middle of the night and think, 'I have a vision. I have to go to work.' "
Mr.
Hutchins and his classmates at the elite, predominantly black men's college are taking their fervor into the wider world during troubled times.
The economy is bestirring itself but the job market for new graduates is the worst in decades, according to several surveys.
And, two weeks ago, just as seniors were settling in for their last experience with the ritual torture known as final exams, the anomic images from Los Angeles exploded across their television screens.


Traffic Alert
Because of the Ninth Avenue Food Festival, Ninth Avenue will be closed today between 37th Street and 57th Street, from 10 A.M. to 7 P.M.
Because of the Amsterdam Avenue Festival, Amsterdam Avenue will be closed today between 77th Street and 96th Street, from 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.


The Chanel Platform
WHAT: Karl Lagerfeld, Chanel's designer, has canonized the cork-soled platform sandal.
The price is a reassuring $615, which includes: one two-inch cork sole, one four-and-a-half-inch cork heel, one black suede-on-leather vamp and one ankle strap with Velcro closure, joined to the sole by two suede-on-leather strips.
The shoe extends the silhouette of Chanel's lower hemlines, which can look dowdy with flat shoes.
The look is monumental, even architectural.
The ground floor presents massed forms that look like pitted sandstone.
The second story elaborates a sophisticated line that plays off against the bulk below.


Streetscapes: Public School 165; The 'Palace Design' Proves a Durable One
THE lasting image of the New York public schools built in the 20th century is the mid-block, H-plan design of the architect Charles B.J.
Snyder and first used at P.S. 165 at 234 West 109th Street in 1898.
These big, light, elegant buildings, often Elizabethan or French Renaissance in style, remain startling mid-block surprises wherever they appear.
They elbow apart long rows of dark tenements and flats with their tall, peaked roofs and big courtyards.


A Voice With Broad Echoes; A Muslim Cleric Hones the Fusing of Religion and Politics
GONE were his traditional flowing white robe and matching half-foot-high turban.
Hassan al-Turabi, the elegant Sudanese legal scholar and philosopher with advanced degrees from the University of London and the Sorbonne, looked as pinstriped as any Barclay Street banker as he addressed multiple gatherings of influential scholars, businessmen, officials and journalists in Washington last week.
Dr.
Turabi is accustomed to wearing two hats.
He is a preeminent pioneer and spokesman of the Islamic revival that is sweeping the Middle East and other regions with heavily Muslim populations.
He is also widely regarded as the de facto power in the Sudan, where a militant Islamic Government seized control in a military coup in 1989 and since then, according to Amnesty International and other human rights groups, has tortured political dissidents and engaged in other systematic violations of human rights.


Lauren Shenian, Patrick McMahon
Lauren Gay Shenian, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Popkin Shenian of Pittsfield, Mass. was married yesterday in Lenox, Mass. to Patrick McMahon, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Frank J. McMahon of Mahwah, N.J.
The Rev.
Thomas J. Kenna officiated at St.
Ann's Roman Catholic Church.
Mrs.
McMahon, 27 years old, is a financial analyst for the Vanguard Group, a mutual-fund company in Valley Forge, Pa.
She is a graduate of Villanova University.
Her father is a plastics consultant.
Her mother, Joyce R. Shenian, is a broker at Roberts &amp; Flint Realty in Lenox.


Sampras Is Finally Ready to Dig In and Play on the Clay
Like a flag at half-mast, his shoulders seem permanently fixed in a shrug that could be apologetic, apathetic, or simply an expression of the non-aggrandizing posture they don't teach in Dale Carnegie's course -- or anywhere else.
But no wonder Pete Sampras hasn't learned to strut.
He's at a career-high No. 3 in the world, he's merely 20 years old, in 1990 he became the youngest United States Open champion in history, and still, wherever he goes, it's the same old litany: What's wrong with Pete Sampras?
What has this one-slam-wonder done lately?
"If I don't play well, people say I wasn't trying; if I'm on, they say it's just a matter of serving genius, not effort," said Sampras.
"I've said from Day One that I'm a guy who lets his racquet do the talking." Sampras is at his most articulate during his service motion -- which happens, naturally, to be silent and virtually unreadable.


Surviving the Dreaded Dogwood Disease
PLENTY of dogwood trees are in full bloom, and when they are seen in concert with the flowers of the redbud, there is no finer springtime show.
Because of this dramatic appeal, dogwoods are still being planted, and should be.
But the fungus that has been decimating the dogwood population still exists throughout the dogwood's natural range.
Although the disease was first reported in 1978, it has not been conquered; where it runs out of control, in forested areas especially, dogwood trees have died in two to three years.
But more and more scientists are researching the problem, and the consensus is one of optimism.


Mickey Mouse, The Big Board And Innovation
There's a party today at Broad and Wall Streets.
Mickey Mouse will be there, and so will Nicholas Brady, celebrating the 200th birthday of the New York Stock Exchange.
There will be carnival rides and a new postage stamp.
Towering above will be empty offices, owned by Olympia &amp; York.
The Big Board deserves its party, even if it is just as well that the particular event being marked -- an agreement by a bunch of brokers to fix commission rates and form a cartel to exclude outsiders -- will not be closely examined.


Raid on Indian Casino Inflames Issue of Self-Rule
Pounding drums and piercing chants echo a spirit of defiance that blazes in the desert night on the Yavapai-Apache reservation here.
A sense of showdown looms as clear as the moon over Red Mountain.
This was the site of confrontation on Tuesday, when Federal agents seized gambling machines at the tribe's casino, only to be prevented from leaving the reservation by a blockade of vehicles driven by angry Indians.
The standoff ended when Gov.
Fife Symington negotiated a 10-day "cooling-off" period.


Ewing Feels Good Enough
With Patrick Ewing's sprained ankle feeling better today, the Knicks couldn't have felt much better about their chances of defeating the Chicago Bulls on Sunday.
As the team bus prepared to leave for the airport, Ewing emerged from the locker room and said what everyone in the Knicks' organization hoped he would: His left ankle, injured on Thursday night, was much improved.
He will play in the decisive Game 7 of the teams' Eastern Conference playoff series, Sunday at Chicago Stadium.
And he is confident he can play effectively.


Testing Tradition's Limits
Being stuck somewhere between cultures is one of America's great subjects, given the country's violent and fluid history.
In pop, musicians outside the mainstream usually seek compromises between music of their subculture and standard pop forms.
Some end up being translators, others become mute.
Both the Neville Brothers and Los Lobos have just released new albums, and being in the middle defines almost everything they do.
For the Neville Brothers, it causes confusion and uncertainty; for Los Lobos, it allows the band to make a complex and richly layered album.
The Neville Brother's "Family Groove" (A&amp;M 75021 5384 2; CD and cassette) is a disappointment, wobbling between New Orleans music and mainstream pop.
The band has consistently misstepped in making records; each album, eagerly awaited because of the group's incandescent live performances, seems to obscure the point: a communal euphoria that gets as much of its power from the band's traditions as from its musical ability.


The Man Who Understood Horses
ALL THE PRETTY HORSES
By Cormac McCarthy. 302 pp. New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $21.


Pazienza Sets His Return to the Ring
What are a couple of fractured vertabrae to a boxer determined to return to the ring?
VINNY PAZIENZA, the World Boxing Association junior welterweight champion who has vowed to resume his career despite the severe injuries he suffered in an automobile accident last November, will give the boxing public a chance to assess his rehabilitation progress next month.


Saving the Earth for More Than One Day
IT was the kind of gentle May morning that Mother Nature seemed to have conjured up expressly for the occasion.
An almost cloudless blue sky created a sunny canopy for students of the Springhurst Elementary School in Dobbs Ferry, who were performing a variety of songs, dances and written pieces to celebrate the earth.
Although the calendar said May Day, the occasion was for Earth Day.


Olympic Tickets
To the Editor: Following is the history of my quest for Olympic tickets through Olson Travel World.
On July 25, 1991, I requested 32 tickets for nine events at the 1992 Olympics.
Accompanying the form was a check for $2,594, which included a processing fee of $5 per ticket.
I understand now that this processing charge would be nonrefundable even if I had received no tickets.
I called Olson a number of times about what happened to the Aug. 31, 1991, lottery, which was to determine the ticket allocation.
Each time I was informed that the allocation would be made "shortly." Finally, on Oct. 1, 1991, I received a letter indicating that by the end of October the allocation would be made.
That finally took place on Nov. 27.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
Up Close (With Bugs)
IT is difficult to love an insect. But Dr. Phil Glaser was giving it a try.
"I'm attempting to appreciate insects more as I get older," he said.
"Where I grew up, bugs were something you feared and wanted destroyed. We even had the exterminator come into our apartment every year."


Abroad at Home; The New World Order
When President Bush took this country and others into the Persian Gulf war 16 months ago, he acted in the named of a new world order.
This was not just a war for oil, he said; it was the beginning of an age when aggression against the weak would not be tolerated anywhere.
How cynical that promise sounds today.
The world is if anything nastier.
There are more victims of aggression.
And political leaders show no signs of the firmness needed to stop it -- least of all George Bush.


Declining Living Standards Account for Sharp Rise in TB Cases; What Are Priorities?
To the Editor:
In 1952, the American Selman Waxsman was awarded the Nobel Prize for the discovery of streptomycin, one of the first effective agents in the treatment of human tuberculosis.


Debra G. Capstick and Tony J. Lee
Debra Gail Capstick, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Daniel F. Capstick of Fayetteville, Ark., was married yesterday in Greenwich, Conn., to Tony Jay Lee, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Tsoung-Chao Lee of Mansfield Center, Conn.
The Rev.
Robert Hundley performed the ceremony at the Second Congregational Church.
Mrs.
Lee, 27 years old, is a computer programmer for Columbia University's academic information systems.
She graduated from Columbia, where she also received a master's degree in computer science.
Her father retired as a professor of agricultural economics at the University of Arkansas.
Her mother, Anita Capstick, operates a day-care center in Fayetteville.


Hong Kong
In the glare of the hot summer sun, some of Hong Kong's most appealing qualities -- steel and mirrored skyscrapers, crowded streets, frenetic energy -- can become oppressive, and a weekend respite seems essential.
Although the colony has scores of bucolic outer islands, they cater mainly to backpackers and day sailors.
To find a more comfortable hideaway, board a high-speed ferry and skim across the Pearl River estuary to Macao.
A Portuguese territory on the southern tip of China, less than an hour from Hong Kong, Macao is the oldest permanent European settlement in Asia.
And even though some high-rises have sprouted along its outer edges, central Macao still retains much of its leisurely, Iberian charm.


Knicks Leave Mark on Bulls
Looking good is no longer the issue for the Chicago Bulls.
Feeling good is.
They can worry about restoring their high-wire image next week, if they can take care of brutal business Sunday in Game 7 of their Eastern Conference semifinal series against the Knicks.
There are no teams left in the National Basketball Association playoffs, as far as Michael Jordan is concerned, with the capability to undo the Bulls the way the Knicks have in the first six games of this series, which concludes with the decisive game at Chicago Stadium, the Bulls' home court.
Good teams that can challenge them, beat them, certainly.
But none with the ferocity, the havoc-wreaking audacity, of these Knicks.


It Came From Outer Space
Anni Kuan, a 32-year-old fashion designer, is looking to the military-industrial complex for inspiration.
In her new showroom on West 38th Street, Ms.
Kuan sits at her buyers' table, which is made from the base of a rocket booster.
By the window, there's a table fashioned from part of a satellite-launching unit, and her samples hang on a rack that is actually a piece of a jet's exterior.


Basic Prep: $45
In 1919, if we're to believe the hang tag, Bradford Dexter Bagg, preppie of yore, uncovered a cache of his father's old button-down shirts in a Midwestern attic and brought them East to college, where they inspired a campus fashion.
Today, B. D. Baggies makes those same extra-roomy, Oxford-cloth shirts, 100 percent cotton and prelaundered, in delicious candy stripes and solids.
The big draw is the cotton drawstring bags they're packed in, prominently marked with country of origin (this one).
The English, especially, love them.
So do the Japanese.
Hudson's sells them for $45.


Past vs. Present
To the Editor:
While Michael Cunningham is right to scorn the one-dimensional and often offensive depictions of gay men in the media, his objections to "The Boys in the Band," "Torch Song Trilogy" and "La Cage aux Folles" do those works and their admirers a disservice.
Each illustrates, entertainingly, various layers of gay life; besides, stable relationships and somewhere to put potted plants are very much worth having.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
JOSEPH PULITZER II AND THE POST-DISPATCH A Newspaperman's Life.
By Daniel W. Pfaff.
Pennsylvania State University, $29.95.


HERE'S BRANFORD
Branford Marsalis might as well write his autobiography
now
, because his interesting years are bound to be the ones he spent in what Peter Watrous describes as the "small-time, late-night jazz life" ("Here's Branford," May 3).
Reading the last paragraph of the article was one of the saddest experiences I've had since I first started playing music 44 years ago: Marsalis says that hearing Coltrane was "one of the worst nights of my life." That would be true only if he was competing with Coltrane.
A real musician never competes, he plays.
And any other player at his best is an inspiration.


ABOUT CARS: A Quick Trip Through the Mailbag; Chapter One
Dear Sir:
I am considering starting a Subaru SVX motor club.
The club could offer a newsletter and provide opportunities for rallies as well as a variety of special events.
I feel that the SVX is a wonderful car, but it sure would be nice if I knew someone else who owned one.
BRIAN DELACEY  Cambridge, Mass.
I guess it would be comforting for the three of you to get together.
In all truth, sales have been disappointing to the company ever since the $29,700 sports car was introduced last September.
At this point, Subaru hoped to be selling 1,000 SVX's a month.
But, so far, your car has only 2,872 siblings.
Good luck.


The First Lady Who Endorsed Bitters
ETHICS evolve.
Today, it is hard to imagine Barbara Bush's endorsing a digestive medicine; a century ago, Frances Folsom Cleveland seems to have done just that.
Stamp collectors often drift into being hoarders of other ephemera, and when a handsome advertising card was offered in a recent mail auction, entering a $25 bid proved irresistible.
The bid was successful.


Gotcha, Smarty!
FOX OUTFOXED
Written and illustrated by James Marshall. 48 pp. New York: Dial. $11. (Ages 4 to 8)


The Louvre Honors A Patron Saint Of French Painting
NOT QUITE 50 YEARS AGO, when Fiorello La Guardia was Mayor of New York, he went in his capacity as an ex officio trustee of the Metropolitan Museum to a meeting of its acquisitions committee.
Not every Mayor of New York makes the most of this opportunity, but on that afternoon La Guardia intervened in a way that those present did not forget.
Among the paintings proposed was the portrait of Guillaume Bude (1467-1540) by Jean Clouet.
It had been brought forward by Charles Sterling, a Polish-born art historian and former member of the staff of the Louvre.
Rescued from France in 1942 through the intervention of Francis Henry Taylor, the director of the Met at the time, Sterling had made himself indispensable.


Moving Outdoors
Harden off, or acclimate, tender plants that have been indoors before planting outside.
Set them outside in a cold frame or a protected spot, out of direct sunlight.
Leave them out for just a few hours at first, prolonging the time each day.
After a week, they should be adjusted to outdoor temperatures; if frost threatens, they should be covered with bushel baskets or floating row covers.
The best time to put in transplants is on an overcast, cool morning.
Don't plant in the midday sun.
Water each transplant with a half-strength solution of fertilizer, like fish emulsion, to decrease the shock of root disturbance.


Noted With Pleasure
Lost Cities in Bright Air
Considering the beauties of ancient cities, John Ruskin issued an angry denunciation of their modern counterparts.
This is from "John Ruskin: Selected Writings," edited by Kenneth Clark (Penguin, paper).


ABOUT CARS: A Quick Trip Through the Mailbag; Isn't Anybody Listening?
Dear Sir:
For the past three years, I have tried to buy a new car to replace my 14-year-old, wonderfully comfortable Chevrolet Malibu Classic.
But new cars are not user-friendly to older buyers, and my mechanic tells me he's keeping many an older car going for the reasons I'll list.


Business Diary/May 10-15
Running Out of Maneuvering Room


Race to Quickest And the Richest?
To the Sports Editor:
Sailboat racing has never been as popular a sport as baseball, football and basketball.
Back in the days of Sir Thomas Lipton and Cornelius Vanderbilt, it was a millionaire's sport, and, unfortunately, it still is.
Except now they are not millionaires but billionaires.


To the Bard
Shakespeare Festival awards and a celebration of American crafts.


Stock Exchange Celebrates Bicentennial


Bridges Between Blacks and Koreans
For many New Yorkers, the looting and burning in Los Angeles summoned uncomfortable memories of racial tensions in New York City between blacks and Koreans -- in particular the angry 1990 boycott of a Korean grocery store in Flatbush.
Yet it was also an occasion to reflect on what can be done to defuse tensions if municipal leaders agree to face them honestly.
New York provides an admirable example, despite a fumbling start.
Mayor Dinkins waited eight months to visit the grocery and refused to help enforce a court order to keep boycotters 50 feet from the store.
He underestimated the hostility between black customers and Korean merchants and his duty to intervene.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
Olympia &amp; York's president and co-chief executive acknowledged that at current market values, the company's real estate properties fall short of the debt against them.  [ Page A1. ]
Oracle and McCaw Cellular disclosed details of a proposed data broadcast service that could transmit vast amounts of digital information to computer users at low cost.  [ D3. ]


Dance in Review
Jeanette Stoner and Dancers  Merce Cunningham Studio
Sometimes, in the arts, less is more.
But sometimes less is merely less.
Although the four premieres that Jeanette Stoner and Dancers presented Saturday night were choreographically economical, only one actually achieved an austere beauty.


What's Next for Wilkins?
Now that this Knick season has ended, the team's front office will immediately begin focusing on the next one.
Two of the Knicks' starters are unrestricted free agents: Xavier McDaniel and Gerald Wilkins.
Backup center James Donaldson is also an unrestricted free agent.


Nationwide Cellular Services reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Investigation Continues in Slaying of Five in Oklahoma City


New York Helps Put Older People to Work
To the Editor:
Your recognition of what New York's seniors can contribute not only to volunteerism but to the business community is especially fortuitous ("The Forgotten Talent Pool," editorial, April 27).
Recently, the Mayor's Voluntary Action Center's Second Careers Program has participated with various public and private agencies to form a new organization, the Senior Employment Service HUB.
Staffed by retired volunteer executives, the HUB works with New York City employers to develop job opportunities for older workers.
A unique feature of the program is the HUB Hotline (212-577-8607) in which employers can access, without charge, a network of agencies that screen and train older job applicants.
Neither the HUB volunteers nor those who staff Second Careers nor I, however, think of our work as "recycling the old folks." PHYLLIS BARON Coordinator Second Careers Volunteer Program Mayor's Voluntary Action Center New York, May 6, 1992


Cornerstone Financial reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Domco Industries reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


John Forsyth Co. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Gigi Foster, Dr. Robert Kitei
Gigi Foster, the daughter of the late Mr. and Mrs.
Howard S. Foster of Merion, Pa., was married yesterday to Dr.
Robert Andrew Kitei, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Milton Kitei of Philadelphia.
Rabbi Max Hausen officiated at the Rittenhouse Hotel in Philadelphia.
Mrs.
Kitei is a marketing strategist in New York.
She graduated from the University of Miami in Coral Gables.
Her father was a clothing manufacturer based in Philadelphia with L. W. Foster Sportswear.


American Technical Ceramics reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Centennial Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Henley Properties reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Las Vegas Discount Golf &amp; Tennis reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Bayport Restaurant Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 30


North American Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Gemco National Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Dr. Lambiris, Dr. Kalogerakis
Dr.
Christine A. Lambiris, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John E. Lambiris of New York, was married yesterday to Dr.
Alexander D. Kalogerakis, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Michael G. Kalogerakis of New York.
The Rev.
Robert G. Stephanopoulos officiated at the Greek Orthodox Cathedral of the Holy Trinity in New York.
Dr.
Lambiris, 28 years old, will keep her name.
She is a resident in pediatrics at New York Hospital.
She graduated from Columbia University and received an M.D. degree from New York University.
Her father, a chemical engineer, is a pharmaceuticals consultant in New York.
Her mother, Lika Lambiris, a chemical engineer, is a vice president of Swemco Inc., an air-pollution-control company in New York.


Brandon Systems Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 29


Convergent Solutions reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Harmony Holdings reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Liberty Homes Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


International Totalizator Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Page America Group reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Valerie Lippmann and Daniel Doran
Valerie Anne Lippmann, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert L. Lippmann of New York, was married yesterday to Daniel Avery Doran, the son of Marion A. Doran of Westlake Village, Calif., and the late Daniel A. Doran.
The Rev.
Joyce Fuchs-Gioia performed the ceremony at the Stanhope hotel in New York.
Mrs.
Doran, 36 years old, is the vice president of Anne Taylor Davis Communications, a fashion advertising and public-relations concern in New York.
She graduated from Goucher College.
Her father is a purchasing agent in New York for Pauline Trigere Inc.
Her mother, Rosalie Lippmann, is a puchasing agent for Hirschberg Schutz &amp; Company, wholesalers of clothes trimmings in Union, N.J.


Pavarotti Withdraws From 'Lucia' at the Met
Luciano Pavarotti will not appear as scheduled in the Metropolitan Opera's new production of Donizetti's "Lucia di Lammermoor" next season, the Met's general director, Joseph Volpe, has announced.
The tenor has decided to retire the role of Edgardo from his active repertory, Mr.
Volpe said.
Richard Leech, an American, will sing the role in the first seven Met performances.
Mr.
Pavarotti has rearranged his schedule to sing Cavaradossi in "Tosca" six times in October and November, and will also give a recital and take part in a pension fund concert at the Met early next year, Mr.
Volpe said.


LeMond: One of America's Monuments
How American can you get?
Today, in the nation's capital, over a course that passed the Capitol, the Washington Monument and the Lincoln Memorial, Greg LeMond, America's most successful and most popular bicycle racer, won the Tour Du Pont, America's most important bicycle race.
Then, on the medals stand, he sprayed willing v.i.p.'s with a giant bottle of American champagne before taking a satisfying gulp.


Needler Group reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Koch Lifts the Veil on Den of Cup 'Espionage'
An ebullient Bill Koch, fresh from victory Saturday in defending the America's Cup against Italy's challenging yacht, has shed the shroud of secrecy that has blanketed his America
team for the past 18 months.
After defeating Italy's Il Moro di Venezia, 4-1, Koch threw open the doors to his camp.
Hundreds of onlookers, mostly friends and the news media, stepped into a waterfront compound usually sealed off by guards and gates.


Cavalier Youth Serves Up a Blowout of Aging Celtics
Quicker, stronger. Faster, fresher.
The Cavaliers exhibited those traits and much more against the Celtics this afternoon, whizzing past Boston on the outside, mercilessly bowling the Celtics over inside and winning by 122-104 in a Game 7 rout that vaulted Cleveland into its first Eastern Conference final since 1976.
On Tuesday night, the Cavaliers will meet the Bulls in Chicago for Game 1.


Autostock reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Memorial Parade Is Held for Dr. King


CCX Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Biopool International reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Occupational Medical Corp. of America reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


American Travellers Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Canadian Energy Services reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Bagration-Mukhransky Memorial Services
Three memorial services will be held tomorrow for Prince Teymuraz K. Bagration-Mukhransky, who died on April 10.
He was a member of royalty who escaped the Russian Revolution, moved to New York City and for 43 years headed international relief efforts for political refugees.
A graveside service will take place at 10 A.M. at the Russian Cemetery in Spring Valley, N.Y., followed by an 11 A.M. service at the St.
Sergius Chapel in the Tolstoy Foundation Center in Valley Cottage, N.Y., and a 5:30 P.M. service at the Synodical Cathedral of the Mother of God at 75 East 93d Street in Manhattan.


Magellan Petroleum reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Celtrix Pharm reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Continental Mortgage &amp; Equity reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Hawkins Energy Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Hyde Athletic Industries reports earnings for Qtr to April 3


Amserv Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Equity Oil Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


A Fearful Sarajevo Sees U.N.'s Last Convoys Go
The United Nations today completed its pullback of military and civilian personnel from Sarajevo, the capital of Bosnia and Herzegovina, leaving behind a city of hungry, frightened civilians desperate for respite from the warfare that has been destroying their city.
Senior United Nations officials who left Sarajevo in one of two large convoys over the last two days said that women stood weeping at the roadside as the convoy passed through the western surburbs of the city.
The 15-hour journey to Belgrade started on roads now controlled by the Serbian militias who have effectively encircled the city and cut it off from relief.


Automotive Industries reports earnings for Qtr to March 28


Consolidated Canadian Express reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Beijing Seizes U.S. Paper's Files
State Security officers confiscated materials from the office of The Washington Post today and interrogated the paper's bureau chief for more than two hours.
The bureau chief, Lena H. Sun, 34 years old, said five officers had arrived at her home with a search warrant for her office and had taken notebooks, a letter and a list of telephone numbers of family members of Chinese dissidents from an office safe.
They videotaped parts of the session and said she had "engaged in activities incompatible" with her status as a journalist, but refused to be more specific.


Grasso Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Texas Governor Urges Smith Graduates to Rejuvenate the Political System
In her speech at Smith College's 114th commencement exercises yesterday, Gov.
Ann W. Richards of Texas recalled a time when "women made the coffee and men made the decisions."
But Governor Richards, addressing the 767 undergraduates and 73 graduate students on the campus of the women's college in Northampton, Mass., said that things have changed: "Men have learned to make coffee, and a few of us are in decision-making positions."


AOI Coal Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


OMNI USA Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Disney Channel Broadens Its Reach
A decade ago the Disney Channel was strictly for kids.
"We had cartoons, old movies and our audience was -- let's face it -- very, very young," said John F. Cooke, the president of the pay channel.
How young?
Twelve years old?
"That's too old," Mr.
Cooke said with a gentle laugh.
"I would say 7 or 8."
Today, the Disney Channel has emerged as the fastest-growing pay service on television, an outlet that has sought successfully to retain its young audience while expanding significantly into the teen-age and adult market.
From 1984 until last year, the number of subscribers to the channel grew from 1.7 million to 6.2 million.


Leisure Concepts Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Pathe Communications reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Omega Hydrocarbons reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


World Economies


Review/Theater; Josef Mengele Recast As a Nightclub Star
The spotlight strikes, and the song-and-dance man smiles at the audience and stylishly steps into a chorus of "I like a Wagner tune. How about you?" The entertainer is none other than Josef Mengele, the so-called Angel of Death of Auschwitz, working his way up in show business under the alias Gunther Ludwig.
At present he is in Paraguay, appearing nightly at the Club Fuhrer in a cabaret act of his own creation.
Some theatergoers may find this idea offensive, but if Mel Brooks could concoct "Springtime for Hitler," then Charlie Schulman can write "Angel of Death," an outrageous comedy about the rise of Nazism and the fall of Hollywood.
The one-act play is at the American Jewish Theater, in what is certainly a change of pace for the company.
It shares a bill with Bryan Goluboff's "Big Al," which was presented last year in the Ensemble Studio Theater's Marathon of short plays.


Stocks Higher in Tokyo
Stock prices rose in Tokyo today.
At the midday recess, the Nikkei index of 225 issues was up 230.13 points, or 1.2 percent, to 18,304.40.
On Friday, the index fell 730.33 points.


Bulls Oust Knicks From N.B.A. Playoffs


U.S. Technologies Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Leeco Diagnostics reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Woman Held In Slashing Of Relatives
A woman described as struggling with depression killed her 2-year-old son with a kitchen knife early yesterday and slashed the throats of her mother, grandmother and 8-year-old daughter as they lay sleeping in a Bronx apartment, the police said.
She then tried to kill herself.
Investigators were trying to determine what set off the violence in a family that neighbors and relatives in their Pelham Parkway neighborhood called close-knit and caring.


Bowl America reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Atlantis Resources reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Laurentian Group reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Bridge
After surviving a tension-packed final match in which the score went up and down like a yo-yo, a group of world champions earned the right this afternoon to represent the United States in Salsomaggiore, Italy, in August, where they will defend the World Olympiad Team title they won four years ago.
Bob Hamman, Bob Wolff, both of Dallas, Jeff Meckstroth of Tampa, Fla., Eric Rodwell of Naperville, Ill., and Seymon Deutsch of Laredo, Tex., won in 1988 in Venice, Italy, with James Jacoby, who has since died and been replaced on the squad by Michael Rosenberg of Manhattan.
In the first 96 deals their margin after the 16-deal sessions was: +24; -16; +17; -1; -28; +2; +39.
In the final 16 deals today they held on to win by 3.


Advanced Marketing Services Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Loyal and Passionate, And All to No Avail
Between hoots at the television and tugs at his drink, Alfonso King spoke only briefly about his career as a 5-foot-4-inch forward for his high school basketball team in Panama.
King had understandably preferred baseball.
What was not so understandable, at least in a city where many went indoors yesterday and prayed for the Knicks to stalk down the Bulls, was his choice of whom to root for.
In a Brooklyn social club roiling with the passion of about 25 Knick fanshj, the 54-year-old King preferred the Bulls.


Farm Credit System reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


BFS Bankorp Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


KMS Industries reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Husband Finds Burmese Dissident Still 'Indomitable'
The husband of Daw Aung San Suu Kyi, the Burmese dissident who won the Nobel Peace Prize last year, said today that her spirit is "indomitable" in her third year under house arrest and that she is prepared to remain in detention until there is reform in her country.
Michael Aris, who left Myanmar on Saturday after his first reunion with his wife since a short visit in December 1989, said Mrs.
Aung San Suu Kyi had refused to discuss the military Government's terms for her freedom.


Accounts
*
Papa Gino's of America, Dedham, Mass., a chain of Italian restaurants, named three finalists in the review for its account, estimated at $4 million.
They are two Boston agencies -- Houston Effler &amp; Partners and Ingalls, Quinn &amp; Johnson -- and Leonard Monahan Lubars &amp; Kelly, Providence, R.I. *
Vitelco, St.
Thomas, the United States Virgin Islands telephone company, returned its account to Wilson, Horne, McClelland &amp; Gray, Atlanta, which it had left 18 months ago for Saatchi &amp; Saatchi, San Juan, P.R.
Billings were not disclosed.


Equity Issues Expected From Companies This Week
The following equity offerings are expected this week:
Alcatel Alsthom, 10 million American depository receipts. Morgan Stanley.
Alco Health Distribution Corp., 7.5 million common shares, 6 million in the U.S.
Smith Barney, Harris Upham.


U.S. Will Play Italy in Soccer In First Event of the Games
The United States and Italy will kick off this summer's Olympic Games with a soccer match on July 24, a day before the opening ceremony.
The match will be the first of four soccer games that evening, the only Olympic contests being held before the Games officially open on July 25.
All other sports begin July 26 or later.


Endosonics Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Dance in Review
Annabella Gonzalez Dance Theater  Theater of the Riverside Church
Annabella Gonzalez, a Mexican-born dancer and choreographer who has worked in Switzerland as well as in the United States, is an inquisitive eclectic who loves variety.
There was certainly nothing monotonous about the program that the Annabella Gonzalez Dance Theater offered on Thursday night.
Yet this was a disappointing occasion, because some of the works never really came alive on stage.


FIND/SVP Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Nahama &amp; Weagant Energy Co. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


NRP Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Endevco Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Hollywood Park reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Cellular Communications Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


PLM Equipment Growth Fund II reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Soccer Game Fight Leaves Eight Injured
Six people were hit with plastic birdshot pellets and two others, including a 2-year-old girl, were scratched by flying glass during a fight at a club soccer game in upper Manhattan yesterday, the police said.
None of the injuries were serious, and all the victims were in stable condition at local hospitals last night, a police spokeswoman, Sgt.
Mary Wrensen, said.


Beth Convissar and Randy Maycon
Beth Deborah Convissar, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Michael Convissar of New York, was married yesterday to Zev Randy Maycon, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert Maycon of Cherry Hill, N.J.
Rabbi Nathaniel Benjamin performed the ceremony at Tappan Hill in Tarrytown, N.Y.
Mrs.
Maycon, 24 years old, and her husband, 26, are graduates of American University.
She received a J.D. from the University of Bridgeport.
Her father is a senior partner in New York in the accounting firm of Kenneth Leventhal &amp; Company.


DSG International Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Broadway on Pay-Per-View? Not Yet
Big star.
Big music.
Big dance numbers.
Big buzz.
The theory is that this should all add up to big bucks, and seemingly "Jelly's Last Jam" has all the elements that would make it the perfect candidate for the first live pay-per-view presentation of a running Broadway musical.
It has been a rocky road to pay-per-view riches, however, and now years of talk and more talk about pay-per-view have ended in postponement: Polygram Diversified Entertainment has had to delay its presentation of "Jelly" until the fall.


Paulson Capital Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Kazakhstan, the Nuclear Holdout
All short-range nuclear arms in the former Soviet Union have been moved from outlying republics to Russia for dismantling.
But Ukraine, Kazakhstan and Belarus have not yet disposed of their long-range nuclear missiles and bombers.
Ukraine and Belarus have now pledged to do so.
The lone holdout is Kazakhstan, whose 1,400 long-range missiles make it the fourth-largest nuclear power.
Its hesitancy threatens to undermine the Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty, or Start, signed by the U.S. and Soviet Union last year.


Information Display Tech reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


CHRONICLE
This morning, CANDICE BERGEN will receive an honorary doctor of laws degree at the University of Pennsylvania's 236th commencement.
Tonight, in her television news reporter role, Murphy Brown, she will give birth to a boy in what is expected to be the most public delivery since Lucy Ricardo had little Ricky in 1953.
The confluence of events -- the dignity of an academic procession in the morning, the frenzy of labor in the evening -- is just a coincidence.


Acmat Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Medex Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Baltek Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Quotation of the Day
"The whole system is hidden by confidentiality. Nobody is really watching how it works. And this is a system that frequently goes wild." -- JEFFRY H. GALLET, a New York City Family Court judge, on child-welfare laws intended to protect the privacy of families.  [ A1:3. ]


Printronix Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 27


Pagurian Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Showalter Cocks Fist, Yanks Provide Punch
The scene was so rare and so scary that it took an instant for the entire picture to register.
First, Buck Showalter and Tony La Russa jabbered at each other from the dugouts.
Then they talked louder, walked faster toward each other and tried settling the argument behind home plate with fisticuffs.
Was this two major league baseball managers or the world of professional wrestling?
Believe it or not, yesterday's ugly spectacle at Yankee Stadium dealt strictly with baseball as two managers who do not exchange Christmas cards or pleasantries almost went a few rounds over bench jockeying that escalated too far.
Dugouts emptied, relief pitchers raced in from the bullpen and it took several players to restrain Showalter and La Russa.
By the way, the undercard included an actual game and the Yankees routed Oakland, 11-2.


Glacier Holdings Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 28


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Candidate's Wife; Hillary Clinton as Aspiring First Lady: Role Model, or a 'Hall Monitor' Type?
After chatting sympathetically with Hillary Clinton for a moment about the silliness of judging a woman by her hairdo, a television reporter from Columbus, Ohio, zeroed in for the sound bite.
"You know, some people think of you as an inspiring female attorney mother, and other people think of you as the overbearing yuppie wife from hell," the reporter said.
"How would you describe yourself?"


Harman Memorial Service
A memorial service for Avraham Harman, who was the chancellor of the Hebrew University in Jerusalem and the former Israeli Ambassador to the United States, will be held at 5 P.M.
Wednesday at the Central Synagogue at 123 East 55th Street in Manhattan.
Mr.
Harman died Feb. 23.


Falcon Cable Systems Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Interstate General Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Data Med Clinical Support Services reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29


Alba-Waldensian Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Elron Electronic Industries Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Hadson reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Circadian Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


METRO DIGEST
lTHE DEBATE OVER PRIVACY AND ABUSE
After 16-year-old Tawana Scott was charged with murder last May for abandoning her baby to die next to the swirling waters of the Harlem River, her relatives were left with many questions -- among them, why had New York City's child-welfare authorities returned the baby to Tawana when she had abandoned the child once before?
In this case, as in any case in which a child under its supervision dies, the city's Human Resources Administration had the same reply: no comment.
The response springs from laws intended to protect the privacy of families, but increasingly these laws are being questioned as some advocates for children charge that the laws too often shield bureaucracies that function poorly and make dreadful mistakes.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY


FATAL CHILD ABUSE IS HIDDEN BY LAWS ON CONFIDENTIALITY
After 16-year-old Tawana Scott was charged with murder last May for abandoning her baby to die next to the swirling waters of the Harlem River, her relatives were left with many questions: Among them, why had New York City's child-welfare authorities returned the baby to Tawana when she had abandoned the child once before?
"I just saw my niece handcuffed and led away," Tawana's aunt, Cynthia Murray, said at the time, "but what about the social workers? I blame the system."


Medical Diagnostics Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Baker (J.) (O) reports earnings for Qtr to May 2


Chancellor Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Experts Seek Clues as Dolphins Die
Since the beginning of March, the carcasses of 120 Atlantic bottlenose dolphins have been found in a network of bays that extends less than 100 miles along the Texas Gulf Coast in the highest concentration of deaths of these animals known in the United States.
Scientists know where the dolphins died and when, but the identity of the killer is an environmental mystery that could take months to solve.


Bio-Technology General reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Valerie Silverman, Michael Flaherty
Valerie Jane Silverman, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Bennet H. Silverman of Hastings-on-Hudson, N.Y., was married yesterday to Michael Thomas Flaherty, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas Flaherty of Norwell, Mass.
Rabbi Beverly Lerner officiated at North House on the campus of Harvard University.
The couple changed their surname yesterday to Flaherman.
Mrs.
Flaherman, 26 years old, and her husband, 27, are 1987 graduates of Harvard.
She will receive an M.D. degree next month from Harvard and will become a pediatric resident at the Oakland (Calif.) Children's Hospital.
Her father is a lawyer at the New York law firm of Katz, Wittenberg, Levine &amp; Silverman.
Her mother, Linda Silverman, is the chief administrator of All Women's Health and Medical Services in White Plains.


Review/Art; A Show of 5 Artists Who Use the Look Of Photo Reproduction
After a decade in which the relationship between art and the mass media has been the subject of heated critical debate, a small exhibition at Bennington College offers a provocative reconsideration of the subject.
Organized by Sidney Tillim, a painter and professor at the college, the exhibition brings together the work of five recent artists who, Mr.
Tillim argues, use the look of photographic reproductions, whether halftones or video images, not simply as a way of referring to mass media, but for its own sake.
In doing so, he suggests in his catalogue essay, these artists, who include Andy Warhol, Richard Artschwager, Ellen Brooks, Mark Tansey and Joseph Nechvatal, create a kind of "esthetics of the 'mechanical.' "
With this argument Mr.
Tillim offers a direct challenge to one of the central texts of modern art criticism.
In an essay published in 1936 under the cumbersome title "The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction," the German critic Walter Benjamin argued that photographs, and photographic reproductions, destroyed the sense of uniqueness and special value that had always surrounded art objects.
With the coming of photography, Benjamin noted, artworks of all sorts could be viewed anywhere, at any time, at least in reproduction; as a result, they were effectively stripped of what Benjamin described as their aura.


King Has a Steady Swing Right Into Record Books
In arguably the greatest single tournament performance ever by a female golfer, Betsy King never moved off dead solid perfect today and won the Mazda L.P.G.A.
Championship by a record 11 strokes.
King's 72-hole total of 17-under-par 267 was so obviously one for the ages that it inspired the normally introverted 36-year-old from Limekiln, Pa., to celebrate her victory march by running along the gallery ropes on the 72d hole and high-fiving spectators for more 100 yards.


Centocor Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Heartland Partners L.P.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Dance in Review
'La Bayadere'  American Ballet Theater Metropolitan Opera House
Natalia Makarova's production of "La Bayadere" is one of the delights of the Ballet Theater repertory.
Set to a lilting, melodic and irresistibly hummable score by Ludwig Minkus, the ballet is filled with juicy characters and even juicier dancing.
But a performance on Wednesday afternoon was also thought provoking.


Ambulatory Medical Care Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Francine Douwes, Gifford Whitney
Francine Caroline Douwes, a daughter of Francoise W. Douwes of Abington, Pa., and the late Dr.
Karel Douwes, was married yesterday to Gifford Cochran Whitney, a son of Alexandra E. Whitney of New York and the late Harry P. Whitney.
The Rev.
Thomas F. Pike performed the ceremony at St.
George's Episcopal Church in New York.
Mrs.
Whitney, 32 years old, is the vice president of development at the Institute for Advanced Studies in the Theater Arts in New York.
She graduated from Drexel University and received a master's degree in film from Columbia University.
Her father was a surgeon at Episcopal Hospital in Philadelphia.


Marines Renewed Link to Banned Group
The Marine Corps last month solicited nominees for an award from a private organization from which the Navy had severed all ties last year because of the organization's involvement in a sexual harassment scandal.
Embarrassed Marine officials said last week that its memorandum requesting the nominees for an award given by the Tailhook Association was "an administrative oversight" that was rescinded on May 7, 10 days after it was sent to Marine aviation commands around the country.


Northland Cranberries reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Place Resources reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Data-Design Labs reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


U.S. Open Isn't Open to Average Tennis Fan
To the Editor:
Reports about an agreement between New York City and the United States Tennis Association for improvements to the Flushing Meadow site (news article, April 23), and thus continuation of the U.S.
Open in New York, prompt me to write.
Initially with my father, and later my own family, I have been attending the U.S. nationals every year for 53 years (starting in 1938), and had hoped to continue for many more.


Lancer Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Berkshire Hathaway Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Noven Pharmaceuticals reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Kimberly L. Lewis, Brent P. Forester
Kimberly Lynn Lewis, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Jeffrey B. Lewis of Harrison, N.Y., was married yesterday to Brent Peter Forester, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Bruce Forester of Bronxville, N.Y.
Rabbi Robert Schreibman officiated at the Beach Point Club in Mamaroneck, N.Y.
Ms.
Lewis, 24 years old, will keep her name.
She is an editorial assistant for children's books at Little, Brown &amp; Company in Boston.
She graduated from Dartmouth College, as did her husband.
Her father is the president and chief executive of the Lewis of Woodhaven department stores in Queens.
Her mother, Marlin Lewis, is a saleswoman at Julia B. Fee, a real-estate company in Rye, N.Y.


Pope Beatifies Founder of a Secretive, Conservative Movement
In one of the most hotly debated acts of his papacy, Pope John Paul II beatified the Spanish founder of the conservative Opus Dei religious movement today, elevating Msgr.
Jose Maria Escriva de Balaguer to a status just short of sainthood only 17 years after his death.
The crowd overflowing St.
Peter's Square numbered more than 200,000 and was one of the biggest ever seen at the Vatican -- testimony to the reach and influence that inspire many liberal Catholics to label Opus Dei a sinister and powerful force for conservatism in the church and elsewhere.
One of the guests at the occasion was Italy's caretaker Prime Minister, Giulio Andreotti.


Call to Privatize Public TV Defies Reason
To the Editor:
Thanks for your warning that Congress is engaged in an acrimonious debate about whether governmental funds should continue to be provided for public television (editorial, April 20).
Certain members of Congress are arguing that public television should be turned over to the commercial marketplace forces and that there is no longer need for public financing.
As one of my children would say, this is a "no brainer."
Our Federal Government could obtain additional revenue by selling Sequoia National Park to a lumber company.
It could, but all Americans would lose an irreplaceable asset.


Memorex Telex N.V.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


A Top Executive To Leave Burnett
John C. (Jack) Kraft, one of the top three executives at the Leo Burnett Company in Chicago, said Friday that he would resign.
Mr.
Kraft, who has worked for Burnett for 17 years, cited personal reasons for his unexpected departure.
Since January, Mr.
Kraft, 50 years old, has been vice chairman and chief operating officer at Burnett and its international unit, Leo Burnett Worldwide, responsible for administrative and finance operations.
An agency spokesman said Mr.
Kraft would remain at Burnett for an unspecified period "to insure a smooth transition." He added that there were no immediate plans to name a successor.


Plenum Publishing Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


'Trial and Error' in Los Angeles as Gangs Maintain Truce
Rival street gangs struggled to maintain a truce today with the latest in a series of extraordinary gatherings, despite reports of a number of apparently gang-related drive-by shootings this weekend.
From the very start of the rioting on April 29, graffiti appeared in gang territory declaring a truce between the Crips and the Bloods, the two broad divisions among the hundreds of gangs that have engaged in deadly conflict for years.


Nuclear Abstinence for South Asia Alone?
To the Editor:
"Stop the Subcontinent's Bomb" (editorial, April 28) strikes me as curiously one-sided and also unhelpful as regards the nuclear proliferation problem in South Asia.
You write of "India's headlong rush to acquire nuclear arms" even though all Indian governments since 1974 have shown remarkable restraint in not developing the sort of nuclear arsenal of which the 1974 Pokharan-controlled nuclear explosion showed India to be capable.


Counsel Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


A Shot in the Arm for Health
Only 30 years ago, getting over measles, rubella or mumps was a rite of passage for American children.
By 1983, however, vaccines had made these maladies rare.
President Carter started a huge immunization initiative.
Now President Bush has proposed another, to make up for callous economizing by the intervening Reagan Administration.
In its eagerness to cut money from social services, it revived these highly contagious diseases.
During the Reagan years, the price of vaccine went up and Federal funding for childhood immunization went down.
In 1987 Congress insisted on spending more, but that was too little and too late.
By 1990, there were 26,520 cases of measles compared with 1,497 in 1983, and cases of mumps had nearly doubled.
Rubella, too, was up, though not as much.


Crackdown by Peruvian Leader Brings No Peace
When President Alberto K. Fujimori seized near-dictatorial powers on April 5, the pillars of his rationale were to fight terrorism and drug trafficking and revive the economy.
Six weeks later, he is facing growing pressure on all three fronts, a sign that his newly assumed powers have not yet worked in the public's favor.


Alton Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Accugraph Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Foreign Affairs; 'We Are Innocent'
If the Persian Gulf war promised a new era of collective responsibility, Yugoslavia heralds its early demise.
A television film clip from the Balkan war zone catches the future.
Cradling her murdered child, a mother cries: "They are killing us, but we are innocent."


Infodata Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Ms. Beckerman, Thomas Winberry
Pamela Iris Beckerman, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Emanuel Beckerman of New Hempstead, N.Y., was married yesterday to W. Thomas Winberry, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
William H. Winberry of Memphis.
Rabbi Phyllis Cole performed the ceremony at Beckwith Pointe in New Rochelle, N.Y.
Mrs.
Winberry, 34 years old, is a promotions manager at Prodigy Services, the computer company in White Plains.
She graduated from the State University of New York at Albany.
Her father retired as the president of the Prestige Corporation, a distributor of beauty supplies in Nanuet, N.Y.


Nucorp Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Mercer International reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Dance in Review
'Goldberg Variations'  New York City Ballet New York State Theater
Jerome Robbins's "Goldberg Variations," presented on Thursday night, is a mountain climber's Kilimanjaro.
Mr.
Robbins turned to the Bach piano score, said to have been composed to lull a patron to sleep, after concentrating on Chopin and sweet and lush romantic dance.
This 1971 piece is the ambitious result, a choreographer's exhaustive exploration of a monumental score interpreted in the protean language of ballet.


Alliant Computer reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Cutco Industries reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Review/Dance; Hurtling, Hurdling and Whirling Near the Edge
The first thing you notice about the Stephen Petronio Company is its astonishing dancers, and that is not because some are less than completely dressed, baring either breasts or bottoms.
It is, rather, that these fearless performers always appear to be living on the edge.
Whiplash is the word to describe the propulsive power on display.
The dancers throw themselves into the air, to the floor, toward one another or, better yet, into stupefying flattened leaps, Frisbee style, across a cluster of curved bodies below.


Oncor Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


INSIDE
Weinberger Under Gun
Former Defense Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger has been pressed for information by the Iran-contra prosecutor.
Page A10.
Tentative Pact for Drivers
A tentative settlement was reached in a dispute pitting The New York Times and a newspaper wholesaler against the drivers' union.
Page B1.
Independent Counsel Sought
Representative Henry B. Gonzalez said he would seek an inquiry into Bush Administration policies that he contends aided Iraq.
Page D1.
Hillary Clinton's Problem
The candidate's wife faces a public relations problem as she finds herself praised and criticized for the same thing: being herself.
Page A15.
Pollution Rule Relaxed
President Bush decided to allow companies to increase pollution emissions without telling the public.
Page A12.


Persian Gulf Journal; Scientists in the Same Boat, Toiling in War's Wake
Call it plankton diplomacy: Iranian marine biologists have been working alongside American, Arab and other international scientists on this oceanographic vessel as she plies the placid waters of the Persian Gulf documenting environmental conditions in the aftermath of the war against Iraq.
As scientists from the Iranian Environment Ministry troll with fine-meshed nets for organisms living in waters polluted last year by the largest oil spill in history, they are producing something more than ecological data for the Mount Mitchell's ambitious research program.


Fear of Reading
Although this is the era in which flaws in the emotional and psychological development of every man, woman, child and dog have been scrutinized in the most minuscule detail, there seems to be no organized interest in one of the most painful afflictions known: lexical anhedonia, or the inability to feel pleasure while reading.
The anguish of those suffering is appalling.
Yet no one cares.
Dismissed with the epithet "bookworm," all addicted readers (whether they are currently reading or not!) are judged to be alike by an indifferent population.
They are patronizingly endured but not treated by the medical establishment.
Yet many could be helped if research were financed in this field.
Some might even be saved.


Cellular Products Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Iran-Contra Case Focuses on Weinberger
Close to the end of their 5 1/2-year inquiry, Iran-contra prosecutors have engaged in intense negotiations, involving tactical bluffs and the threat of possible criminal charges, with Caspar W. Weinberger, the former Defense Secretary and architect of the Reagan Administration's military buildup in the 1980's, say people closely following the discussions.
In the last few days, Mr.
Weinberger's former Pentagon colleagues, some of whom were summoned to the prosecutors' office to provide information about him, have watched with rising disbelief as the prosecutors appeared to be concentrating their attention on the former Defense Secretary, one of the few Reagan officials who opposed the secret arms sales to Iran in 1985 and 1986.


Elaborate Promotion For Taster's Choice
In an effort to capitalize on the popularity of its serial commercials starring a flirtatious couple, Taster's Choice instant coffee will join with a television network and two magazines to sponsor an elaborate consumer promotion.
The promotion, called "Most Romantic First Date," is expected to cost up to $5 million.
It seeks to build on spots created by McCann-Erickson New York, which present episodes involving two neighbors as their slow-brewing romance develops.


Crown Andersen Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Osborn Communications Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Ivaco reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


U.S. Sumo Star, Faltering, Is Counted Out for Crown
One day a foreigner may hold the title of "grand champion" in Japan's most sacred sport, sumo wrestling.
But with the entire nation watching this weekend, it became clear that it will not happen anytime soon, and it may never happen for Konishiki, the 576-pound Hawaiian who threatened to break a tradition that goes back 1,500 years.
A raging debate here over whether racial discrimination was at play in the sport's seeming reluctance to promote a non-Japanese to sumo's highest ranks came to an anticlimactic end when Konishiki, after a promising start, lost four consecutive matches.
Had he won the current tournament, a 15-match contest that ends next weekend, it would have been virtually impossible for the sport's conservative leaders to deny him the rank of yokozuna.


H&amp;H Oil Tool Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Magazine Notes; At Last, It's Springtime for Start-Ups
OPTIMISTS say the magazine industry will begin to bloom by summer.
The pessimists concede only that recession's long winter may be at an end.
So this must be the sap-rising season of spring.
At any rate, a lot of wannabe magazines are out there trying hard to bud.


Maynard Oil Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Advanced Medical Products reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


The Top Pick Is Going to Disney World
When all but one envelope had been opened and only the Orlando Magic remained, the wide-eyed astonishment on the face of Pat Williams looked just like that on the face of a game-show winner.
In the National Basketball Association's lottery here this afternoon, the Magic won the right to select Louisiana State center Shaquille O'Neal, the biggest prize in the draft since the Knicks won Patrick Ewing in the first lottery seven years ago.
The draft will be held in Portland, Ore., on June 24.


Noel Group Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Embrex Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Advatex Associates reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Dial REIT Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Bush to Relax Air Pollution Regulation
Handing industry its second victory over the Environmental Protection Agency in a week, President Bush has decided to allow companies to increase emissions of pollution without notifying the public, Administration officials said today.
If, as expected, the proposed pollution rule is adopted, officials of environmental groups said they were likely to challenge the regulation in court.


Bocenor Inc. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Griffin Technology Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


CFS Group reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


New Proposal For Drivers To Go to Vote
A tentative settlement was announced yesterday in the tangled 12-day labor dispute pitting The New York Times and a newspaper distribution wholesaler against the drivers union.
A three-member panel that served as an intermediary between the parties said at a news conference that the agreement, in the form of five contracts, would be put to a vote on Thursday by the union membership.
On May 6, the union went against its leaders and rejected an earlier version of the proposed contracts, setting off the sometimes violent dispute that disrupted distribution of The Times.


Provident American Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Emons Holdings reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Cuomo Calls for Review Of Port Authority Plans
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo, citing a "tunnel to nowhere" at Kennedy International Airport and other projects gone awry, called yesterday for a sweeping review of construction programs of the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey to cut waste and to safeguard against "ill-conceived capital investments" during hard economic times.
In a separate interview, the Governor proposed that New York and New Jersey set up a new and independent oversight panel that would monitor the authority's management and productivity and create greater accountability in an agency that he said had become "a kind of government all its own."


Chalone Wine Group Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Cominco Resources reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Independence Holding Co. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Hadron Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Matrix Pharmaceutical Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Information Solutions reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


PVC Container Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


American Claims Evaluation reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Harold Miller, 89, Navy Publicist; Launched Planes From Dirigibles
Harold B. Miller, an aviation pioneer who became a public relations expert as an admiral in the Navy and later as a corporate executive, died on Friday at the Americana Nursing Home in Overland Park, Kan.
He was 89 years old and lived in Shawnee Mission, Kan.
He died of multiple ailments, his family said.


AFTER THE RIOTS A Dream Undone -- A special report.; Riots Ruin a Business, and a Neighborhood Suffers
It took Wenefrette Conner a week to gather the courage to visit her burned-out businesses, and even then, gripping the hands of her daughter and business partner, she said, "I didn't know it was going to hurt so much."
Collapsed now into their own ashes, her chiropractic and skin-care clinics represented more than a decade of personal struggle and a climb into what Mrs.
Conner thought was economic security.
And, along with scores of other small black-owned businesses destroyed in the recent riots, the clinics symbolized the efforts of black residents to build an economic base in an area filled with poverty.


Timing Is Good for a Big New York City Offering
New York City is scheduled to sell more than $1 billion in new tax-exempt securities this week, when conditions in the credit markets for the city appear better than at any time since the late 1980's.
The ripple effect of Olympia &amp; York Ltd.'s bankruptcy filing in Canada is the only potential problem for the city's offering, but it is not expected to be a serious one.


Fairfield First Bank &amp; Trust reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Treasury to Sell Bills and Notes This Week
Treasury financings are confined to bills and notes this week, starting with the regular Monday auction of three- and six-month bills.
On Wednesday, the Treasury will auction two-year notes, and on Thursday an issue of five-year notes will be offered.


Essay; Crimes of Iraqgate
Americans now know that the war in the Persian Gulf was brought about by a colossal foreign-policy blunder: George Bush's decision, after the Iran-Iraq war ended, to entrust regional security to Saddam Hussein.
What is not yet widely understood is how that benighted policy led to the Bush Administration's fraudulent use of public funds, its sustained deception of Congress and its obstruction of justice.


Athena Neurosciences reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Discovery West Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Mass Microsystems reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Global Natural Resources reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Consolidated Fibres reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Prism Entertainment Corp.  reports earnings for Year to Jan 31


Lifeway Foods Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Precision Standard reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Madison Avenue 'Recycles': Old Footage in New Spots
IT is Madison Avenue's own version of recycling: footage from long-ago movies and television programs is being reused in contemporary commercials.
Bits and pieces of stock footage from newsreels, documentaries, industrial and training films, cartoons, travelogues and the like -- particularly segments originally shot in black and white -- are turning up in spots for consumer goods and services.


3 Joining to Start Center Against Substance Abuse
Three leading authorities on substance abuse are starting a national center to examine and work against all aspects of addiction, from chain-smoking and alcoholism to cocaine and heroin abuse.
"Until now," said Joseph A. Califano Jr., who will announce the creation of the Center on Addiction and Substance Abuse today in Manhattan, "there has been no one place where all the skills of professionals dealing with addiction can be brought together under one roof to look at what it costs society in terms of health bills, crime, domestic violence, unsafe highways, lost worker productivity or overburdening of the court system."


Armada Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Petroleum Development Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Crop Genetics International reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


CS Resources reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Faraday Resources reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


HMG/Courtland Properties reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


CHRONICLE
For SHELDON HARNICK, tonight will be a trip down Memory Lane, through the various shows for which he wrote books and lyrics.
"Sheldon Harnick, Fiddler, Fiorello &amp; Friends," a pastiche of the dozens of memorable songs written during a 50-year career, will be the centerpiece of a benefit at the 92d Street Y. Such performers as THEODORE BIKEL, JUDY KAYE, DOROTHY LOUDON, RITA MORENO and BRIGID BRADY will perform songs from such productions as "She Loves Me," "The Merry Widow" and "The Rothchilds."


Health Insurance of Vermont reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Buy Me Some Peanuts . . . and That's It
Team executives have been blaming the cold spring weather across most of the country for major league baseball's drop in attendance so far this season, a dip of about 3 percent.
Another reason, however, could be the ever-rising cost forof a family of four to attend a game, now averaging $85.85.
That figure comes from a survey by Team Marketing Report, a Chicago-based sports business publication, and it is 10 percent higher than last year.
Why?
A 12.3 percent rise in food and souvenirs, a 7.7 percent hike in ticket prices, all while the recession continues.


Review/Opera; Poulenc's 'Carmelites' In a Subterranean Church
Opera and extravagance are such interconnecting concepts in the minds of most that it is startling to come across instances of the first working so well without the second.
Operagoers experienced in this city's operatic subculture -- tiny companies with interesting ideas, no money, young singers, underrehearsed orchestras, straggling listenership and jerry-built sets and lighting -- probably came to Friday night's "Dialogues of the Carmelites" with upwardly adjusted thresholds of pain.
Opera Manhattan's portrayal of Poulenc's piece confounded such expectations by using physical limitations to its advantage.
The setting was St.
Peter's Church in the Citicorp building: bright, clean and neutral in its visual effect.
Costumes were implied: street clothes and black dresses in one instance, cowl-like headdress and robes at the next.
The props were two chairs; and though most of the action took place before the altar, the entire body of this Lutheran church provided exits, entrances and added room to accommodate the moments of expanding action.


National Gas &amp; Oil Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Raquel Newman, Aaron Sarfati
Raquel Ellen Newman and Aaron Sarfati were married yesterday at Temple Beth-El in Fairfield, Conn.
Rabbi Leon Waldman officiated.
Mrs.
Sarfati, 25 years old, is an accountant with the firm of Dworkin, Hillman, La Morte &amp; Sterczala in Bridgeport, Conn.
She graduated from the University of Bridgeport.
She is the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Robert E. Newman of New York.
Her father is the medical director of the Manhattan Life Insurance Company.
Her mother, Charlotte Newman, who is retired, was a guidance counselor at Junior High School 118 in New York.


Review/Philharmonic; Principals Step Forward to Teach
When Kurt Masur introduced the New York Philharmonic's principal horn player, Philip Myers, in Avery Fisher Hall on Saturday afternoon, he told the audience it would have a lot to learn from him.
"The only thing you should not learn," he added, pointing to Mr.
Myers's considerable girth, "is that sometimes he eats too many cookies."
"It's not true," Mr.
Myers countered in response, after the laughter had died down.
"It's ice cream."


Perrigo Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Epigen Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Books of The Times; Ruminations of a Mathematics Lover
The Art of Mathematics  By Jerry P. King  313 pages. Plenum Press. $24.50.
Jerry P. King writes that math anxiety nearly got him when, as a youngster, he told his teacher, "I don't understand why -2 multiplied by -3 gives +6."
" 'You have,' she answered sternly, 'a very bad attitude toward mathematics. I've already told you that the product of two negative numbers is always positive.' "


Some New Experiences in Catalonia
The Barcelona Dragons continue to be
the
success story of the World Football League, which has not had too many others.
The Dragons, now on a road trip in the United States, continue to be adored in their home city in Spain, where they have broken their attendance record twice this season with crowds of 40,875 and 49,675.
The Dragons have also sustained the football lives of their general manager, JACK TEELE ; their coach, JACK BICKNELL, and their most popular player, ERIC NAPOSKI.


Review/Television; Hit Show Examines Its Roots
Right from episode No. 1, CBS's "Northern Exposure," created by Joshua Brand and John Falsey, set out to be the most imaginative of current television series.
Taking the premise of a young New York doctor forced to pay off his medical-school debt by treating patients in a small Alaskan town called Cicely, the show has been devising wonderfully original turns on the old ploy of country cousins teaching city slickers a thing or two about the art of living.
How long can "Northern Exposure," now ensconced on Mondays at 10 P.M., maintain its new-age momentum?
Tonight's episode, the final one for this season, gives every indication that there's no end yet in sight.
Now, courtesy of an exceptional script by Diane Frolov and Andrew Schneider, viewers can learn how tiny Cicely came into being and why, in the early decades of this century, it was known as "the Paris of the North."


Kiddie Products Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Coming in Hope, Staying to Struggle, Leaving to Die; Gambling on Better Care, H.I.V.-Infected Puerto Ricans Seek Help in New York City
Luis Alberto Lopez settled down in New York City two and a half years ago hoping, not for the American dream, but for a longer life.
He finds less stress in his native Puerto Rico, he says, and he misses his family, the sun and the beach.
But Mr.
Lopez is infected with H.I.V., the virus that causes AIDS, and he says his access to medicines, specialists and experimental treatments is better in the states than on the island.
"My mother said, 'Why don't you stay? I'll take care of you,' " said Mr.
Lopez, 26 years old, who tested positive for H.I.V. in late 1989.
"I told her, 'If I stay here, I think I'll die much faster.' " In Hopes of Health Care
While Puerto Ricans have traveled to New York for economic reasons for decades, those who are H.I.V.-positive have been coming more recently to fight a killer disease and, when faced with defeat, return home to die.
Now, responding to the strains such flow has created for AIDS services and families, officials in New York and Puerto Rico will for the first time try to measure the size of this migrant group and its needs.
In one collaborative effort spearheaded by the New York State Department of Health's AIDS Institute, two offices planned for New York City and the island this fall will document the travel patterns of H.I.V.-infected Puerto Ricans and assist them in transferring medical records, continuing medical treatment and finding clinical and social services as they arrive.
The offices are expected to serve up to 200 clients apiece annually, with financing from United States Public Health Service.
And Mayor David N. Dinkins, who is in the Caribbean this week, is expected to announce an agreement on Wednesday between San Juan and New York City, home to nearly a million Puerto Ricans, to identify and coordinate AIDS services available in each city for the H.I.V.-infected population that travels between them.
The officials also plan to seek financial support from both Washington and private foundations to improve services.
An Unknown Number
It is not known how many Puerto Ricans travel because of AIDS, but health officials in New York and Puerto Rico say that anecdotal evidence indicate that the number is significant.
Health officials say that H.I.V. itself has been exchanged back and forth across the air bridge linking New York City and San Juan.
Both New York and Puerto Rico have suffered a heavy toll.
New York State has the nation's second highest per capita rate of new cases reported to the Federal Centers for Disease Control in Atlanta.
Puerto Rico, a commonwealth of the United States, has the fourth highest.
As of last March, Puerto Rico had reported 6,849 AIDS cases since the beginning of the epidemic and New York State 44,176, more than 38,000 of them in New York City.
And on the mainland, AIDS is striking Puerto Ricans proportionately more than any other Hispanic group, with most cases stemming from intravenous drug use, according to studies by the Centers for Disease Control.
Many H.I.V.-positive Puerto Ricans come to the mainland in response to disparities in Medicaid coverage and Federal disability benefits.
The Social Security Administration, for instance, does not pay Supplemental Security Income benefits on the island, but Puerto Ricans are eligible for the program on the mainland.
Medicaid has a dollar cap for Puerto Rico and does not pay for treatments and services there that it covers on the mainland, such as private nursing care.
In 1990, the cap was $79 million, while the commonwealth spent $519 million on medical care for the indigent, officials in Puerto Rico said.
Dr.
Gabriel Torres, medical director of the AIDS center at St.
Vincent's Hospital in Greenwich Village in Manhattan, treats about 30 visiting Puerto Ricans at any given time.
He said that some of his patients had discontinued certain treatments when they returned to Puerto Rico because the treatments were not covered by Medicaid there.
"Finally, you'll get all the tender loving care and chicken soup your mother will provide," Dr.
Torres said, "but you won't get the medical treatment you need."
Dr.
John V. Rullan, director of Puerto Rico's Office of AIDS Affairs and Communicable Diseases, said that a network of seven AIDS clinics that opened in late 1990 adequately serves the island's H.I.V.-infected population, which is estimated at 40,000.
The clinics provide, free of charge, uniform medical care and psychosocial services throughout Puerto Rico and currently see 5,000 men, women and children, he said.
"If they gave me more money I'd do more," Dr.
Rullan said, "but let nobody be mistaken that we can't take care of our people and have to send them to New York." Model for Other Cities
In New York City, the pilot program prepared by the New York State AIDS Institute and commonwealth officials will involve agencies that already work with visiting, H.I.V.-infected Puerto Ricans, like the Hispanic AIDS Forum and St.
Vincent's and Bronx-Lebanon hospitals.
Barry Gordon, regional AIDS coordinator for the U.S.
Public Health Service in New York City, said that, if successful, the new offices could be replicated in other cities with large Puerto Rican communities, like Hartford and Philadelphia.
Health officials and advocates for people with AIDS in both Puerto Rico and New York say that, although services have improved tremendously in the last year, the demand still overwhelms the island's resources.
Jorge Irizarry, a member of Act Up, an advocacy group for people with AIDS, in Puerto Rico, talked about the short supply of medicines for certain conditions.
"Some people give false addresses to register in different clinics," he said, "so that they can get all the medicines they need."
Those who have the money to pay for medication and private doctors themselves or through insurance still find on the mainland preventive treatments and experimental drugsnot found on the island, advocates for people with AIDS say.
Many patients who leave Puerto Rico wait until the final stages of the disease to return.
Dr.
Jaime Rivera Dueno, executive director of the San Juan AIDS Institute, a nonprofit organization that treats AIDS patients, says that the number of H.I.V.-infected Puerto Ricans coming back now seems greater than the number who leave.
Between 1989 and last year, the institute alone counted 64 patients from New York and New Jersey, which also has a large Puerto Rican population.
Back Again
"Unfortunately, we are seeing more and more patients in such a poor state that the families are not prepared to deal with them," he said.
Luis C., 36, says he has gone back to Puerto Rico at least 15 times since he moved to Newark in 1988, drawn by a 12-year-old daughter and a supportive family.
The last time, he gave away his furniture and said goodbye to friends in New Jersey, planning to stay in Puerto Rico for good.
But a month later, a painful bout with herpes zoster, or shingles, a viral infection common among people infected with H.I.V., drove him back to Newark.
He spoke on condition that his full name not be used.
"In Puerto Rico they treated it like an allergy," he said, noting he went to a municipal hospital in a small town of the island.
"Here, the doctor needs only to look at my face to say, 'You're staying in the hospital today.' "
But Puerto Ricans with H.I.V. have to overcome a number of hurdles once they arrive on the mainland.
Medicaid is not available until they have established residency for at least 30 days, New York State health officials say.
Often, they must negotiate the maze of AIDS services by themselves because there are very few AIDS community organizations specifically serving Hispanic people.
But on the mainland, Puerto Ricans with H.I.V. say, along with better treatment, they find less stigma and a more organized advocacy community.
Luis Alberto Lopez, who said he also felt more acceptance as a gay man, said he was inevitably drawn to AIDS work.
A Longing for Home
A computer data operator, Mr.
Lopez is participating in a trial of a drug intended to bolster his immune system.
He is preparing himself for the upcoming international AIDS conference in Amsterdam.
"It helps a lot to be active," Mr.
Lopez, who has become a member of Act Up, said.
"It keeps you alive and it keeps you informed."
But even now, after nearly three years, he remains homesick.
"As soon as the AIDS cure comes, I'd move down there," he said.
"I always hope to return."


Appian Technology Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League  BOSTON RED SOX -- Activated John Dopson, pitcher, and Mike Greenwell, outfielder.
Optioned Peter Hoy, pitcher, to Pawtucket of the International League.
Waived Mike Brumley, utilityman.
DETROIT TIGERS -- Placed Alan Trammell, shortstop, on the 15-day disabled list.
Purchased the contract of Kurt Knudsen, pitcher, from Toledo of the American Association.


Canadian Manoir Industries reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Nuclear Abstinence for South Asia Alone?; Delhi's Self-Restraint
To the Editor:
"Stop the Subcontinent's Bomb" (editorial, April 28) makes the incredible allegation that India has started more wars in the last 40 years than any other country.
This flies in the face of historical facts: not a single war has been started by India.
It is surely not your intention to suggest that India should have sat by silently while armies of other countries crossed her border.
You also state that India long ago abandoned the pacifism of Mohandas Gandhi.
Gandhi did not at any stage suggest that India should give up its territory or accept aggression quietly.
We do not know of any country that has done so.
There is a difference between nonviolence and cowardice.


Camera Platforms International Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Rich and Poor Likely to Remain So
In the continuing debate over the distribution of wealth and income -- the richest 1 percent of American families control more wealth than the bottom 90 percent -- one school of thought says findings like this, however extreme, do not present a true picture.
In this view, largely conservative, these data are flawed because they are mere snapshots of a single moment in time and fail to reflect the constant ebb and flow of fortunes.


IGI Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


PEC Israel Economic reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Padres Sweep Pirates, Who Hear the Cards' Footsteps
Padres 6, Pirates 5
PITTSBURGH, May 17 (AP) -- Kevin Ward's homer started San Diego's five-run fifth inning as the Padres completed a three-game sweep of the Pittsburgh Pirates with a 6-5 victory today.
The Pirates now lead the St.
Louis Cardinals by only a game and a half in the National League East.


Hormel (Geo. A.) (N) reports earnings for Qtr to April 25


THAI TROOPS FIRE ON DEMONSTRATORS IN CAPITAL STREETS
Thailand's military-backed Government declared a state of emergency in Bangkok and surrounding provinces Sunday night after the police and soldiers battled with pro-democracy protesters seeking the ouster of the Prime Minister.
Before dawn today, troops backed by armored vehicles attacked a crowd of tens of thousands of demonstrators.
While it appeared initially that the soldiers were firing warning shots over the protesters' heads, witnesses said they had seen the bodies of five demonstrators shot dead in the attack.


Cable Car Beverage Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Helping Top Schools Correct Some Bad Fractions
"IF I were going to public school," said Sheldon Gilbert, a 16-year-old from Jamaica, Queens, "I wouldn't be thinking of Yale or Harvard."
He
is
thinking of applying to Yale or Harvard next year, though.
And the reason he is going to Horace Mann instead of a public high school is that when he was in the fourth grade, his mother heard about Prep for Prep.


Carol Ann Ross, Marc A. Mauceri
Carol Ann Ross and Marc A. Mauceri were married yesterday in Kitchawan, N.Y.
Dr.
Robert J. Berson, the leader of the Ethical Culture Society of Northern Westchester, officiated at the home of Holly Ross, the bride's sister.
Ms.
Ross, 27 years old, is keeping her name.
She is a graduate of New York University, as is her husband.
She is an associate producer at Ginger Group Productions, a New York television and film production company.
She is a daughter of Charles W. Ross 4th and Dr.
Betty W. Ross of Morristown, N.J.


Haley Industries reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Hosposable Products Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Cardinal Financial reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


El Paso Electric reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Contest Set By Democrats
Seeking "the best new 30-second commercial that helps defeat George Bush and Dan Quayle in November," the Democratic National Committee is sponsoring an unusual contest for aspiring commercial makers.
Mark Steitz, the committee's director of communications and policy, said the contest, called "30 Seconds Over Washington," is a "scouting mission for new ideas and approaches from a video generation," rather than from traditional advertising agencies.


Mestek Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


CE Software Holdings Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Cleanup Weekend Is Held in New York Parks


Blue-Collar Player More Than Ekes Out a Living
John Kruk leaned against the back of the batting cage on the field at Veterans Stadium in Philadelphia, intently watching his Phillie teammates hit.
Suddenly, a high-pitched voice caught his ear, a sound emanating from the area behind the cage where the visiting San Francisco Giants were doing their stretching exercises.
Will Clark, San Francisco's All-Star first baseman, was doing what he does almost as well as he hits: chirping away.


DCX Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


AgriStar Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Sandra Siegel, Douglas Gluck
Sandra Marguerite Siegel, the daughter of Mrs.
Harold Siegel of Minneapolis and the late Mr.
Siegel, was married yesterday to C. Douglas Gluck, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Adolph Gluck of Wilmington, N.C.
Rabbi Max Shapiro performed the ceremony at Temple Israel in Minneapolis.
Ms.
Siegel, 33 years old, will keep her name.
She graduated summa cum laude from Barnard College, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and received a law degree from Stanford University.
She was until recently an associate at the New York law firm of Proskauer, Rose, Goetz &amp; Mendelsohn.
Her father was a lawyer in Minneapolis.
Her mother, Margot Auerbacher Siegel, owns Siegel Properties in Minneapolis; she was formerly a fashion writer for Women's Wear Daily in New York.


Check Express Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


DNA Plant Technology reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: White House; Bush Tells Graduates That Family, Not Government, Can Cure Nation's Ills
In a ceremony marked by both silent protest and blunt criticism of his policies, President Bush urged University of Notre Dame graduates today to rebuild American society through strong families.
"Government alone," Mr. Bush said, "is simply not enough" for the task.


E.P.A. Proposal on Costs Of Waste Cleanups Is Halted
The White House appears to have quashed an effort by the Environmental Protection Agency to shield many local governments from the staggering costs of the 1986 Superfund law, which governs hazardous- waste cleanups.
The Administration's move follows extensive lobbying by a broad coalition of industry groups and large companies, which feared that they would have to foot nearly all of the cleanup bill under the E.P.A.'s plan.


Book on Tyson Sold to Movie Producer
The movie rights to a 1991 book, "Mike Tyson: Money, Myth and Betrayal" by MONTIETH ILLINGWORTH (Birch Lane Press), have been acquired by an outfit called Trilateral Pictures.
WALTER MANLEY will produce the movie.


Americas Approve Forceful Steps To Restore Ousted Haitian Leader
Foreign ministers of the Organization of American States met here today and approved strong new measures aimed at restoring Haiti's elected President, including a denial of port rights to any ship that delivers goods to Haiti.
The renewed effort to isolate Haiti's military-backed Government and reinstate the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide, who was ousted in an army coup last September, is built around a trade embargo adopted in October by the organization's 37 members.
All the nations in the Western Hemisphere except Cuba are represented.


Commodore Environmental Services reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


GV Medical Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


3 Former Indy Winners Get in a Race for Survival
The last day of qualifying for the Indianapolis 500, a day reserved for the marginal cars and drivers rather than the speedballs, is known as "bump day," in honor of the winnowing of the slowest from the starting lineup.
And as three former winners here have learned, one of the first things to get bumped is dignity.
This morning, Johnny Rutherford, Tom Sneva and Gordon Johncock prepared to climb into the kinds of cars that they would have lapped on the way to victory a decade ago.


Morrison Petroleums reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Ecuador Government Ousted
Ecuador's ruling social democratic party, widely blamed for an ailing economy, was ousted in general elections today by rightist parties promising a healthier future with free-market policies.


Oracle and McCaw Tell of Radio Data Network
The nation's largest supplier of data base software, the Oracle Corporation, and the biggest cellular phone carrier, McCaw Cellular Inc., have disclosed new details of a proposed data broadcast service.
The new system could transmit vast amounts of digital information nationally to computer users at low cost, the companies say.


Copley Properties reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Ennisteel Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


McGrath RentCorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Premiere Radio Networks reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Interferon Sciences reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Olympia &amp; York's Properties Are Valued Below Its Debts
The president and co-chief executive of Olympia &amp; York Developments Ltd., Gerald Greenwald, acknowledged yesterday that at current market values, the company's real estate properties fall short of the debt against them.
"A big part of the problem is the current major-market real estate values," Mr.
Greenwald said in a telephone interview from his home in Colorado.
"They are depressed in London, depressed in New York and depressed in Toronto. What we think is more pertinent from a business judgment is what would the values be when the real estate market improves. 'Three Years Out'
"You don't try to value the company this morning, but you try to do it based on what it will be worth when values come back and the market improves," he said yesterday.
"The work we did on April 13 was based on three years out. I don't think we expect the markets to be completely back, but we expect the markets to improve."


Far West Industries reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Bulls Plug In Offense and Disconnect the Knicks
It all ended today for the Knicks -- their championship dreams, their memorable seven-game series with the Chicago Bulls, and their season.
The Knicks were unable to survive the wizardry of Michael Jordan and the determination of the Bulls, a championship team that responded with passion when its title was threatened.
Scoring 42 points on 15-for-29 shooting from the field, Jordan willed the Bulls to a convincing 110-81 victory over New York in the decisive Game 7 of their Eastern Conference semifinal playoff series.
The Bulls advance to the conference finals, where they will meet Cleveland in a four-of-seven-game series beginning at Chicago Stadium Tuesday night.


Inrad Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Offense Once Again Gives Mets the Silent Treatment
The manager and the pitcher, their backs to the scoreboard and all of the afternoon's inadequacy its numbers flashed, stared in silence from atop the mound.
Condolences had been offered, regrets had been expressed.
There was, then, nothing for Jeff Torborg and Anthony Young to do but wait -- for the reliever to arrive, for the game to end, for another day on which the Mets might at last fully function offensively.


Dana Alexander, Michael J. Nolfe
Dana Jill Alexander, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Hans H. Alexander of Elmhurst, Queens, was married yesterday to Michael Joseph Nolfe, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph F. Nolfe of Breinigsville, Pa.
Allen Beldock, a retired judge of the New York City Criminal Court, officiated at the Nassau County Bar Association in Mineola, L.I.
Mrs.
Nolfe, 28 years old, graduated from Queens College and received a master's degree in broadcast news journalism from New York University.
She is a production associate at "20/20," the ABC News program in New York.
Her father is the financial officer in the customs and imports department of E. S. Sutton Inc., an importer of women's apparel in New York.


Gunmen in Gaza Strip Kill Israeli Motorist
Palestinian gunmen shot and killed an Israeli motorist in the Gaza Strip today in the latest fatal shooting by Arab assailants in the occupied territories since Middle East peace talks began last fall.
David Cohen, a 64-year-old livestock trader, was shot twice in the head by assailants who blocked his pickup truck and forced open its door at Beit Lahiya in the northern Gaza Strip, said Brig.
Gen.
Yom-Tov Samiya, the commander of Israeli forces in the region.


Review/Music; Freewheeling Instrumentals By New Winds
New Winds is a trio of musicians who compose the way a test pilot might fly a plane.
Most of the eight pieces on Thursday night's program at Washington Square Church busied themselves not so much with the beginning-middle-end format of conventional musical structure, but with freewheeling, loosely structured pushings of the instrumental envelope.
They include blowing multiple sounds from a single mouthpiece, achieving continuous line through circular breathing and creating explosive percussion effects with the help of electronic amplification.
This stretching of boundaries also applied to the instruments themselves.
Robert Dick explored the depths of the contrabass flute in F ("Digging It Harder From Afar") and later climbed into the world of the A-flat piccolo ("Heart of Light").
J.
D.
Parran's range of clarinets included the E-flat alto instrument and the E-flat contrabass.
Ned Rothenberg played alto saxophone and bass clarinet.
The more pronounced the deviation from the standard concert device, the more eager these musicians seemed to be.


Cache Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 28


Nuevo Energy reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Biosys reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Itel Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


It's a Long Way From Coogan's Bluff
The nostalgia market continues to soar, on land and sea.
In January, a 1960 flannel road jersey worn by the Yankees' Mickey Mantle sold for $111,000 at Leland's, a New York sports memorabilia auction house.


24-Karat Jordan In Pursuit of a Ring
He landed on one foot, his eyes far away, a trance-like look that great players get when they are on their own special stage, when they have reached the height of their game and the top of the world.
John Paxson had attempted an 18-foot jump shot from the top of the key, and the ball, after bouncing off the back rim, seemed to float forever in the stale, humid air of Chicago Stadium.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Graf Beats Sanchez  Top-seeded Steffi Graf rallied for a 4-6, 7-5, 6-2 victory over No. 2 Arantxa Sanchez Vicario yesterday in the final of the Berlin Open.
The second-ranked German won this clay-court event for the sixth time, her 64th tournament victory over all.
Sanchez Vicario, ranked fifth, dominated early with a mix of powerful backhands, net attacks and drop shots.
In the second set, the Spaniard had a 5-4 lead, but Graf forced her into errors.
Graf then controlled the third set. (AP) Courier Wins in Rome: Jim Courier lived up to his No. 1 world ranking by overpowering Carlos Costa of Spain, 7-6 (7-3), 6-0, 6-4, to win the Italian Open in Rome.
Courier is the first American to win the Italian Open since Jimmy Arias in 1983.
On a day when temperatures were in the 90's, fitness proved to be the key factor.
Costa, who had already won two clay-court titles this year, folded after the tight first set, needing a dose of mineral salts to keep him going. (AP) AUTO RACING  5 in a Row for Mansell  Nigel Mansell led from start to finish yesterday in the Grand Prix of San Marino in Imola, Italy, capturing a record fifth consecutive Grand Prix victory at the start of the season.
Mansell got off to a blistering start from the pole position and increased his lead lap after lap.(AP) GOLF  Brown Wins in Playoff  Billy Ray Brown dropped a 15-foot birdie putt on the first extra hole and won a four-man playoff yesterday in the rain-shortened Byron Nelson Classic in Irving, Tex.
Brown's birdie after a 4-iron tee shot on the par-3 17th defeated Ray Floyd, Ben Crenshaw and Bruce Lietzke, all of whom were previous winners of this event.
Brown, Lietzke, Floyd and Crenshaw finished the third round at 199, 11-under par on the sodden, saturated TPC course at Las Colinas yesterday morning and became playoff participants when continuing rain forced officials to reduce the event to a 54-hole format.
More than four hours later, the quartet found a break in the weather long enough to start the playoff.
This was the second victory for the 29-year-old Brown, who won last year's Hartford Open. (AP) Another Title for Housen: Bob Housen of Somerset Hills defeated Jerry Courville Jr. of the Shorehaven Club, 4 and 3, to win the Walter J. Travis Memorial Tournament for the third time at the Garden City Golf Club on Long Island.
Housen, who won the title in 1979 and 1980, has also captured the New Jersey State Amateur seven times.
In the morning semifinals, Housen eliminated Joe Sommers of Mount Kisco, 4 and 3.
LACROSSE  Maryland Wins Title  The University of Maryland won the Division I women's championship with an 11-10 come-from-behind overtime victory over Harvard, while Trenton State College won its second successive Division III women's title, defeating William Smith, 5-3.
Both title games were played at Lehigh University in Bethlehem, Pa.
DOG SHOW  Terrier Chosen as Best  A 20-month-old wire fox terrier, Ch.
Cunning Santerica's Patriot, who answers to the name of Tip, was chosen by Edward Jenner as best in show yesterday at the 90th Fixture of the Long Island Kennel Club, one of the oldest sporting events on Long Island.
The event was held on the grounds of the Nassau County Museum of Art in Roslyn Harbor.
It was the first red, white and blue rosette for the dog, owned by Richard and Carolyn Vida of Sacramento, Calif., and handled by Peter Green.
On the way to best, Tip won his third group.
SOCCER  Scotland Beats U.S.
Pat Nevin won a battle for a loose ball about 18 yards out and drilled a line- drive shot for the only goal in Scotland's 1-0 victory over the United States in an exhibition game at Mile High Stadium in Denver. (AP) COLLEGE TENNIS  Florida's Perfect Ending  Florida completed an unbeaten season with a five-match-to-three victory over Texas for its first National Collegiate Athletic Association women's tennis championship, played in Stanford, Calif.
The top-ranked Lady Gators clinched the best-of-nine finals when Kristin Osmond and Erika Kuttler defeated Ashley Johnson and Jackie Moe, 6-1, 6-3, in doubles.
Florida (30-0) is the first non-California school to claim the women's team title in the event's 11-year history. (AP)


Amylin Pharmaceuticals Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Gray Communications reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Aspen Imaging International reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Paragon Mortgage Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Dutch Paper in Crisis
The Netherlands' only Sunday newspaper, Krant op Zondag, was not published today because of a cash crisis.
"There are no more funds," Pieter Storms, the newspaper's publisher, said on Dutch television.
He added that he was in contact with three potential overseas investors, and that for the moment there was no talk of dismissing the paper's 40 journalists.
The paper has not made a profit since it started in October 1990.


Bradley Pharmaceuticals Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


American Shared Hospital Service reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-8  STATE OF EMERGENCY IN THAILAND
Thailand's military-backed government declared a state of emergency after security forces battled protesters who were demanding the ouster of a Prime Minister who was never elected.
Witnesses said several people had been killed when troops opened fire.
A1  TIGHTER BONDS FOR HAITI
Foreign ministers of the Organization of American States approved tough new measures aimed at restoring Haiti's ousted President and isolating its military-backed Government.
A1  SAME PHANTOMS HAUNT PERU
Terrorism, drug trafficking and economic problems were President Alberto K. Fujimori's declared enemies when he seized expanded powers.
Now he is facing growing pressure on all three fronts.
A8  FAMILIAR RIFTS IN SOUTH AFRICA
The impasse in negotiations on South Africa's future is symptomatic of the deeper mistrust between the African National Congress and the white minority Government.
A3  FEAR GRIPS SARAJEVO
Weeping at the roadsides, hiding in basements, hungry, frightened civilians watched the pullout of United Nations peacekeepers from their headquarters in Sarajevo, the capital of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
A6  CONTROVERSIAL BEATIFICATION
Pope John Paul II beatified the Spanish founder of the conservative and controversial Opus Dei religious movement, in one of the most hotly debated acts of his papacy.
A6  SPIRIT UNTRAMMELED IN MYANMAR
Despite the barbed wire and isolation, Daw Aung San Suu Kyi's spirit is intact, says her husband, who was allowed to visit her for the first time since 1989.
Mrs.
Aung San Suu Kyi won the Nobel Peace Prize last year for her dedication to restoring democracy to her homeland.
A3  CHINESE SEARCH NEWS BUREAU
Security officers in China confiscated materials from a bureau of the The Washington Post there and interrogated the bureau chief for more than two hours.
A8  Persian Gulf Journal: 'Plankton diplomacy' aboard ship.
A4  Sumo star Konishiki loses footing on road to championship.
A6  National A10-15, B8-9  PEROT'S WALL STREET CRASH
Ross Perot's name has long had a familiar ring on Wall Street, where he made his first $1 billion, and suffered the biggest failure of his career, when he attempted to fix the problems of a stock brokerage.
A1  BUSH STRESSES THE FAMILY
President Bush urged University of Notre Dame graduates today to rebuild American society through strong families in a speech that touched on recent themes of social disintegration and dependence on the government.
A14  MRS.
CLINTON IN STORM'S EYE
Hillary Clinton has stepped into the eye of the stormy debate about the role of women in society and in politics.
And she seems a bit at a loss over how to deal with all the powerful reactions she has unleashed.
A15  RIOT'S RIPPLE EFFECT
The riots in Los Angeles destroyed several chiropractic and skin-care clinics owned by a black woman, setting back her efforts to build an economic base in an impoverished area.
The loss also put 15 of her former employees out of work.
A1
Rival street gangs met again in Los Angeles.  B8  DOLPHIN DEATHS POSE MYSTERY
The deaths of 120 dolphins along a stretch of Texas coastline has raised fears that whatever is killing them could eventually harm humans, too.
A10  BOTTOM LINE AT OLYMPIA &amp; YORK
Three days after Olympia &amp; York, the world's largest developer, filed for bankruptcy protection in Canada and the United States, the president of the company admitted that the value of their real estate properties fall short of the debt against them.
A1  WEINBERGER UNDER THE GUN
Iran-contra prosecutors have engaged in intense negotiations with Caspar Weinberger, the former Defense Secretary and architect of the Reagan Administration's military buildup in the 1980's, say people following the discussions.
A10  ANOTHER VICTORY FOR INDUSTRY
President Bush will allow companies to increase emissions of pollution without notifying the public, Administration officials said.
A12  SPACE'S FRONTIER OF KNOWLEDGE
The device designed to snare an errant satellite fell victim to the limits of knowledge about how to work in the weightlessness of space, space engineers say.
A13
Endeavour's commander defended spending on space.  A13 GRADUATES ENTER CHANGED WORLD
In a speech at Smith College's 114th commencement exercises, Gov.
Ann W. Richards of Texas recalled a time when "women made the coffee and men made the decisions." B9  A rival for the title of world's largest living thing.
A12  Metropolitan Digest, B1 CHILD ABUSE AND CONFIDENTIALITY
After 16-year-old Tawana Scott was charged with murder last May for abandoning her baby to die, her relatives were left with many questions -- among them, why had New York City's child-welfare authorities returned the baby to Tawana when she had abandoned the child once before?
As in any case in which a child under its supervision dies, the Human Resources Administration had this reply: no comment.
A1  Business Digest, D1  Sports C1-10  Baseball: Yanks get mad, and get even.
C6  Dodgers down Mets.
C6  Basketball: Bulls rout Knicks in Game 7.
C1  Jordan rules, from start to finish.
C1  Orlando gets first pick in N.B.A. draft.
C2  Column: Berkow on the pain of defeat.
C2  Cycling: Lemond wins Tour Du Pont.
C10  Feature: Sidelines C2  Golf: King wins L.P.G.A.
Championship.
C10  Hockey: Penguins beat Bruins in overtime.
C2  Horse Racing: The ranks are thinning.
C10  Olympics: Soccer will kick off festivities.
C9  Obituaries B12  Harold B. Miller, aviation pioneer  Arts/Entertainment C12-18  Few unknowns at Cannes.
C13  Art show at Bennington.
C13  Theater: "Big Al" and "Angel of Death." C15  Music: Hammer at Garden.
C13  Dance: Stephen Petronio.
C13  Word and Image: "The Art of Mathematics." C15  "Northern Exposure." C18  Editorials/Op-Ed A16-17  Editorials A16  Lily-white Republicans.
The nuclear holdout.
Shot in the arm for health.
Blacks and Koreans.
Letters A16  Leslie H. Gelb: "We are innocent." A17  William Safire: Crimes of Iraqgate.
A17  Ann Markusen: Department of the Peace Dividend.
A17  Marcelle Clements: Fear of reading.
A17


Environmental Tectonics reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Francis Fitzpatrick, 89, Mayor And Party Leader in New Jersey
Francis G. Fitzpatrick, whose elections as the insurgent Mayor of Bayonne, N.J., and as Hudson County Democratic chairman signaled the demise of an old-line political machine 20 years ago, died on Friday at Bayonne Hospital.
He was 89 years old and lived in Bayonne.
He died of cancer, a family spokesman said.


Koss Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Miscellany
*
Anheuser-Busch Inc., St.
Louis, will offer twice as many second and third prizes in the initial part of its "Bud Summer Games" sweepstakes promotion, in response to what the company called a printing and production error that resulted in more winning numbers distributed than were intended.
Consumers will be eligible for 1,000 jet skis instead of 500, and 500,000 lapel pins instead of 250,000.


Dividend Meetings
Student Loan Mktg. Assn


Affymax N.V.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Icot Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to April 25


Kent Financial Services reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Elsinore Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Acton Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


NASA Capture Bar Is Victim of Space
In a dramatic effort that saved their mission, three Endeavour astronauts reached up and snatched an errant satellite from space with their outstretched hands as the device that was supposed to do the job lay to the side.
After two years of design, development and testing, months of practice by astronauts in simulators, all at a cost of $7 million, the device finally performed as it was designed to do, securing the Intelsat-6 satellite once the astronauts grabbed it, space agency engineers said Friday.
But they said the 15-foot capture bar fell victim to the limits of knowledge about how to work in the weightlessness of space.


Campbell Resources reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Canlan Investment reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Oshawa Group reports earnings for Qtr to April 18


Cortex Pharmaceuticals Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Medi-Mail Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Marlton Technologies reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Cerbco Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


General Communications Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Shore's Shops Face the Annual Scramble
LIKE a farmer scanning her seeded fields for the first signs of green, Barbara Buchan took a long look up Bay Avenue before returning to her store to set out the novelties she hoped would attract the waves of vacationing impulse shoppers who will soon crowd the Jersey Shore.
But the chilly spring weather has kept the main street of Long Beach Island as empty as a beach house in February.
Under the severe economic rules of the summer tourist trade, every slow week before the season begins will have to be made up during the 10 crucial weeks leading up to Labor Day.


Inquiry Into U.S. Aid to Iraq Urged
Representative Henry B. Gonzalez, the chairman of the House Banking Committee, said yesterday that he would seek the appointment of an independent counsel to investigate the secret American buildup of Iraq before the Persian Gulf war and the Bush Administration's "obstruction of justice."
In what was apparently the last straw for Mr.
Gonzalez,Attorney General William P. Barr said on Friday that he would no longer provide Mr.
Gonzalez, a Texas Democrat, with classified documents unless he was assured that the Congressman would not disclose the information.


Liposome Technology Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Nicolet Instrument reports earnings for Qtr to March 29


Just a Few Heading Toward Belmont
Pine Bluff, the newest star in racing after winning the 117th Preakness, not only was going to New York for the Belmont Stakes but was gone.
He left by van at 8:30 this morning, leading the parade of 3-year-old colts to the third and final challenge in the series for the Triple Crown.
But it was a small parade this year, and the Preakness Class of 1992 was already scattering.
Only 4 of the 14 horses in the race were ticketed for the Belmont on June 6: Pine Bluff, Alydeed and Casual Lies, who ran 1-2-3, plus Agincourt, who ran seventh.


Mid-South Insurance Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Gulf USA Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Unilab Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Grant Tensor Geophysical reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Abu Dhabi Details Its Role in B.C.C.I. Case
Ever since the Bank of Credit and Commerce International was seized by regulators last July, the role of the Abu Dhabi Government, the main shareholder in the scandal-ridden bank, has been an intriguing unanswered question.
Was the oil-rich emirate a party to the fraud, or simply a deep-pocketed victim of the bank's crooked managers?
The evidence has been mixed, and it remains so.
But last week, for the first time, an Abu Dhabi official publicly presented his nation's side of the story, before a Senate subcommittee on Thursday and in an interview on Friday.


PC Quote Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Hotel Investors Trust reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


White Sox Barrage Led by Sax
White Sox 14, Orioles 10
CHICAGO, May 17 (AP) -- Steve Sax drove in five runs and Frank Thomas, Robin Ventura and Tim Raines each homered today, powering the Chicago White Sox past the Baltimore Orioles, 14-10.
The White Sox had scored only five runs in four games before breaking loose.
Sax, who began the game with six runs batted in this year, hit his first two triples of the season.


Segal Award Winners
Michael Stuhlbarg, a 23-year-old acting student at the Juilliard School, and Jennie Somogyi, a 14-year-old student at the School of American Ballet, are the winners of the 1992 Martin E. Segal Awards, presented by Lincoln Center each year to young performers connected with the center.
The awards, which were started in 1986, are $4,000 each.


Filene's Basement reports earnings for Qtr to May 2


CV REIT Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Bethel Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Bamberger Polymers reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Indiana Financial Investors Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Sports of the Times; The Hurting of Patrick Ewing, and Others
PATRICK EWING'S famous left ankle was propped up on a slab of foam rubber on a folding chair in the small Knicks locker room in Chicago Stadium yesterday evening.
His knees, also famous but not as publicized over the last few days, were wrapped in ice.
Beads of sweat still lay on his head and gleamed on his bare shoulders, tokens of his effort over the afternoon.
He was surrounded by newspeople as he sat at his locker, talking low.
The disappointment was apparent.
It was the end of a long day's journey into what might have been.
What might have been was another series, and then another -- the final one.
The one that might have been for the championship of the basketball world.
Ewing and the Knicks, as well as New York itself, the metropolis that can suddenly become a small town, with street-corner enthusiasms, was flush with dreams.


Free Society Requires Freedom on Abortion
To the Editor:
As David A. Kaplan points out ("Bush v. Bush on Abortion," Op-Ed, April 28), when Solicitor General Kenneth W. Starr conceded a state can't outlaw abortions to save a mother's life, he conceded that the mere rationality of an anti-abortion law does not make it constitutional.
But Justice David Souter and Mr.
Kaplan should have gone one step further and asked whether a state may compel a woman to have an abortion if, say, tests show the child will be deformed or if the woman has already borne the maximum number of welfare babies.
Take the question a step further: May a state by law force a woman with superior genes to conceive and bear a child if it pays for the procedure?


Critic's Notebook; Lament At Cannes: Rarities Are Rare
The consensus among those who came here to buy and sell newly discovered films is that this has been a better year for long lunches at Cannes than for anything else.
Only a few previously unknown works are being fought over, among them Baz Luhrmann's "Strictly Ballroom," an appealingly offbeat Australian comedy with an unusually well-developed sense of kitsch.
In better times "Strictly Ballroom," which was shown in the middle-range subsection of the Cannes International Film Festival known as Un Certain Regard, would still attract attention.
But the present furor says at least as much about film buyers' desperation here as about this particular film and its long-term prospects.
Meanwhile, the price of distribution rights for "Strictly Ballroom" has reportedly shot up significantly during the course of the festival.
And a lawyer representing the film's production company has been abruptly summoned from Los Angeles, in case a deal is in the offing.


Perkins Paper reports earnings for Qtr to March 29


Drexler Technology reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


The Lily-White Republicans
If President Bush is serious about bridging the racial divide in the wake of the Los Angeles riots, there's a symbolically important step he could take today: Instruct his party to open up its lily-white power structure at the Republican National Convention in August.
The Grand Old Party, the party of Abraham Lincoln, William Lloyd Garrison and Frederick Douglass, has made notable contributions to civil rights.
Yet only three of the Republican National Committee's 165 voting members are black -- and all three are from the Virgin Islands.
Of 2,277 delegates at the 1988 convention in New Orleans, only 3.2 percent were black.
Invariably, G.O.P. gatherings present a sea of white faces.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Undeclared Candidate; How Perot Took Wrong Turn In Effort to Bail Out Wall St.
While Ross Perot has gradually become known to voters across the country, his name has long had a familiar ring on Wall Street, that bustling intersection of money and information.
Wall Street enabled Mr.
Perot to make his first $1 billion, from selling stock in his computer services company in 1968.
Wall Street also handed Mr.
Perot, who is considering a run for the Presidency, the biggest failure of his career -- what came to be known as "the duPont debacle." Fear of a Run on Brokerages
In 1970, responding to an appeal by leaders of the New York Stock Exchange, Mr.
Perot rode in from Dallas to tackle the problems of a stock brokerage, duPont Glore Forgan.
Although it was the nation's third-largest brokerage, duPont, like many family-run firms, was plagued by lax management and was largely unprepared for a cash shortage that followed a plunge in stock prices in 1969-70.


Genesco Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Review/Rap; Hammer and More Hammer
The United States, being the big place that it is, has produced a vernacular culture obsessed with size.
Skyscrapers, massive cars, tall tales of the frontier and Las Vegas all dwell on excess, as if the vast silences and open spaces of the country needed to be filled in, populated and made festive.
The rapper Hammer's show at Madison Square Garden on Friday night, the first of two, fit squarely into that tradition.
It almost exploded with activity.
With 14 backup singers, 16 to 18 dancers, 4 percussionists, 3 keyboardists, a 3-member horn section and countless costume changes, the show had more than a touch of frenzy and seemed terrified of silence, or of any sort of intimacy or emotion.
Maniacally friendly, it was a half-time production stretched out to an endless hour or so.


And It's Lob, Lob for Old Notre Dame
He's the National Collegiate Athletic Association's No. 1 ranked tennis player, and somehow he got to the top of the collegiate heap without a Stanford or a BOLLETTIERI in the background.
Instead, DAVID DiLUCIA used a backyard court in unbalmy Allentown, Pa., some unsung campus courts at South Bend, Ind., and gets advice in sports psychology from the Rev.
JOE DSIPENZA, a local priest, to become the first player in Notre Dame history to headline the collegiate national ranking.
During his high-school years, DiLucia competed against luminaries like PETE SAMPRAS, ANDRE AGASSI and DAVID WHEATON, but when the time came to turn professional or pursue a diploma, he opted for the dual privilege of four years of Notre Dame education and four years as the centerpiece of its renovated tennis program.


Chandler Insurance Co. Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Granges Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Riverside's Pastor at Center of Turmoil
Black and white they come to Riverside Church, more than a thousand strong each Sunday.
It is a church sizzling with life and remarkably integrated at a time when blacks and whites tend to go separate ways for worship.
But tensions are running high these days at Riverside in a dispute that threatens to disrupt the delicate racial balance that the interdenominational church has tried hard to achieve.
The congregation is deeply divided over the actions, leadership and style of its pastor, the Rev.
James A. Forbes Jr., who is the first black to head the church.
His appointment three years ago was seen as a mighty witness to Riverside's long-standing liberalism.


Biomagnetic Technologies Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Computer Automation reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


South Africa Talks: Rush to Impasse?
The impasse in negotiations on South Africa's future has exposed the hard realities of finding solutions mutually acceptable to blacks and whites divided by generations of apartheid.
The latest talks, which concluded Saturday, foundered on ostensibly secondary issues: the percentage of votes required for its drafters to approve a new constitution and the powers that a second chamber, called a Senate, would wield in a new multiracial parliament.
But the deadlock was symptomatic of the deeper mistrust between the African National Congress and the white minority Government.


Avondale Industries reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Cenvest Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Robert Morris Page Is Dead at 88; Physicist Helped to Refine Radar
Robert Morris Page, the former research director of the United States Naval Research Laboratory who was a leading figure in the development of radar technology, died on Friday at Fairview Southdale Hospital in Edina, Minn.
He was 88 years old and lived in Bloomington, Minn.
He died of heart failure, said his niece, Carol Hone.


Ag-Bag International Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Ocom Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


A Milestone for Dartmouth in Eastern Sprints
Something new happened today at the Eastern Sprints regatta, a rowing event that dates to 1946.
Dartmouth won the premier event for men's heavyweight eights for the first time, under a first-year coach, Scott Armstrong.
In the process the Green beat Harvard, which no such Dartmouth crew had ever done.
The victory came on Lake Quinsigamond over the familiar 2,000-meter course in 6 minutes 10.5 seconds, against a mild headwind.


Bovar reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


World Bank Warns on Environment
A new report by the World Bank warns that developing nations will have to muster the political will to control pollution and use resources more wisely if they want to protect the environment and the poor from the ravages of industrialization.
The World Development Report 1992, which appears less than three weeks before a United Nations "Earth Summit" in Rio de Janeiro, counters the view in some developing nations that rich countries and big international corporations are to blame for water and air pollution, deforestation and other environmental ills that weigh heavily on the poor.


Lee Pharmaceuticals reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


CellPro Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Publishers Just Can't Say No To Some Huge Book Deals
Publishers are crying austerity and recession, and yet they continue to pay millions and millions of dollars, sometimes record-breaking sums, to buy books from celebrities or famous authors.
To an outsider, it seems as if the publishers are claiming to be on a strict diet but are gobbling down banana splits with cherries and whipped cream.
There are more than a few examples.
Kitty Kelley got around $4 million from Warner Books for an unauthorized peek at the British royal family.
Magic Johnson is being paid about $5 million by Random House for three books, two about himself and his fight with H.I.V. and one a handbook about AIDS for teen-agers.


People
*
James K. DeVoe, 55 years old, chief executive at the Jayme Organization, Cleveland, was named to the additional position of chairman, succeeding George N. Havens, 66, who was named to the new post of honorary chairman.
Also, Cathy A. Pokorny, 40, previously chief operating officer, was named to the new position of vice chairman.


Critic's Notebook; A Running Debate About Public TV
Last Tuesday's "Nightline" encounter between Bill Moyers and George F. Will over whether taxpayers should subsidize public broadcasting had its diverting aspect.
There was Mr.
Moyers, the PBS pooh-bah of populism, defending an institution that is being charged with elitism.
And there was Mr.
Will, that Brahmin of the tube, delivering the charge.
The real issue at the moment -- as the program's title, "Conservatives Trying to Kill Off Public Broadcasting," made plain enough -- is the attack from the right on PBS for its skew to the left.
The tone was more civilized than one has come to expect in this fight, with its overheated rhetoric about immorality and censorship.
Mr.
Will expressed admiration for programs like "The Civil War" but argued that his own preferences or those of other comfortably situated viewers do not justify a subsidy.
Mr.
Moyers granted that public broadcasting has its flaws, and he did not contend that the institution was essential, only valuable.
But both indulged in familiar debating tactics that obscured more than they clarified.


Mercantile Stores reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Shuttle Chief Views Space Flights As Investments in Nation's Future
The commander of the space shuttle Endeavour, Capt.
Daniel C. Brandenstein of the Navy, back on earth after a bold satellite rescue, argued yesterday that the problems and needs of America's cities were no reason to divert money from the space agency's annual budget of $14 billion.
If anything, Captain Brandenstein said on the ABC News program "This Week," a strong space program was needed to inspire young people to high achievement and hopes for the future.


Isomet Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Intercan Leasing reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Koreans Remember Hundreds Killed in 1980 Uprising


Transactions
Baseball  American League
CLEVELAND INDIANS -- Activated Sandy Alomar, catcher, and Jim Thome, third baseman, from the disabled list.
Sent Carlos Martinez, designated hitter-first baseman, to Colorado Springs of the Pacific Coast League for injury rehabilitation.
Optioned Jesse Levis, catcher, and Craig Worthington, third baseman, to Colorado Springs.
Sent Glenallen Hill, outfielder, to Canton-Akron of the Eastern League for injury rehabilitation.
MILWAUKEE BREWERS -- Placed Andy Allanson, catcher, on the 15-day disabled list.
Recalled Dave Nilsson, catcher, from Denver of the American Association.
National League
NEW YORK METS -- Recalled Eric Hillman, pitcher, from Tidewater of the International League.
Sent Rodney McCray, outfielder, to Tidewater.
Basketball  National Basketball Association
DETROIT PISTONS -- Named chief executive officer Tom Wilson to the position of team president and director of basketball operations.
LOS ANGELES LAKERS -- Named Randy Pfund coach. United States Basketball League
NEW HAVEN SKYHAWKS -- Signed Rod Sellers, center, and Phil Lott, guard.
Activated Chris Watts, guard, from the taxi squad.
Assigned Lott to the taxi squad.
PHILADELPHIA SPIRIT -- Signed Marques Bragg, forward, and placed him on the taxi squad.


Printing A Panoply Of Pictures Cheaply
MOST drawing programs for personal computers come with a sampling of clip art, images that can be incorporated into your own fliers, newsletters and other printed matter.
Windows Draw, from Micrografx of Richardson, Tex., includes more than 2,600.
If that isn't enough, about 15,000 more are available at additional cost.
Windows Draw raises the ante for the low end of drawing packages.
There are probably more tools in it than anyone who is not a full-time professional graphic artist could use.
Elements can be moved around, duplicated and distorted; straight lines and curves are readily drawn, and text can be entered in more type faces than are good for you: Courier, Dutch, Swiss and Century Schoolbook in plain, bold, italic and bold italic, as well as Vivaldi, a fancy scriptlike font, and a set of symbols.


Hurst A Formula For Mets' Defeat
The dominance dates from 1986, includes play in both the regular season and World Series, and has stretched over three different managerial regimes on the Mets.
The box score is almost down to a formula: Bruce Hurst pitches.
The Mets lose.
The aura of invincibility deepens.


Clues to Quality Heard In the Sound of Corn
ACOUSTIC engineers believe they have found a way farmers in the field could quickly test the quality of their corn and other grain by using a tractor-mounted system for analyzing sound.
Dr.
Paul A. Wheeler of Utah State University told a meeting of the Acoustical Society of America in Salt Lake City last week that his group's experiments revealed that the sound of corn kernels jostling together in a bin is altered by the moisture content of the corn.
Moisture content, a critical value that influences the quality and price of grain, is usually determined by weighing a sample before and after drying -- a somewhat lengthy procedure.


'Last' Nazi Criminal Gets Life Sentence
In what may be the last verdict ever against an important Nazi officer, a German judge sentenced an 80-year-old former labor-camp commandant today to life imprisonment.
The defendant, Josef Schwammberger, was convicted of killing 25 people in seven incidents between 1942 and 1944 and of taking part in the murders of hundreds of slave laborers.


Razing of House In Error Leaves More Than Dust
Helen Anthony cannot go home again.
And she says the settlement the city has offered to provide a new home after demolishing her old one in a drug-control operation is not nearly enough.
"Everything I owned was in that house," said Mrs.
Anthony, a 59-year-old widow.
"Pictures of my husband. All my memories. My furniture. My clothes. All that was left was the clothes that was on my back."


Cuomo in 10th Veto On Death Penalty
For the 10th time in his 10-year tenure, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo vetoed a bill today to reimpose the death penalty in the state.
In what some death-penalty supporters dismissed as a perversion of logic, Mr.
Cuomo cited the recent trial of officers in the beating of Rodney G. King in Los Angeles to bolster his veto, which the Legislature is not expected to override.
Mr.
Cuomo argued that trial, which he has said should have produced guilty verdicts, had "vividly and forcefully revealed the fallibility of the present system."


Yanks Get What They Paid For: Tartabull Homer
Danny Tartabull was brought to New York and paid $25.5 million for the next five seasons to hit homers, drive in runs and make fans open their eyes when he bats and open their mouths when he finishes hitting.
For the first time this season, Tartabull did just that.
In a game that featured too many walks and too many baserunners left stranded, Tartabull livened up the night with a three-run homer off Chuck Finley that catapulted the Yankees to a 7-2 victory over the Angels last night at Yankee Stadium.
It was Tartabull's first homer in almost five weeks, his first for the Yankees at the Stadium and the first time he offered a glimpse of what he can do.


St. James Is Steering Her Own Course to Indy
Lyn St.
James will not be taking many telephone calls at her apartment here this week.
Each day, she will be sitting in a spare bedroom, wearing a fire-retardant suit and crash helmet, driving in the Indianapolis 500.
America's most famous auto race hasn't moved indoors.
It will be run on Sunday, as scheduled, before about 325,000 spectators at the Indianapolis Motor Speedway.


Chiefs of Imagine Films Seek to Take It Private
The founders of Imagine Films Entertainment, whose productions have included "The Burbs," "Problem Child," "Parenthood" and "Kindergarten Cop," said yesterday that they had made a six-year production agreement with Universal Pictures.
Ron Howard and Brian Grazer, the co-chief executives of Imagine, also offered to take the company private by buying the 48 percent of the company they do not own, or 2.4 million shares, at $9 a share.


Mr. Bush's Political Environment
The "Environment President" now seems mainly interested in becoming the "Re-elected President." Twice in one week, on the issues of air pollution and forests, the Bush Administration has handed down rulings that sacrifice long-term environmental concerns to short-term commercial and political interests.
And perversely, in both instances, the Administration, even while enraging environmentalists, offers false promises to the interests whose favor it wishes to curry in this election year.


Federal Agency Shreds List Of Gay Employees
The Federal Emergency Management Agency said today that it had destroyed a list of gay employees supplied by a homosexual at the agency who has said he was pressured by security officers.
The director of the agency, Wallace E. Stickney, also announced that he would convene an outside board of review to examine the agency's Office of Security after indications that it "may be operating under outmoded procedures."


USG MAY FILE 'PREPACKAGED' BANKRUPTCY PLAN
The USG Corporation, a debt-laden gypsum supplier that has been struggling to restructure, said it might file for bankruptcy protection with a reorganization plan already worked out among its leading creditors.
USG, based in Chicago, said the prepackaged bankruptcy filing was likely to be faster, less expensive and less disruptive than a traditional filing under the Federal Bankruptcy Code.
USG has been hurt by the downturn in the construction industry, and since 1990 has been trying to develop a restructuring plan acceptable to its banks and other creditors.
USG's stock fell 12.5 cents yesterday, to $1.125 a share, on the New York Stock Exchange.


CHEVRON TO PAY $8 MILLION WATER-POLLUTION SETTLEMENT
The Chevron Corporation said it had agreed to pay $8 million for violating Clean Water Act regulations in the 1980's.
The settlement includes $6.5 million for 65 misdemeanor counts and $1.5 million for civil penalties involving an offshore oil platform, Chevron said.


CHRONICLE
Another legendary Broadway composer, JULE STYNE, will receive the New Dramatists 1992 Lifetime Achievement award at the organization's benefit luncheon on Thursday at the Marriott Marquis Hotel.
CAROL CHANNING, who is traaveling from Los Angeles for the event, said, "It is the most due award, maybe overdue."
She will join a crowd of 550 to pay homage to the man who discovered her when she was "one of 20 unknowns in a little revue called 'Lend an Ear' in 1947," she said, and he was searching for a lead for "Gentlemen Prefer Blondes."


Review/Theater; Comedy Tops Marathon of One-Acts
In "Scheherazade," it is the playwright Percy Granger who is the tale spinner, with a lunatic comedy about life as soap opera and soap opera as it mirrors life.
Pirandelloesque permutations brighten this journey in which the characters keep losing their place in the story line, and the audience shares the comic confusion.
As airy as ether, "Scheherazade" is a high-flying one-act in Series B of the Ensemble Studio Theater's Marathon of short plays.
Tantrums flare as a television producer and his aide (she heatedly denies that job description) confront a new head writer for their show.
He may be an imposter or even a spy.
As played by John Pankow, the writer has the scruples of a housebreaker, which puts him in good company, as the other characters try to corner one another in a cul de sac.
When the producer (John Rothman) says to the writer, "You think you can scare me with dialogue," full fright is intended.


New York Officers Are Indicted By Suffolk on Cocaine Charges
A Suffolk County grand jury has indicted five New York City police officers and a retired colleague on charges that they bought cocaine in Brooklyn for sale on Long Island.
They were among about 50 people arrested on May 6 by the Suffolk and New York City police on drug charges.


Classical Music in Review
Anders Martinson  Pianist Weill Recital Hall
Anders Martinson is one of the many new faces that pass yearly through this concert space, and he may also be one of the very few that musical audiences will encounter again.
Only 18 years old, Mr.
Martinson has won the Joanna Hodges International Piano Competition and is soon to enter Yale.
He manages hair-raising technical difficulties with easy assurance; he has a good ear for proportion, tempo and linear movement, and he demonstrates a precocious confidence in his own interpretive ideas, many of them sound.
His Sunday evening recital split itself sharply between the problems of modest musicality and those of grand virtuoso display.
Haydn's late C-major Sonata was filled with unusual articulations, pedal effects and, in the Adagio, some unaccountable pauses.
And yet so secure is Mr.
Martinson with the basic values of this music that one accepted his young imaginings with pleasure.
Two Faure Nocturnes later in the evening sang simply and maintained the composer's half-hidden undercurrents of energy.


Wilder Refuses Execution Stay In 1981 Murder
Gov.
L.
Douglas Wilder of Virginia and a Federal appeals court panel refused today to halt the execution of Roger Keith Coleman, a former coal miner who is scheduled to die in the electric chair on Wednesday night for the murder of his sister-in-law.
The three-judge panel of the United States Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit denied a stay of execution for Mr.
Coleman six hours after Governor Wilder's announcement.
Mr.
Coleman can still appeal to the full appeals court and to the Supreme Court, but Mr.
Coleman said today that he had little hope of relief from either court.


Topics of The Times; The Profit in Crime
The cold war is long gone, so there's no money in spies.
The flush 80's have given way to the feeble 90's, so there's no money in money.


Mob Violence Continues in Las Vegas
A few miles and a world away from the blazing neon and flashing billboards where tourists stroll, this city's black neighborhoods have been wracked by mob violence almost every night since the riots began in Los Angeles.
Violence has erupted on 16 of the 18 nights since April 30, as the police have battled crowds that have burned and looted buildings, shot at police cars and pulled a man from a car and beat him.


NBC Realigns Prime Time, Adding 8 New Series
Looking to reinforce a prime-time schedule depleted by the departure of "The Cosby Show" and four other longtime hits, NBC announced a fall lineup yesterday that will introduce eight new series: five comedies, two dramas and one "reality" show.
NBC is also moving six series to different time periods and making changes on every night but Monday.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Senate Race; Challenger Senses Hope in Anti-Incumbent Mood
Chris McNair knows he is in an uphill battle in his quest to unseat Senator Richard C. Shelby.
Mr.
McNair faces an incumbent who has a campaign treasury of nearly $3 million and a reputation as one of the Senate's most conservative Democrats in a state that favors conservative views.


AIDS Education Costs
To the Editor:
A sidelight to your editorial "The AIDS 'Plot' Against Blacks" (May 12):
Our library, serving a largely black community, has been distributing a useful flier, "Understanding AIDS," published by the U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services, Public Health Service, Centers for Disease Control for the last two years or so.
When we attempted to replenish our supply we were told that the fliers were no longer free -- they would now have to be purchased.


Preserving the Works Of Artists With AIDS
The formation of a national organization to preserve the work of artists afflicted with AIDS has been announced by Mayor David N. Dinkins and Ronald Johnson, New York City's coordinator of AIDS policy.


American Pianist Wins Naumburg Prize
The first prize in the Walter W. Naumburg International Piano Competition has been awarded to Awadagin Pratt.
Mr.
Pratt, 26 years old, studied at the Peabody Conservatory of Music in Baltimore, where he lives.


BUSINESS DIGEST
International
Chevron signed an agreement with Kazakhstan that envisions producing 700,000 barrels of oil a day and revenues of more than $5 billion a year.  [ Page A1. ]
Yeltsin signed a resolution raising the prices of oil and gas more than fivefold.  [ A8. ]


Observer; This'll Fetch 'Em
Stand back, everybody!
Back!
Congress is about to amend the Constitution.
When they get through, everybody -- that's you, son; that's you, mother -- absolutely everybody can quit worrying.
That's right, folks: Quit worrying is what you'll do.
And when you quit worrying, what are you going to be?
That's right, sister; that's right, brother: You're going to be happy.


Man Said to Rule Mob Family With Terror
The racketeering-murder trial of the man accused of being the head of the Lucchese crime family opened yesterday with a prosecutor charging that the defendant, Vittorio Amuso, ordered nine murders and ruled the family "with an iron fist."
The evidence will show Mr.
Amuso "did run the Lucchese crime family in a reign of terror" that included all those murders, the prosecutor, Charles E. Rose, told the jury in his opening statement in Federal District Court in Brooklyn.
"Only Mr. Amuso had the responsibility for ordering those murders that you will hear about in this courtroom," he said.


Venice Journal; In Gondola Waters, Mayor Floats a Subway Plan
A subway in Venice? The Grand Canal without a bustle of boats?
Ugo Bergamo has seen the future, and he likes it. Not everybody agrees.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Democrats; Jackson Asks His Party to Pay Attention to the Poor and the Cities
Accusing both political parties of being unresponsive to the crisis in the cities and the pain of the poor, the Rev.
Jesse Jackson challenged the Democratic Party today to "renew its commitment to people in need."
If Mr.
Jackson is able to energize the Democrats' most liberal wing, it could complicate the effort of Gov.
Bill Clinton, the party's likely Presidential nominee, to unify the party behind a set of moderate positions and to run a nominating convention in July without a division over policy.
Throughout the campaign this year, the Arkansas Governor and his supporters have tried to appeal to the middle class and have paid less attention to the needs of the poor than Democrats have in the past.





Taiwan Company Backs Off on McDonnell
The Taiwan Aerospace Corporation said today that it wanted to scale back significantly its proposed partnership with the McDonnell Douglas Corporation in building commercial jetliners.
The disclosure left the arrangement at the brink of collapse and raised new questions about McDonnell Douglas's ability to remain competitive, analysts and industry executives said.


Eckersley First Rate In His Second Career
If Nolan Ryan is considered the Bionic Arm, then Dennis Eckersley should be considered the Bionic Conversion.
After all, the Oakland Athletics' premier reliever is as much an anomaly as is Ryan, defying the laws of nature and of baseball by squeezing more out of one career then a rational player would ever expect.
In fact, Eckersley has squeezed not one, but two distinct and distinguished careers out of his right arm.


Kenneth David Harris; Advertising Executive, 59
Kenneth David Harris, an advertising executive and graphic designer, died on Thursday at Northern Westchester Hospital in Mount Kisco, N.Y.
He was 59 years old and lived in North Salem, N.Y.
He died of cancer, his family said.
He was an art director at the Bozell advertising agency in Manhattan and was influential in the campaign to revive the Chrysler Corporation from its financial woes in the late 1970's.
He also developed concepts for the 1988 Buick Summer Olympics promotion.


Wieden &amp; Kennedy's 'Second Generation'
Wieden &amp; Kennedy has named four executives as partners to form "a second generation" of leadership, said Dan Wieden, the president and co-creative director.
In a telephone interview from Portland, Ore., yesterday, Mr.
Wieden confirmed a report in this week's Advertising Age that the appointments were intended to insure that the agency remained independent and to help fend off acquisitive-minded, agency-eating conglomerates.
The new partners join Mr.
Wieden and David Kennedy, the chairman and co-creative director.


Murder Trial Of Warmus Gets Lecture On Silencers
On the last day of testimony at the second trial of Carolyn Warmus for murder, the courtroom here was turned into an unusual class on the fine points of the manufacture of illegal handgun silencers.
The lecturer, at an easel supplied by prosecutors, was a self-taught Brooklyn machinist and his testimony that he made a silencer has become a focal point in the trial of the former schoolteacher who is accused of shooting to death the wife of the man with whom she was having an affair.


KFC's Very Real Problems May Be Solved in Lake Edna
KENTUCKY FRIED CHICKEN and its agency, Young &amp; Rubicam, are hoping that an imaginary town will help solve some very real problems.
For almost six months, the fast-food chain's national advertising has focused on a make-believe town called Lake Edna and its one Kentucky Fried Chicken restaurant.
Television spots portray Lake Edna as a commercialized version of Garrison Keillor's Lake Wobegon, crossed with Brigadoon or Utopia.


Prosecutor Aims High; Walsh's Focus on Weinberger Signals Bid To Tie Reagan to an Iran-Contra Cover-Up
More than five years after coming to the capital to investigate whether wrongdoing in the Iran-contra affair reached into Ronald Reagan's Oval Office, Lawrence E. Walsh seems to be making one last effort to make that case.
Over the years Mr.
Walsh, the independent prosecutor, has compiled a record of modest successes undercut by stunning collapses of some of his biggest cases.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-10  THAI ARMY FIRES ON CIVILIANS  Thai Army troops fired into crowds of demonstrators in Bangkok, killing at least 10 people and wounding scores of others, but the protests against military rule seemed to spread, rather than dissipate.
A1  A THREAT TO MILITARY PRIVILEGE  The possibility of civilian rule in Thailand would imperil the tradition of military privilege that has made generations of officers rich and protected them from prosecution.
A10  SWITZERLAND TO JOIN EUROPE?
Despite a heritage of independence and neutrality, Switzerland plans to seek entry to the European Community -- if voters agree.
A1  OIL DEAL FOR KAZAKHSTAN  After two years of sporadic negotiations, the Chevron Corporation signed an agreement with Kazakhstan that is intended to produce 700,000 barrels of oil a day.
A1  A CZECH CAPITALIST TOOL  In a plunge into privatization, Czechoslovakia embarked today on the biggest single sale of companies ever seen.
A1  NAZI WAR CRIMINAL SENTENCED  A German judge sentenced Josef Schwammberger, an 80-year-old former concentration camp commandant, to life imprisonment.
A3  DIPLOMATIC WAVES FROM HAITI  The U.S. role in restoring democracy to Haiti is cramped by domestic political concerns and a fear of confrontation with Latin America and Europe over intervention.
A7  LAST WORD ON PEACE TALKS  The State Department said a U.N. resolution on the Palestinian "right of return" was not part of current Mideast peace talks, then cut off further comment on the peace process until Israel's elections.
A3  DEBATE OVER BOSNIA'S FUTURE  The sense of having abandoned Sarajevo weighs heavily on the U.N. force that pulled out Saturday.
A8  FUJIMORI PRESENTS A PLAN  President Alberto Fujimori of Peru told the Organization of American States that he would restore democratic rule within five months.
A6  Venice Journal: Tourists won't need gondoliers if the Mayor has his way.
A4  National A12-21  FIGHTING OVER BIG BONES  Acting on a complaint by leaders of an Indian tribe, Federal agents in South Dakota seized the largest and best-preserved Tyrannosaurus rex fossil ever found.
Now the Department of Justice and the tribe are facing off against scientists and dinosaur fans.
A1  SIGN OF OPTIMISM IN NEW ENGLAND  The Bank of Boston announced an unusual commitment of $3 billion in new loans for businesses in the region, signaling renewed confidence in the battered New England economy.
A1  REACHING INTO REAGAN'S OFFICE  An inquiry's focus on Caspar Weinberger reflects a long and often frustrated effort by Lawrence Walsh to investigate whether wrongdoing in the Iran-contra affair reached into Ronald Reagan's Oval Office.
News analysis.
A1  INSURANCE, AIDS AND BUSH  A dispute has broken out within the Bush Administration over whether to support a decision by a Federal appeals court allowing employers to revoke the health insurance coverage of employees who develop costly illnesses like AIDS.
A12  CONGRESSWOMAN'S SUDDEN RISE  Washington at Work: When riots erupted in Los Angeles, Representative Maxine Waters of California burst onto the national political scene as the voice of the disenfranchised.
She has had a lot to say, and not everybody likes it.
A18  STRING OF VIOLENCE IN LAS VEGAS  A few miles from the casinos in Las Vegas, the city's black neighborhoods have been wracked by mob violence almost every night since the riots in Los Angeles.
A18  JACKSON CRITICIZES HIS PARTY  Jesse Jackson accused both political parties of being unresponsive to the crisis in the cities, criticism that could complicate the effort of Governor Clinton to unify the party behind moderate policies.
A20  Innocents and cynics alike are talking about Ross Perot.
A20  A black official has challenged an Alabama Senator.
A20  RIGHTS OF MENTALLY ILL CRIMINALS  The Supreme Court gave mentally ill criminal defendants new constitutional protection against unwanted medication during trial and continued confinement once they regain their sanity.
A14  The Bush Administration acted in a torture suit against Saudi Arabia.
A12  VIRGINIA EXECUTION TO GO AHEAD  Virginia's Governor refused to halt the execution of a former coalminer whose conviction has been questioned in many recent news articles and television programs.
A12  Marlboro Journal: Rudyard Kipling left a small black box here.
A12  A woman in Philadelphia lost her home to the city's mistake.
A16  A Federal agency said it destroyed a list of gay employees.
A16  Three men died on Mount McKinley.
Three others were rescued.
A17  Metropolitan Digest, B1 Business Digest, D1  Science Times C1-11  To treat or not to treat the hormone loss of menopause?
C1  What may be the most endangered primate charms breeders.
C1  Statistical doubts cast on theory of human ancestry.
C1  Science Watch C2  Hearings on halcion, the disputed sleeping pill.
C3  Arts/Entertainment C12-18  Swedish film wins at Cannes.
C13  Theater: One-act marathon.
C18  Music: Bang on a Can.
C13  Dance: "Donizetti Variations" by New York City Ballet.
C13  Word and Image: NBC adds eight series.
C13  "Salaryman," a first novel.
C17  Obituaries B8  LAWRENCE WELK IS DEAD
Lawrence Welk, the band leader whose folksy charm and "Champagne music" shaped his long-running television show, died on Sunday evening in Santa Monica, Calif.
He was 89 years old.
Sports B9-15  Auto Racing: Lyn St.
James achieves Indy goal.
B9  Baseball: Tartabull leads Yankees in 7-2 victory.
B9  Padres beat Mets, 3-0.
B11  Basketball: Knicks look for shooting stars.
B9  Column: Rhoden on Jordan B9  Fashion Page B7  Furs for all reasons.
Editorials/Op-Ed A22-23  Editorials A22  Bush's political environment.
Fight Haiti's thugs with oil.
Topics: Profit in crime.
Letters A22  Russell Baker: This'll fetch 'em.
A23  A. M. Rosenthal: Straight in the eye.
A23  Lawrence M. Mead: Jobs programs and other bromides.
A23  Robert E. Barna: Say it with plastic -- "I love New York." A23


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Bell Canada is offering $200 million of 7.75 percent debentures due 2006 at 99.657 to yield 7.789 percent through Goldman, Sachs.
The noncallable notes are rated Aa-2 by Moody's Investors Inc. and AA by Standard &amp; Poor's Corp.
*
Champion International Corp. filed a shelf registration with the Securities and Exchange Commission for up to $225 million of debt securities through Goldman, Sachs.


Fight Haiti's Thugs With Oil
Seven months of economic pressure from the Organization of American States have failed to budge the thugs who hijacked Haiti's infant democracy last fall.
Negotiations are stalemated -- yet the crisis of repression boils ever hotter.
Recent weeks have seen ever-more desperate refugees again fleeing in flimsy boats.
Sunday the O.A.S. rightly decided to tighten the economic screws.
Ships that trade with Haiti will be turned back from ports in O.A.S.-member nations.
Supporters of the outlaw regime will be denied visas.
And European countries will be urged to suspend trade.


After Bosnia, Peacekeepers Weigh Their Purpose
After weeks of enduring near misses from snipers, mortar bombs and tank cannon, and the menace of young militiamen with Kalashnikov rifles at roadblocks, United Nations peacekeepers had cause for relief over the weekend when they pulled out of Sarajevo, the capital of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
But as some of the 280 peacekeepers who were withdrawn from Sarajevo reflected on the experience today, there were things that seemed to mean more to them than the personal hazards.
Time and again, they spoke of the weeping women who had gathered at the roadside in the Sarajevo suburb of Ilidza as the United Nations convoy moved out of the city, of the flowers that were tossed to them a little farther on, of the pleas put to them by residents of all ethnic backgrounds, Serbs, Croats and Muslim Slavs.


Classical Music in Review
Benita Valente  Soprano Metropolitan Museum of Art
Benita Valente is 57 years old, and scarcely sounds it.
But neither did she sound quite so fresh and radiant in her recital on Friday evening as her briefer appearances recently had led one listener to expect.
At times, Ms.
Valente rivaled her younger self, especially in a longtime specialty, Villa-Lobos's "Bachiana Brasileira" No. 5.
She sustained the vocalise beautifully, with a warm, open flow, but stumbled a bit on the ethereal lift at the end.


Federal Panel Says Simple Steps Could Limit Bedsores
Bedsores, the painful and potentially dangerous pressure ulcers afflicting thousands of patients in nursing homes and hospitals, could be reduced significantly by relatively simple preventive measures, an expert panel said today.
The panel, convened by the Agency for Health Care Policy and Research to develop new Federal guidelines, said much suffering could be reduced among people confined to beds or wheelchairs if health workers were more aware of the problem and the easy ways available to monitor and prevent bedsores.


Robert Morris Page Is Dead at 88; Pioneer in Development of Radar
Robert Morris Page, the former research director of the United States Naval Research Laboratory who was a leading figure in the development of radar technology, died Friday at Fairview Southdale Hospital in Edina, Minn.
He was 88 years old and lived in Bloomington, Minn.
He died of heart failure, said his niece, Carol Hone.


Classical Music in Review
Bryant Park Young Artists Concert Series  Bryant Park
The Bryant Park Young Artists Concert Series was to open on May 8 with performances by the Essex String Quartet and the pianist Emanuel Ax.
But when the concert was canceled because of rain, the program was rescheduled, losing not only pride of place (the actual opening was May 11) but Mr.
Ax as well.
On Wednesday afternoon, he was replaced by Samuel Bartos.
The series, to consist of 60 performances over 20 weeks, is to feature student ensembles from New York City's music schools.
Its artistic director, Deborah Drattell, a composer, has also commissioned a series of brief fanfares from young composers.
The first of them, a trumpet duet called "A Reveling Fanfare" by 15-year-old Caroline W. Trowbridge, showed an ear for attractive themes and a good sense of counterpoint, and the trumpeters, J. Craig Davis and Russell Campbell, made the most of its easygoing interplay.


Combative Giuliani Builds a War Chest
Rudolph W. Giuliani, the once and future Republican mayoral candidate, last night joined his Democratic rivals in the race for money to run for New York City's top job, denouncing "business-as-usual politicians" and raising $1 million at a grilled-chicken dinner that marked the unofficial start of his campaign.
With Willie Mays, Henry A. Kissinger, the actor Ron Silver and the comedian Joe Piscopo lending their names to the effort, Mr.
Giuliani gathered about 1,000 supporters to hear an aria by Miss New York State, Marisol Montalvo, and a speech on the virtues of modern Republicanism by his old friend, Gov.
William F. Weld of Massachusetts.


REBATES OFFERED ON 1993 ESCORTS AND TRACERS
The Ford Motor Company has already tried to spur sales of its Ford Escort and Mercury Tracer models by using a "one price" strategy for certain models.
Now it is adding rebates of $200 to $400 on its 1993 Escorts and Tracers, the company said yesterday.
The new rebates are $200 for Escort standard and LX models with automatic transmissions and $400 for models with manual transmissions.
The new rebate for Tracer models is $200.
Besides the new rebates on the 1993 models, which recently went on sale, Ford said incentives previously offered on 1992 and 1991 Escorts and Tracers had been revised.
From May 21 through June 30, rebates on 1992 and 1991 Escorts and Tracers will range from $400 to $1,000, depending on the region and model.
The rebates were previously $500 to $1,000.


Bush Faces Hard Choice On Limits on Insurance
A bitter dispute has broken out within the Bush Administration over whether to support or oppose a decision by a Federal appeals court allowing employers to revoke the health insurance coverage of employees who develop costly illnesses like AIDS.
The case involves a man with AIDS whose company severely limited his medical payments after he told company officials that he had the disease and filed his first claims.
His lawyer has appealed the ruling to the Supreme Court, contending that the company illegally discriminated against the man, John W. McGann, by stripping him of health insurance benefits at the moment he needed them most.


For 100 Years, 'Forever Wild' and Forever in Dispute; The Adirondack Park Remains the Focus of a Clash Between Preservation and Commerce
A hundred years ago, after vast timber cuts had denuded sections of the majestic Adirondack forest and turned rivers brown with silt, the Legislature stepped in.
The Adirondack Park was created, with parts to be "forever wild," a preserve of mountains, lakes and woods.
This week the park, the largest in the country outside of Alaska, marks its centennial.
But the clash between commerce and preservation has not ended: instead of lumberjacks, developers are pushing at the edges of the wilderness.


On My Mind; Straight In the Eye
Once and only once, I knew a national leader who told the truth to his people about the most important things in their lives -- themselves.
This man told them that they were superstitious and slovenly.
He denounced their religion, customs, manners, furies and hatreds.
He told them that sometimes they were so dense that they drove him mad.


Czechoslovakia a Bull Market As State Grip Yields to Stock
As people lined up to trade in vouchers for stocks, Czechoslovakia embarked today on the biggest single sale of companies ever seen, trying to yank the nation overnight from its Communist past to a Thatcherite tomorrow of citizen shareholders.
Under a program overseen by Finance Minister Vaclav Klaus, shares in 1,446 state-owned companies valued at a total of $9.3 billion are being offered to the public, beginning today.
Of the nation's 11 million adults, 8.6 million have elected to take part, creating the prospect of overwhelming direct involvement in emergent Czechoslovak capitalism.


Accounts
*
O.
M.
Scott and Sons Co., Marysville, Ohio, to Partners &amp; Shevack, New York, for the lawn-care company's Hyponex brand account, previously at Fallon McElligott, Minneapolis.
Billings were not disclosed.


Justice Speaks About Duties Of Graduates
Justice Ismail Mahomed of the Supreme Court of South Africa delivered the main address yesterday at the 236th commencement ceremonies at the University of Pennsylvania, held at Franklin Field in Philadelphia.
Justice Mahomed told the 5,000 seniors and graduate students that they enjoyed exciting opportunities, in part because they had the good fortune to be born "in a privileged land with vast reservoirs of material wealth and affluence and spiritual and constitutional values."


Johnson and His Bat Aren't Saying Much
Howard Johnson dressed largely unbothered in the Mets' clubhouse on Sunday, clearly eager to let another afternoon of silence with the bat pass without inspection.
When approached by reporters, his emotions were tight, his responses brusque, defensive.


Trump's West Side Project Declared Ready for Review
After two flamboyant false starts, Donald J. Trump's plan to build an entirely new neighborhood on the Upper West Side of Manhattan was declared ready for public review yesterday, amid unanswered questions and hints that the coming debate may be as tumultuous as those in the past.
Now that the City Planning Department has certified Mr.
Trump's application as complete, the 74.6-acre project is subject to seven months of scrutiny by the local community board, the Manhattan Borough President, the City Planning Commission and the City Council.
Even if the project is approved, there is no guarantee that it will be built, given the difficulty of finding financing.


Patterns
The New Informality
Lilacs bloomed in Central Park.
Roller bladers zoomed down the park drives in sleek aerodynamic outfits, arms tucked close to their bodies.
People packed the theater district for new Broadway shows, tieless and skirtless in acid-washed jeans, sneakers and sweatshirts -- the new informality.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  U.S. Edges Russia in World Team Cup
Pete Sampras and the doubles team of Patrick McEnroe and Jim Grabb won yesterday to give the United States a 2-1 victory over Russia in the World Team Cup competition in Dusseldorf, Germany.
Sampras beat Aleksandr Volkov, 6-2, 7-6 (7-3), then Andrei Cherkasov defeated Derrick Rostagno, 4-6, 6-0, 6-3.
McEnroe and Grabb defeated Volkov and Cherkasov, 7-6 (7-1), 4-6, 6-3.
Spain blanked Sweden by 3-0 as Emilio Sanchez, ranked No. 20 in the world, upset No. 2-ranked Stefan Edberg, 6-1, 7-6 (7-5), 6-4.
Sergi Bruguera put Spain ahead, 2-0, by beating Magnus Gustafsson, 5-7, 6-4, 6-3.
Sanchez and Sergio Casal teammed to beat Edberg and Anders Jarryd, 6-4, 7-6 (11-9). (AP) Davin Upsets Markus: Fourth-seeded Gabriel Markus and seventh-seeded Gianluca Pozzi of Italy were upset yesterday as the Muratti Time-Bologna tournament began in Italy.
Markus lost to his fellow Argentine Franco Davin, 4-6, 6-4, 6-1, and Pozzi lost to Ctislav Dosedel, a qualifier from Czechoslovakia, 7-5, 6-3.
Eighth-seeded Francisco Roig of Spain defeated Pietro Pennisi of Italy, 6-3, 7-5.
In other first-round action, Jaime Oncins of Brazil beat Simon Youl from Australia, 6-4, 6-3, and Tomas Carbonell from Spain beat Horacio de la Pena of Argentina, 3-6, 6-4, 6-1.
Top-seeded David Wheaton, the only American in the clay-court tournament, and Andres Gomez, the 1990 French Open champion, are scheduled to play their first-round matches today. (AP) Kroupova Beats Werdel: Marianne Werdel of the United States had a short stay in the European Open in Lucerne, Switzerland, beaten in the opening round yesterday by Katerina Kroupova of Czechoslovakia, 6-2, 6-3.
Sabine Hack of Germany defeated Maya Kidowaki of Japan, 6-2, 6-1.
Alexia Dechaume of France overcame Rene Simpson-Alter of Canada, 6-4, 6-7 (3-7), 7-5, and wild-card entry Christelle Fauche of Switzerland routed Federica Bonsignori of Italy, 6-0, 6-1.
Hack will face top-seeded Manuela Maleeva of Switzerland in the second round. (AP) HORSE RACING  Nose to Nose to Nose
Only two noses separated the first three finishers when Jean Cruguet rode Buckhar to victory yesterday in the feature race for older horses at Belmont.
Buckhar, carrying 118 pounds, beat Home of the Free by a nose.
Another nose back in the six-horse field was Buchman.
The victory was the second in three starts this year for Buckhar, who covered the mile and a sixteenth on the inner turf course in 1:434/5 to earn $28,200 for John W. Meriwether.
The winner paid $5.60, $2.60 and $2.40 for $2 across the board. (AP)


Haiti Dispute: Limits on U.S.; Other Concerns Appear To Block Strong Action
Although the Bush Administration continues to insist that it seeks a speedy restoration of democracy in Haiti, the policy appears to be hobbled by domestic political concerns and a reluctance to risk confrontation with Latin America and Europe over a naval blockade or other direct intervention.
President Bush's unwillingness to raise the stakes in dealing with the Haitian military leadership that overthrew the President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide, on Sept. 30 is puzzling to some members of Congress and area experts.
They say that by breaking the political impasse and ending a regional embargo the Administration would also serve its goal of stanching the flow of refugees once again heading in large numbers toward American shores.


Thailand's Military Is Seen As Grasping Spoils of Power
Throughout the 1980's, as Thailand's economy boomed, an exhilarating sense of change began to infuse the new middle class that was quickly putting its civilian stamp on the social and political life of the country.
At every intellectual gathering where tomorrow's Thailand was discussed, one theme was heard: The days of coups and dictatorships are over; the army will have to play by political rules.
Today, many young, middle-class Thais were on the streets of Bangkok facing an army willing to destroy a dream so as to maintain its hold not only on political power but also on the economic spoils of near-absolute authority.


Review/Fashion; Furs for All Reasons
Birger Christensen, the Danish manufacturer, deftly illustrated the range of fur designs for next fall with three designer collections presented back to back last week in its Seventh Avenue showroom.
The show started with venturesome avant-garde styles by Marc Jacobs for Perry Ellis, transferring to furs the same quirky themes he developed in his Ellis sportswear.
Some styles that were translated successfully from fabric to fur were long rectangular stoles with alternating white and black mink stripes, boas in fluffy fox, animal patterns like zebra stripes in sheared beaver, vests reversing from leather to nutria and the ubiquitous jean jacket done in broadtail rather than denim.


Q&amp;A
Dew on the Canoe
Q.
I used to hear that morning dew on the canoe meant the rain would stay at bay.
Why is that so?
A.
According to Daniel H. Graf, a meteorologist at Pennsylvania State University, there is truth in this idea and in a similar folk rhyme:


F.B.I. Seizes Tyrannosaur In Fight on Fossil Custody
Acting on a complaint by leaders of an Indian tribe who say a private company had illegally taken fossils from tribal land, Federal agents in South Dakota have seized the largest and best-preserved Tyrannosaurus rex fossil ever found.
The seizure ignited a struggle involving the Justice Department, Indian leaders, scientists, a large fossil dealer and many dinosaur enthusiasts.


The Enquirer Is on the Prowl
The National Enquirer is snooping around -- for agencies, that is.
A spokesman in Lantana, Fla., said yesterday that the supermarket tabloid was in the early stages of talking to shops for creative ideas.
The spokesman confirmed a report in this week's Adweek, adding, "We want to be prepared, if we decide to advertise on television again." He also confirmed that The Enquirer had talked with several New York agencies, including the incumbent, D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles; Deutsch Inc.; Partners &amp; Shevack, and Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Advertising.


Sun Microsystems to Battle Rivals With New Machines
Sun Microsystems Inc., in an effort to hold on to the top end of its business, will introduce four new desktop work stations and a server computer today based on a new processor chip designed by Texas Instruments Inc.
While Sun has the dominant share of the work station market for the high-powered machines used by scientists and engineers, recent entries from Hewlett-Packard, I.B.M. and Digital Equipment have threatened to surpass Sun, which is based in Mountain View, Calif.


Quotation of the Day
"If an employer can cut workers out of a health plan after they become ill, health insurance is just an elaborate shell game." -- THOMAS B. STODDARD, representing a man who lost his benefits before dying of AIDS.  [ A12:6. ]


A Ferryboat Again Plies Mid-Hudson
After a lapse of 35 years, ferry service resumed this month across the Hudson River between Kingston and Rhinecliff.
The service consists of one ferryboat, a converted small Navy launch that can carry 40 passengers; for now it operates only on weekends.


A.T.&amp; T. Plans to Cut Long-Distance Costs 2%
A.T.&amp; T., citing lower user fees it must pay to local telephone companies, said yesterday that on June 1 it would reduce long-distance charges by 2 percent.
The company estimated that the price cuts for consumers and small businesses will total about $20 million.
Actual rate changes will vary according to locale, but the American Telephone and Telegraph Company said the price of a 10-minute coast-to-coast call between 5 P.M. and 11 P.M., for example, will drop from $1.55 to $1.50.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.25-6.5
6.25-6.5
8.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.81
3.96
5.69
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.60
3.58
5.50
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.68
3.68
5.66
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.94
6.95
7.95
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.81
7.81
8.27
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.75
8.75
9.33
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.62
6.63
7.22
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


An Empire Run Amid Rice Paddies
Retailers in bankruptcy?
A crumbling real estate market?
A global recession?
The problems might as well be happening on Mars, as far as Zhang Guoxi is concerned.
While gnarled old peasants slog barefoot behind water buffaloes in the rice paddies here, Mr.
Zhang, apparently China's richest private businessman, has found a better way to make a living.


Deaths Mount as Troops Fire on Thais
Thai Army troops fired into crowds of pro-democracy demonstrators gathered in Bangkok on Monday night, killing at least 10 people and wounding scores of others in a second day of protests.
The unrest reflected the public's long-suppressed fury over military rule.
The attacks on civilians failed to intimidate many demonstrators, and as dawn broke today, young protesters were rampaging through the streets of the Thai capital.
They set fire to Government offices and chanted their demand that the nation's former army commander, Suchinda Kraprayoon, step down from his new job as Prime Minister.


PERUVIAN PLEDGES DEMOCRATIC RULE
President Alberto K. Fujimori of Peru told foreign ministers of the Organization of Amerian States today that he would restore democratic rule in his country within five months by holding elections for a constituent assembly to replace the Congress he dissolved on April 5.
Mr.
Fujimori, whose appearance at the O.A.S. general assembly here was arranged only Sunday on the meeting's eve, urged the hemispheric organization not to isolate his country for its breach of constitutional rule, but instead to support the sweeping changes he has proposed for Peru's crisis-ridden political system.


Lendl Slips and Slides
He would hate to be accused of being a cockeyed optimist, but Ivan Lendl thinks he can win the French Open.
After all, it's nothing he hasn't done three times already, and it wasn't so long ago -- August of 1990 to be exact -- that he was No. 1 in the world.
If a Grand Slam victory in Paris can serve as a tactical rewrite of his recent history, the usually pragmatic Lendl has his pencil ready.
There's plenty to erase this year, now that his epic 615-week possession of a spot among his sport's top 10 ended yesterday when 10th-ranked Lendl was displaced by Carlos Costa of Spain.


Wall St. Gets That G.M. Feeling
For General Motors, yesterday wound up the sales pitch of a lifetime.
Its short video presentation, which it displayed around the country, was a smooth one.
Fresh-faced adolescents and bare-bottomed babies grinned from the seats of G.M. cars.
Happy customers breezed by in their Cadillacs and Chevrolets.
But this time the world's largest auto maker was not selling cars and trucks, it was selling itself, in the form of the largest stock offering by an American company.
Later this week, G.M. plans to sell up to 57.5 million new shares of its common stock to raise $2.29 billion.
The money will dress up G.M.'s battered balance sheet and pay for everything from new-car development to new tools and equipment.


Embattled Biologist Will Return to M.I.T.
AFTER a brief but tumultuous stint as president of Rockefeller University in Manhattan, a post that he resigned last November when outrage over his role in a fraudulent scientific paper grew too fractious to bear, Dr.
David Baltimore is returning to the place of his greatest professional triumphs, the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
Dr.
Baltimore, a Nobel laureate who is considered one of the nation's most outstanding biologists, will remain as a research biologist at Rockefeller until the spring of 1994, when he will join the M.I.T. faculty as a professor, the Cambridge institute announced yesterday.


Trial Testimony Is Begun In Killing of Yale Student


Congressional Redistricting: Too Much for Albany Lawmakers?
To the Editor:
New York State legislators need a wake-up call.
They can barely get a budget passed on time and even then it bears the mark of just three officials -- Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo, Assembly Speaker Saul Weprin and Senate Majority Leader Ralph J. Marino.
They create an alliance of political parties and divvy up state legislative districts to assure continuing the Democratic domination of the Assembly and the Republican domination of the Senate.
I won't even bother to comment about the protection of "worthy" incumbents.


Business Scene; East's Problems In Going Private
DESPITE years of ballyhoo about rapidly privatizing huge state enterprises, none in Russia and very few in Eastern Europe have been turned over to private owners.
The reason is that the state is not the uncontested owner of these companies after all, and therefore lacks the authority to cede them.
Before privatization can proceed, the various owners have to resolve their claims for control -- claims suppressed over decades of Communist central rule.
"State ownership has turned out to be a bit of a misnomer; there is implicit ownership by other groups, each claiming a stake," said Jeffrey Sachs, a Harvard economist who advises the Polish and Russian Governments.
Such recognition of the conflicting claims -- from managers, workers and municipal officials as well as central government -- has come only recently.
And now the question is, can the transition to free markets proceed without first resolving these conflicts so that the big state enterprises can be privatized?


Executive Changes
AMERICAN HOME PRODUCTS CORP., New York, a manufacturer and marketer of prescription and over-the-counter drugs, medical supplies, diagnostic equipment and food products, named Steven A. Tasher vice president of enviromental affairs and associate general counsel.
DIATECH INC., Londonderry, N.H., a radio-pharmaceutical company, appointed Hersh Petrocelly executive vice president and chief operating officer.


Serbia Has Its Last Hurrah in Milosevic
To the Editor:
Alex N. Dragnich shows unrealistically shortsighted views of Yugoslav history ("Don't Make Serbian the Yugoslav Villain," letter, April 30).
The central thrust of the Serb-Croatian split is that of hegemonic nationalism (Serbia) versus separatist nationalism (Croatia).
The Union of Serbs, Croats and Slovenes, which was founded on the ruins of the Austro-Hungarian Empire in 1919, represented more a Serbian victory than the mere shuffling of the losers' territories.


Birdhouses For Ducks May Harm Breeding
CONSERVATIONISTS who put up birdhouses to help wild wood ducks breed may instead be harming the elegantly patterned ducks' reproductive efforts by choosing the wrong locations, biologists say.
About 90,000 of the sturdy artificial nests have been placed in national refuges as well as on state and private lands around the country.
And every year, conservationists and wildlife managers put up more, typically in clusters on poles in lakes or ponds, where they are safe from raccoons and other predators, and managers can clean them all at once.


Jury Selection for Ex-Drexel Official
The securities fraud trial of a Wall Street junk bond salesman who once tied his financial future to Michael R. Milken is scheduled to begin as early as tomorrow in a Federal courtroom in Manhattan.
Jury selection began yesterday, and Mr.
Milken is expected to testify against his former friend and protege in an attempt to gain a reduction of his own 10-year sentence.
In many ways, the trial will rekindle the issues and charges that marked the sensational insider trading scandals of the late 1980's, which included the guilty plea of Ivan F. Boesky, the Wall Street arbitrager, and similar pleas and testimony by some of the biggest figures on Wall Street.
Help for Former Client
The trial also poses a substantial risk for both the defendant, Alan E. Rosenthal, the former head of convertibles in the junk bond department of Drexel Burnham Lambert, and Mr.
Milken, who pleaded guilty in 1990 to securities fraud charges that toppled his junk bond empire at Drexel.


CHEVRON TO SPEND $10 BILLION TO SEEK OIL IN KAZAKHSTAN
In one of the largest joint ventures between a Western company and a former Soviet republic, the Chevron Corporation signed an agreement with Kazakhstan today that envisions producing 700,000 barrels of oil a day and revenues of more than $5 billion a year.
The agreement, signed in Washington by President Nursultan A. Nazarbayev of Kazakhstan, calls on Chevron to invest $10 billion over 40 years to develop the Tengiz oil field, one of the largest in the world.
Russia Raises Fuel Prices
In another move to increase oil production and exports, President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia signed a resolution today raising the prices of oil and natural gas more than fivefold.
The higher prices are expected to send new shock waves through the fragile Russian economy, where factories, farms and transportation have long relied on inexpensive fuel.


Dropping Isolation, Swiss Seek to Enter Europe's Institutions
Switzerland broke with its proud tradition of isolation today by announcing plans to seek membership in the European Community after a referendum on Sunday approved the country's application to join the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund.
The decision reflects Switzerland's fear that it will lose its competitive edge if it remains outside Europe's fast-moving process of economic integration.
The end of the cold war has also led Switzerland to question the validity of its generations-old policy of strict neutrality. 3 Other Nations Seek to Join
A statement by the seven-member Federal Council that governs Switzerland said it hoped negotiations with the 12-nation community would begin "in the near future." Switzerland is expected to negotiate membership alongside Austria, Sweden and Finland, three other neutral countries that have already applied to join.


Chess
The New York Open, held at the Ramada Inn from April 15 to 19, was won by the German grandmaster Eric Lobron, who scored 7 1/2-1 1/2 and was awarded the $10,000 first prize.
Second place in this most prestigious of New York competitions was shared by the grandmasters Jaan Ehlvest of Estonia, John Fedorowicz of Manhattan and Alonso Zapata of Columbia; the California international master Igor Ivanov, and two untitled players, Aleksandr Schneider of Russia and Mikhail Braude of Florida.
Each scored 7-2 in the 182-player Swiss-system event and each was awarded a $1,741 prize.


Treasury Prices Slightly Higher
Prices of most Treasury securities inched higher in quiet trading yesterday, as credit market participants marked time in advance of today's meeting of the Federal Reserve Board's Open Market Committee and Treasury note auctions tomorrow and Thursday.
Based on recent increases in the price of short-term bills and notes, traders are gambling that the Fed will move to lower short-term interest rates shortly after today's meeting.


Frank S. Napal 3d; College Aide, 44
Frank S. Napal 3d, director of alumni development for Emerson College in Boston, and a former public relations executive in New York, died May 4 in Cambridge, Mass.
He was 44 years old and lived in Boston.
Mr. Napal died of toxoplasmosis, said his brother, Ronald J. H. Napal.


Editors' Note
An article on April 20 described efforts by men's rights groups to change the perception that domestic violence affects only women.
It included quotations from George Gilliland Sr. of St.
Paul, founder of the Domestic Rights Coalition, an advocacy group that he said planned to open a shelter for battered men.
Since the article appeared, additional information about Mr.
Gilliland has emerged, including that a court ordered him to stay away from one of his ex-wives, because of his threats of violence, and that his two other ex-wives also sought court protection from him.
Moreover, experts in domestic violence say his group actually defends men accused of battering women rather than men who have been battered.
Any account of Mr.
Gilliland's position on domestic violence should have included these facts and allegations about him and his organization.


West Haven Reels From Layoffs
With sunbathers already lolling on the beach here and rollerbladers racing along the three-and-a-half-mile Boardwalk, this waterfront town hardly projects an image of financial distress.
But a mile away at Town Hall, employees are reeling from the dismissal of one-fourth of the city's 300 workers two weeks ago.
And officials are furiously trying to balance the budget of a town whose economic woes recently forced it to submit to state control.


Bizarre Baby Raises Hopes For an Endangered Primate
THE aye-aye is a creature that can be described only by comparing it piecemeal with other things.
It is the size of a cat, has the ears of a bat, the snout of a rat, a tail like a witch's broom and a long knobby middle finger that would look just fine on that same witch's hand.
Its teeth are as tough as a beaver's and its eyes bulge out from its skull like a tree frog's.
And when a baby aye-aye cries, it sounds like a squeezed rubber duck -- particularly when it is being held with exceptional clumsiness by a visitor attempting neither to hurt the little beast nor to be hurt herself.
This is, after all, the first aye-aye to be born in captivity outside Madagascar, its native home, and its birth signals a possible turnaround in the fate of the animal considered the world's most endangered primate.
Thus, it is an honor to be allowed to pick up the three-week-old baby and feel its coarse fur, its writhing, protesting muscles, its tiny heart thumping in fear and fury.


Administration Asks High Court To Halt Lawsuit Against Saudis
The Bush Administration asked the Supreme Court today to reconsider a lower-court ruling that would allow American citizens who say they have been tortured in Saudi Arabia to sue the kingdom in United States courts.
The Saudi Embassy in Washington has intensively lobbied the State Department on the case.
In one instance, the Saudi Ambassador, Prince Bandar bin Sultan, wrote a letter asking the Administration for help.
But State Department officials have said they intervened in the case on the merits and not to placate the Saudis.


Supreme Court Roundup; High Court Rulings Provide Mentally Ill Defendants With New Protections
Ruling in two cases, the Supreme Court today gave mentally ill criminal defendants new constitutional protection against unwanted medication during trial and continued confinement once they regain their sanity.
The decisions in the unrelated cases were both based on the majority's interpretation of the Constitution's guarantee of due process of law.
Both provoked dissenting opinions from the Court's newest member, Justice Clarence Thomas.


Corrections
An article on Thursday about commencement at Columbia University referred incorrectly to Associate Justice Harry A. Blackmun of the United States Supreme Court.
He is a present member of the Court, not a former one.
The article also misidentifed Jacqueline K. Barton, a professor at the California Institute of Technology, and Marshall D. Shulman, an adviser to Secretary of State Cyrus R. Vance during the Carter Administration.
Professor Barton is a former member of the Columbia faculty, not a present one; Mr.
Shulman is emeritus professor of international relations at Columbia, not a former faculty member.


F.D.A. Panel Recommends Keeping Sleeping Pill on Market
An advisory committee to the Food and Drug Administration concluded today that the sleeping pill Halcion was safe and effective and should remain on the market.
But it asked that the drug's warning label be strengthened.
And it called for a new study of the company's currently recommended lower dose to be sure it is effective.
The committee wanted the warning label to be made simpler to read and to stress that the drug had caused anxiety in controlled studies.
On the Market 10 Years
The drug agency convened the panel after questions were raised about the safety and effectiveness of Halcion, the world's best-selling sleeping pill.
Essentially, the committee was asked to take a new look at the drug and ask, 10 years after the drug came on the market, whether it belonged there.


China's Rights Abuses Reflect a Bitter History; Roots of Hostility
To the Editor:
Having spent two years in the People's Republic of China studying foreign policy, I agree that China's missile sales, nuclear proliferation and ideological propaganda all clearly indicate a hostility to the United States ("As China Looks at World Order, It Detects New Struggles Emerging," front page, April 21).
However, I would like to underline an important point.
This hostility is not solely ideologically based.
Marxism-Leninism plays a minor role in the Chinese conception of the world.
The possibility for a foreign policy reversal with a younger, non-Communist government is unlikely.
It is Chinese nationalism, not Communism, that is the most salient indicator of its foreign policy.
The younger generation of Chinese may be even more imbued with nationalism than their older, ideologically inspired rulers.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, a report in the Company News column of Business Day on Saturday misstated the impact of a court ruling involving Orion Pictures and Showtime, the pay television service.
Judge Burton R. Lifland of Federal Bankruptcy Court in New York ruled in Orion's favor, agreeing that it was entitled to payments from Showtime.


Capezio Dance Award
Frederic Franklin, a former premier danseur of the Ballet Russe de Monte Carlo, has received the 1992 Capezio Dance Award for lifetime achievement, and Tina Ramirez, the founder and director of the Ballet Hispanico, a citation of honor.
The awards ceremony took place on May 11 at the Hudson Theater in Manhattan, with Arthur Mitchell, the director of the Dance Theater of Harlem, and Virginia Johnson, a ballerina in the company, serving as hosts.
Mr.
Franklin is artistic adviser to the company.


Books of The Times; How a Japanese Company Man Finds a New Self
Salaryman  By Meg Pei  296 pages. Viking. $21.
A hero stuck in a rut, too innocent or naive to realize that the placid surface of his life conceals a host of anxieties and resentments.
A series of experiences and losses that trigger a spiritual and emotional reassessment.
The hero's gradual realization that he can and must change his life.
It's a familiar recipe for a Bildungsroman, and Meg Pei uses it deftly in her first novel, "Salaryman," to tell the story of a Japanese corporate executive named Jun Shimada.


Big Olympia London Project Wins Backing of All Banks
Olympia &amp; York Developments Ltd. won a reprieve here today on its vast Canary Wharf office development, when all the banks involved agreed to a decision made by a majority of the 11 construction lenders on Friday.
The banks said they had agreed not to cancel emergency financing and not to force the East London project to file for bankruptcy here.
Lloyds Bank P.L.C. and Barclays Bank P.L.C. are heading a committee of lenders, which have construction loans of about $:550 million, or $1.01 billion, that are backed by Canary Wharf's buildings.


Sending a Message That Will Be Heard
To the Editor:
Conventional wisdom seems to be that when dissatisfaction is at its highest, as it appears to be now, voter turnout is at its lowest.
Does anyone else notice a contradiction here?
If you are eligible to vote but do not, then you have absolutely no right to complain about anything.
Our system of government was created to involve all white male property owners and has evolved over time to include, ideally, everyone.
The reason it does not is because people seem to think that by not voting they are sending a message.
Perhaps they are, but it cannot be heard.


Salvadoran Benefit Concert
Roberta Flack, Cynthia Gregory and David Parsons are among 18 singers, choreographers and dancers performing tomorrow at 8 P.M. at the Brooklyn Academy of Music in "Flowers From the Volcano," a benefit for New El Salvador Today, an organization helping children in El Salvador.
Ms.
Flack will also serve as host, with Raul Julia, Carmen De Lavallade and Maya Angelou, in a show directed by Patricia Birch and produced by Arthur Whitelaw.
Tickets are $15, $25 and $50.
Gala tickets, at $125, $250 and $500, include a post-performance reception with the artists.
Reservations: (212) 260-0759.
Charge: (212) 307-4100.


Today's Primary


Marlboro Journal; 1892 Bank Box Opens A Lid on Kipling's Past
A century ago Rudyard Kipling and his newlywed wife placed a small black box in the vault of the Vermont National Bank in Brattleboro.
The great British writer, born in India in 1865, had decided to settle near his wife's family in a hilly farming village just outside Brattleboro.
Kipling was enchanted with the snow, which he had never seen before, and with the sound of sleigh bells.


Topics of The Times; Watching TV Watchers
The television preferences of black Americans have diverged sharply from national viewing habits.
While "60 Minutes" is the top-rated prime-time show on network television, in black households it ranks only 20th, according to an analysis by the BBDO advertising agency.
Conversely, among blacks the No. 1 show is "A Different World," about life on a black college campus; in the overall ratings, it is No. 13.
BBDO's analysis, based on Nielsen Media Research data, compares the preferences of black viewers with those of all viewers, including blacks.
In the first half of the current season it found, for the first time, that the 10 shows most watched by blacks and by all viewers were completely different.


UNOCAL TO SELL ASSETS AND CUT UP TO 1,200 JOBS
The Unocal Corporation, adding details to announcements made in the last few weeks, said yesterday that it would cut 800 to 1,200 jobs and sell $750 million in assets over the next two years.
The company also said it would take a $35 million restructuring charge in the third quarter.
Unocal had previously said it would cut 400 "upstream" jobs, in exploration and drilling.
About 800 workers will be eligible for an early-retirement plan, the company said.
Details of the plan follow similar announcements from Chevron, Exxon, Mobil and Phillips, all driven by low prices for oil and natural gas.


Sports of The Times; They Want To Be Like Mike
IT'S 10 o'clock Monday morning, and the pace of a new day has already accelerated to an up tempo at 152d and Broadway.
There is a tender moment, however, in the middle of the block.
A boy about 7 or 8, wearing a bright red T-shirt, black shorts and black gym shoes looks through the window of a basement apartment, trying to impress a little girl who is looking out from her kitchen.
He takes a basketball that seems as large as his torso, and attempts to dribble it between his legs, awkwardly at first.
One time the ball bounces off his foot, on another attempt it hits off his knee.
But just as the girl begins to lose interest, he finds his rhythm:


High-Energy Gold
Brookhaven National Laboratory on Long Island accelerated gold atoms to an energy of 12 billion electron-volts, an important step in a program aimed at recreating "quark-gluon plasma," the primordial soup from which the matter making up the universe is believed to have congealed.
Brookhaven scientists boosted gold atoms to ultrahigh energy using their powerful Alternating Gradient Synchrotron during a two-week series of experiments.
This marked the first time that gold atoms, which are far heavier than most other atoms, had been accelerated to such high energies.
Dr.
Philip Pile of the laboratory said that collisions of gold atoms with target atoms had produced showers of other particles expected to reveal new information about "strange" quarks and other fundamental constituents of matter.


AFTER THE RIOTS: Washington at Work; Lawmaker From Riot Zone Insists On a New Role for Black Politicians
Last Tuesday, when President Bush invited Congressional leaders and Cabinet members to meet with him at the White House to discuss urban problems in the wake of the Los Angeles riots, they had an unexpected guest.
Representative Maxine Waters, who, hearing about the meeting and learning that she was not invited, made her way from the Capitol to the White House and presented herself at the President's door.
As she expected, she was not turned away.


CHRONICLE
They may have spent the past four years studying feet, but the 108 students graduating from the New York College of Podiatric Medicine tomorrow evening at Avery Fisher Hall will hear nary a word about toes or heels from their commencement speaker, DR.
BENJAMIN SPOCK.
As his wife, MARY MORGAN, put it yesterday, "He doesn't know a thing about foot care; he is a thumb-sucking doctor." Then again, she added, "He may surprise me and know something about foot care, but in the 17 years I've been coordinating his talks, he's never mentioned it."


Review/Ballet; A Stylish Guest Star in a 'Bayadere' Debut
Some fine dancing and interesting acting went on amid the crumbling temples, biting snakes and leaping fakirs when American Ballet Theater presented Natalia Makarova's production of "La Bayadere" on Saturday afternoon and evening at the Metropolitan Opera House.
Laurent Hilaire, a guest star from the Paris Opera Ballet, made a role debut in the afternoon as Solor, the noble warrior who loves the temple dancer Nikiya but must marry Gamzatti, the Rajah's beautiful but murderous daughter.
Most American ballet dancers could profitably study Mr.
Hilaire's bold, clear mime.
But this was a slightly remote Solor.
Mr.
Hilaire's propulsive, stylish jumps and turns, particularly in the Kingdom of the Shades scene, established the character's nobility and the performer's appetite for dancing, though an occasional landing plie would have been welcome.
Christina Fagundes brought compelling technical skills, true and clear, to Gamzatti in the afternoon's other role debut.
But this was an almost unrelievedly villainous woman, and without a sense of Gamzatti's softer side the character is less believable and less dramatically useful.
Cheryl Yeager, who recently took on the role, offered the same kind of unshaded characterization in the evening, although her Gamzatti seemed at first, imaginatively, a timid child.
Ms.
Yeager's pulled-up, airy carriage and attack gave Gamzatti a lyrical grandeur, however, in the garden scene.


U.S. COMPANY TO INSTALL JAPAN-CHINA CABLE
The American Telephone and Telegraph Company said yesterday that it had won a $70.3 million contract to design and install a huge undersea communications cable linking Japan and China.
The project is scheduled for completion by December 1993.
The 800-mile fiber-optic cable, which will carry information as pulses of light, will run from Miyazaki, Japan, to Shanghai.
It will consist of one active and one backup pair of fiber-optic lines operating at 560 million bits of information a second -- the equivalent of about 40,000 simultaneous phone conversations.
Last December, A.T.&amp; T. signed related contracts for the system with the Directorate General Telecommunications of China and the Kokusai Denshin Denwa Company of Japan.


Lilly in a DES Settlement
Eli Lilly &amp; Company said yesterday that it had made an out-of-court settlement with a Manhattan woman, whose mother had taken the pregnancy drug known as DES.
Lilly, based in Indianapolis, has settled at least 250 diethylstilbestrol, or DES, cases in the last 17 months, and about 350 cases are still pending, according to company statements and lawyers for women bringing the suits.
Lilly, which reported $5.73 billion in 1991 sales, has said that the outcome of all outstanding lawsuits against it will not "have a material adverse effect" on its finances.


Officers From Transit Police Rising to Their New Calling
Peter Boylan, a transit police officer who has faced up to the dangers of a midnight-to-8 shift patrolling the subway system in the Bronx, acknowledged yesterday that he was a little nervous about his latest challenge: transferring to the New York City Police Department and adapting to a new assignment above ground.
"It's just at my age, it's starting all over again," he said. "I'm 38 now."


Stocks Higher in Tokyo
Japanese stocks were higher today, helped by bargain-hunting, a firmer yen and expectations of relatively positive corporate earnings news this week.
At the end of the afternoon trading session, the Nikkei index of 225 issues was up 311.01 points, or 1.69 percent, to 18,754.11.
On Monday, the Nikkei gained 368.83 points, or about 2 percent, after a loss of more than 700 points on Friday.
But buying was not enthusiastic, with volume at about 220 million shares, compared with 352 million on Friday.


Barnett Banks Sets Deal to Acquire First Florida
Barnett Banks Inc., seeking to solidify its market-leading position in Florida, said yesterday that it would acquire First Florida Banks Inc. in a merger worth roughly $885 million.
The deal would move Barnett, the nation's 18th-largest bank, up one rung to replace Suntrust Banks as the 17th-largest bank in the country.


Fines Seen For Shearson And Trader
Shearson Lehman Brothers Inc. has agreed to pay a $500,000 fine, and a senior trader, Peter J. DaPuzzo, has agreed to pay an additional $100,000 in a settlement reached with the New York Stock Exchange over a case of reported stock manipulation, executives close to the case said yesterday.
The case attracted wide attention because of Mr.
DaPuzzo's reputation as one of Wall Street's best-known traders.
The settlement tries to focus the blame on Mr.
DaPuzzo and his assistant, Manny Geronimos, and only indirectly to Shearson, a subsidiary of the American Express Company.


Yeltsin Signs Decree to Raise Price of Oil and Natural Gas
President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia signed a resolution today raising the prices for oil and gas more than fivefold, a long-awaited move that is expected to send new shock waves through the fragile Russian economy.
Although wholesale prices for oil and natural gas will remain low by world standards, many economists fear that the increases will batter the nation's farms, factories and transportation.
The price of oil is rising from 48 cents to between $2.47 and $3.01 a barrel, compared with about $20 on world markets.


Lawrence Welk, the TV Maestro Of Champagne Music, Dies at 89
Lawrence Welk, the band leader whose folksy charm and bubbly brand of "Champagne music" shaped one of the longest-running shows in television history, died on Sunday evening at his home in Santa Monica, Calif.
He was 89 years old.
Mr.
Welk had been suffering from pneumonia in recent days, said Bernice McGeehan, a spokeswoman for the Welk Group.


Of Turning The Pages Without Any Pages
ON his most recent business flight, the traveler tucked several novels into his shirt pocket and, as a last-minute precaution against having the book go blank, tossed an extra battery into his flight bag.
One does not usually associate extra battery life with reading novels, but in the case of the Voyager Company's Expanded Books -- books designed to be read on an Apple Computer Macintosh Powerbook screen instead of on paper -- battery life becomes important.
It simply would not do to have the book lose power just as the dinosaur's dripping jaws start to close on the hero's leg and . . .


Swedish Film Is No. 1 at Cannes; Tim Robbins Wins Acting Prize
"The Best Intentions," a three-hour Swedish film based on a screenplay by Ingmar Bergman about his parents' courtship and marriage, tonight was awarded the Palme d'Or, the highest honor at the Cannes International Film Festival.
Directed by Bille August, who won an Oscar in 1989 for "Pelle the Conqueror," the film stars Pernilla August, who was voted best actress.
"I'd like to send a thank you to Sweden to Ingmar Bergman, who wrote this wonderful part for me and then of course to my director, who also helped me -- my husband," Mrs.
August said at the ceremony.
"The Best Intentions," which was shown in Sweden as a six-hour television series, is one of the more straightforward and less adventurous films to have been shown here.
Reception to the news of its winning the Palme d'Or was distinctly lukewarm, in contrast to the wave of enthusiasm greeting the choice of Gianni Amelio's "Stolen Children" as winner of the Grand Jury Prize, or runner-up.
Mr.
Amelio appeared on stage at the Palais des Festivals with the adult actor and two children who constitute virtually the entire cast of his beautifully spare and humane film.
Acting Prize Was Foreseen
Tim Robbins, who stars as the soulless movie executive Griffin Mill in "The Player," was voted best actor, a popular choice that was not entirely a surprise.
Mr.
Robbins, who left here several days ago, had left a statement offering thanks to "the entire festival for encouraging American films made outside of the mainstream" and to his "partner in crime, Susan Sarandon, and her three angels, who helped me keep Griffin Mill out of our home." Mr.
Robbins's speech was read by Robert Altman, who only moments earlier had received the best director award for the same film.


Environmentalists Accuse U.S. Of Trying to Weaken Global Treaty
As negotiations draw to a close here on an international treaty to slow the world's steady loss of plant, animal and microbial species, the United States is being accused by environmental groups of trying to weaken the agreement due to be signed at the Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro next month.
Biologists have warned that unless international action is taken to curb the destruction of species, a mass extinction of epic proportions will result within a few decades.


Teen-Agers Slain in Bronx
Three teen-agers were found shot to death in a Bronx apartment last night in what was believed to be a drug-related killing, the police said.
The bodies of the three male victims -- two were 15 years old, the third was 16 -- were discovered by a neighbor just before 11 P.M. last night in a fourth-floor apartment at 350 St.
Ann's Avenue in Mott Haven, said a police spokesman, Sgt.
Ed Burns.
The boys' identities were not immediately available, the sergeant said.
No suspects had been arrested in the shooting by early this morning, the police said.


Review/Ballet; Bubbling Over With Donizetti in a Toast to the Past
Balanchine's "Donizetti Variations" is as refreshing as a glass of sparkling wine.
It's also a ballet that offers a toast to dance history.
On Sunday, the New York City Ballet presented two buoyant programs at the New York State Theater and, with a cast headed by Nichol Hlinka and Peter Boal, "Donizetti Variations" was the afternoon's highlight.
The cast certainly demonstrated the expertise of today's dancers.
At the same time, the performance was a reminder that Balanchine glances fondly back at the past in this work.
His choreographic style here recalls that of August Bournonville, the great 19th-century Danish choreographer.


United Way Accountant Admits $282,500 Theft
The former head of accounting for the United Way of Westchester and Putnam pleaded guilty yesterday to stealing almost $300,000 from the charity over seven years and depositing the money in her personal account, prosecutors said.
The case against the former employee, Evol Sealy, 41 years old, comes while United Way groups across the country are feeling national scrutiny on how the charity conducts business.
In February, William Aramony was forced to resign as president of the national United Way of America after revelations about his $463,000 salary and benefits package, and his lavish expense account.


China's Rights Abuses Reflect a Bitter History
To the Editor:
"China Is Reported to Plan Release of Some Political Prisoners Soon" (news article, May 6) discussed photographs, provided by the Chinese Government, of Wang Juntao and Chen Ziming, two leading pro-democracy activists.
The photos were given to John T. Kamm, an American businessman who serves as a conduit for information that Beijing releases to the West.
Given the previous official disinformation provided on the status of these two men, the photos, which suggest that Mr.
Wang and Mr.
Chen are in good health, are highly suspect.
Wang Juntao and Chen Ziming, founders of the Beijing Economic and Social Sciences Research Institute, an unofficial think tank, were branded by Beijing as the two "masterminds" of the 1989 democracy movement.
Arrested after the violence in Tiananmen Square on June 4, 1989, they were held for more than a year without charges, rushed to trial when world attention was focused on the Persian Gulf and quickly sentenced to 13 years' imprisonment.


Clinton Tells Workers of Plans for Economic Change


China's Rights Abuses Reflect a Bitter History; Designs on Mongolia
To the Editor:
"As China Looks at World Order, It Detects New Struggles Emerging" (front page, April 21) states that "While it is not Government policy, some Chinese would . . . like to recover the independent country of Mongolia, which China was forced to give up earlier in this century, as well as strips of territory taken by Russia in the last century."
Actually, a secret Chinese Government circular obtained recently by the Reuters news agency argues that the very concept of Mongol nationalism is flawed since "the Mongolian region has from ancient times been Chinese territory" ("China Stakes a Claim to All the Mongolias," International Herald Tribune, April 30).


Corrections
An article on Sunday about the suicide of Dr.
Allen Epstein, a Manhattan dermatologist who was a defendant in several lawsuits, referred incorrectly to the medical procedure involved.
It was silicone injections for cosmetic purposes like wrinkle removal, not breast implants.


Bulls Delight Chicago, and NBC, Too
The Chicago Bulls' seventh-game victory over the Knicks in the National Basketball Association Eastern Conference semifinals gives NBC the city it wants for what it hopes will be the Bulls' march into the finals.
Any network would rather have the lighter-than-air, mega-marketing machine that is Michael Jordan leading his team toward a final-round defense of its 1991 title than the blue-collar Patrick Ewing and his bump-and-bash Knicks.


Dinkins in San Juan On a Trip to Improve Hispanic Credentials
Mayor David N. Dinkins and a small entourage of Hispanic leaders arrived here tonight for a three-day visit to Puerto Rico and the Dominican Republic that Mr.
Dinkins hopes will improve his low standing among New York City's Hispanic residents.
The Mayor comes to this United States commonwealth of 3.6 million people at a time when his popularity among Hispanic voters, who supported him overwhelmingly in the 1989 election, is sagging, amid charges that he has not been sensitive to their needs.


Triple Crown '92: Strain Is Showing
It's probably a form of gallows humor.
You ask D. Wayne Lukas about his talented but erratic race horse Big Sur, and he says, "You never know who'll show up, Big Sur or Little Sur."
Big Sur runs 11th in the Preakness, and Lukas says, "No Sur showed up."


The Knicks' Next Project: A Search for Shooting Stars
For the Knicks, yesterday was a day to regroup, a day to recover and a day to reflect.
The Chicago Bulls are not prepared to relinquish their hold on the championship, as the Knicks discovered painfully in Sunday's 110-81 loss in the decisive Game 7 of their tug-of-war playoff series.
It took Chicago seven years to build a championship team around Michael Jordan, and the Knicks are still a few pieces short of building one around Patrick Ewing.


S. Hadi Raza Ali; Pakistani Diplomat, 49
S.
Hadi Raza Ali, a Pakistani diplomat, died on May 11 in Islamabad, where he resided.
He was 49 years old.
He suffered a heart attack while jogging, the Pakistan Mission to the United Nations said.


Lawrence Welk Dies
The bandleader, host of the longest-running show in television history, was 89.
Page B8. (Associated Press, 1967)


G.O.P. Leader Criticizes Abrams on Handling of Drug Allegations Against Deputy
With a stack of documents from a bitter 1990 divorce and a public official's ex-wife to back him up, the chairman of New York State's Republican Party said yesterday that State Attorney General Robert Abrams had ignored or covered up "substantial evidence of drug trafficking and drug use" by one of his senior deputies.
The charge, by a close associate of Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato, was widely regarded as the opening Republican salvo against Democrats in this year's campaign for the United States Senate.
Mr.
Abrams, one of four Democrats seeking the Senate nomination, denied the allegations, which he called groundless, and scoffed at the man who made them, William D. Powers, as a D'Amato "henchman."


Bridge
The conclusion of the international playoffs in Memphis on Sunday, after a match in which the scores oscillated wildly, was the most dramatic in the two decades since this method of selection was introduced.
A total of 32 deals were scheduled in the day, and a formidable foursome was going to work: Bob Hamman and Bob Wolff, Jeff Meckstroth and Eric Rodwell.
They had a 2-imp lead, and gratified their teammates, Seymon Deutsch and Michael Rosenberg, by gaining 37 in 16 deals.
It appeared over, but it was not.
Their opponents in the last segment, determined to make a comeback, were Bill Root, Richard Pavlicek, Brian Glubok and Michael Passell, with Edgar Kaplan and Norman Kay on the sidelines.
In 15 deals they had two game swings, a part-score swing and profits from three competitive auctions, without significant reply.
When the last deal reached Root and Pavlicek they knew they were doing well, but not how well.
In fact they were at this point ahead by 7 imps, having gained 46.


INSIDE
Deciding Whether to 'Treat' Hormone Loss of Menopause
Hormone replacement therapy offers benefits after menopause, like some protection against heart disease and osteoporosis, but women must decide whether benefits outweigh possible risks.
Science Times, page C1.
Execution Stay Is Refused
Virginia's Governor refused to halt the execution of a man convicted of killing his sister-in-law.
Page A12.
Victory for Sleeping Pill
A panel found that Halcion was safe and effective and should remain on the market.
Science Times, page C3.
Florio Vetoes Tax Rollback
Gov.
Jim Florio vetoed a 1-cent reduction in the state sales tax, but an override is almost certain.
Page B1.


S.E.C. Expected to Propose New Rules on Mutual Funds
The Securities and Exchange Commission is expected to announce new mutual fund regulations this week that might cut the costs for some investors, open the way to new kinds of funds and make buying a fund as easy as filling out a coupon in a newspaper advertisement.
The proposal will come after two years of review of the act of Congress that established the mutual fund industry in 1940.
Some of the changes can be made by the S.E.C. itself; others will take Congressional approval.
The proposal is scheduled to be released Thursday.


Debate Today on Macy Plan
In a court hearing scheduled for this morning, bondholders of R. H. Macy &amp; Company will argue that the company does not need an additional nine months to come up with a reorganization plan.
Macy, which operates the Macy's, I. Magnin and Bullock's department store chains, last week asked Federal Bankruptcy Judge Burton R. Lifland to extend until February the period in which the retailer has the exclusive right to file a reorganization plan.


U.S.-Japan Auto Chiefs Hold Talks
Against a backdrop of budding protectionist sentiment in Washington, the chief executives of American and Japanese auto makers agreed at a meeting today to establish working groups to stimulate Japanese purchases of American auto parts and distribution of American vehicles in Japan.
The agreement was a small but telling step toward soothing strained trade relations caused by automotive competition.
But statements made after the meeting left little doubt that vast differences remain over the pace and methods for easing tensions.


Adirondack Park Fights for Survival at 100 Years


Twins Rough Up A Dear Old Friend
Twins 6, Blue Jays 2
TORONTO, May 18 (AP) -- Jack Morris, pitching against Minnesota for the first time since leading his hometown team to the World Series title last October, failed to hold an eighth-inning lead today and the Twins went on to beat Toronto, 6-2, in 11 innings.
"I wanted to beat them and they wanted to beat me," said Morris.
"I love winning, I hate losing and the no-decision was a waste of time."


Critics Batter Proof Of an African Eve
IN the search for modern human origins, it has been all about Eve the last five years.
Molecular biologists studying certain genetic components of today's humans had come to the startlingly precise conclusion that all family trees lead back to a single African woman who lived some 200,000 years ago -- the mother of all humankind, who inevitably came to be known as Eve.
Now the serpent of uncertainty has slithered into the garden.
Its bite has undermined a critical statistical foundation for the Eve hypothesis.


Dealing and Wooing One of King's Fighters
Is Joe Maffia the man who would have been King?
Maffia is the former controller of Don King Productions whose recent allegations in affidavits have been raising questions about the way King conducts his business of boxing.


There's Life After the Knicks . . . and Before the Democrats


U.S. Softens on '48 Palestinian Issue
The State Department moved today to defuse a dispute with Israel over the terms of peace in the Middle East, saying a United Nations resolution on the Palestinian "right of return" was not part of the current Arab-Israeli peace talks.
The State Department spokeswoman, Margaret D. Tutwiler, added that from now until Israel's election on June 23, she would try to avoid responding to every question on the peace process in order to avoid inadvertently instigating any controversy by her answer.


By Design; Espadrilles: Rope to Unwind In
Espadrilles are summer perennials for good reasons.
Something about suntanned legs in rope-soled fabric slippers evokes images of a carefree Mediterranean life.
Espadrilles are comfortable to wear.
They are also cheap. (Of course, they don't last long, but that's part of the bargain.)
For those who prefer the classic variety, plenty are available in plain canvas with a squared-off toe and a wedge-shaped rope sole in the Galo shops along Madison and Lexington avenues.
They cost $45 a pair.
Galeries Lafayette's wafer-thin flat-soled versions, in madras or gingham, are $24.
Macy's Junior department has Esprit's bright flower-print or color-block cotton flats for $19.99.


M.V.P., Yes. An Ambassador, No.
Michael Jordan gratefully accepted the award for most valuable player in the National Basketball Association today for the third time in his career, but said he wanted nothing to do with the unofficial role of the league's goodwill ambassador.
"That's something I never politicked for and I don't want to accept that," said Jordan, when asked if he believed the focus on him would become more intense now that Magic Johnson has retired and Larry Bird's career could be coming to an end.


Cuomo Panel Pressures the Legislature to Adopt Stricter Limits on Tobacco Ads
As antismoking groups across the country express increasing alarm over the effects of cigarette advertising on teen-agers, a commission formed by Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo urged lawmakers today to pass a bill to limit tobacco advertising and restrict minors' access to cigarettes.
The Legislature is considering several bills intended to do that.
The commission endorsed an Assembly version of the legislation, saying it was the strongest.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Political Week; Long Shot or Not, Perot Has the Bettors Talking
In Washington, the hard noses tell you that Ross Perot is strictly for the rubes, that only people who know next to nothing about politics think the Texas billionaire has a shot at the Presidency.
In California, Indiana and Pennsylvania, the cynics tell you the whole phenomenon is another piece of inside-the-Beltway delusion.


BUSINESS DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  GRILLED CHICKEN FOR GIULIANI
Rudolph W. Giuliani, the once and future Republican mayoral candidate, said he raised $1 million at a grilled-chicken dinner that marked the unofficial start of his campaign for New York City's top job.
Several hundred supporters were attracted to the event, which featured an aria by Miss New York State and a speech on the virtues of modern Republicanism by Gov.
William F. Weld of Massachusetts.
B3.
THE TALK, AGAIN, IS OF TRUMP


Can Drugs 'Treat' Menopause? Amid Doubt, Women Must Decide
MENOPAUSE, long mired in myth and controversy and shrouded by a cloak of embarrassed silence, is fast becoming the leading women's health issue of the decade.
As baby boomers mature and life expectancy lengthens, the question of what to do about menopause has become central for millions of women, most of whom will spend more than a third of their lives in the postmenopausal years.
Emboldened by a new openness, these women are now demanding better answers to the nagging question: to treat or not to treat menopause and the decades beyond with hormone replacements.


COMPANY NEWS
CARNIVAL CRUISE LINES INC., Miami, and Club Med Inc., Grand Cayman, announced a joint venture to develop a cruise business in Europe.
Terms were not disclosed.
CAROLINA FINANCIAL CORP., announced that a nonbinding letter of intent for the acquisition of Carolina Financial by SouthTrust Corp., Birmingham, Ala., a banking concern, had been extended a second time, in this case until Friday.


Florio Vetoes 1-Cent Cut In Sales Tax
Gov.
Jim Florio vetoed a 1-cent reduction in the state sales tax today and immediately began drumming up support to stave off an almost certainly successful effort to override it by the Republican majority in both houses.
In a message to the Legislature explaining the veto, Mr.
Florio laid down a long list of conditions for his acceptance of a tax reduction.
Included on the list was almost all his $15.7 billion budget.
But Republican legislative leaders made it clear that compromise was impossible and vowed to go ahead with a vote to override the veto.


Market Place; New Securities Are a Hard Sell
IS Wall Street ready for the "son of portfolio insurance"?
After more than three years of refining, and after marketing realities have forced the slashing of fees that will be paid by initial investors, "super trusts" are about to come to market.


CHRONICLE
Leonard Bernstein would have been proud of the newest production of "West Side Story," says his son, ALEXANDER BERNSTEIN.
The show is not a Broadway extravaganza but the annual musical production at the Packer Collegiate Institute, a private school in Brooklyn.
Mr.
Bernstein, who teaches drama at the middle school, is a director of the show, for which his father composed the music.


Topics of The Times; America's Cup Overrunneth
Bill Koch, the Oklahoma oil billionaire, spent $64 million to defend the America's Cup this year.
Italy's failed challenge, led by the industrial billionaire Raul Gardini, cost more than $100 million.
Whatever happened to sailing as sport?
The oldest sports trophy in the world, the America's Cup originally was the "100-guinea cup" back in 1851 when the yacht America first won it from the British.
Challenges have always been a rich man's game, but this year the costs got out of hand.
With newly liberalized rules on boat design, high-priced high tech took over.


Important Patients Get House Calls
"WELL," Dr.
Melissa Foodman said, as chipper doctors do to break the ice, "how are we today?"
The patient said nothing, as worried patients do amid medicine's malevolent scents and suspicious sights.


Critic's Notebook; Is There Music After Minimalism? Bang on a Can Festival Says Yes
As the hour approached midnight on Sunday, it might have been expected that a critic would begin to feel no little impatience, frustration and dismay.
After all, in the midst of sampling the traditional nine-hour marathon concluding the sixth annual Bang on a Can Festival at the New York Society for Ethical Cultural, I found a fair number of works that seemed just barely above student level.
A piece for electric guitar noodled around with patterns that repeated even as the guitar's tuning was changed; another work, described as the "first 12-tone isorhythmic rock piece," did indeed have 12 tones, repeated rhythms, and elements of Minimalist rock, but without much point other than to combine them.
And for the lovers of tiresome theatrics gone by, there was even Daniel Goode's "Stamping in the Dark," in which a large ensemble of musicians kept their eyes closed, stamped on the floor intermittently and groped around the stage -- giving an unexpected demonstration of Brownian movement.


Classical Music in Review
Bach Performers Guild  St. Jean Baptiste Church
The Bach Performers Guild began life with a noble gesture on Saturday evening, using its inaugural concert, at St.
Jean Baptiste Church on the Upper East Side, as a benefit for City Harvest, an organization to feed the needy.
The program consisted of three Bach cantatas: No. 39, "Brich dem Hungrigen dein Brot" ("Break Your Bread With the Hungry"), appropriately; No. 78, "Jesu, der Du Meine Seele," and No. 151, "Susser Trost, Mein Jesus kommt."
It would be nice to be able to report that the musical results lived up to the lofty social ideals.
They did not.


Even a Star Can Identify With Rage
In the opening moments of the television drama "Mrs. Cage," a suburban housewife, played by Anne Bancroft, goes haywire in a supermarket parking lot and shoots another shopper.
"I understand this woman," Ms. Bancroft said firmly. "I am this woman. All of her is
me
. I almost knew instinctively what she was going to say next."


Classical Music in Review
'Coyote Walks Around'  Symphony Space
At some point not too many centuries ago, music in European cultures broke away from its social and religious moorings and became an activity in and of itself: a set of skills to be pursued by experts, a source of entertainment and inspiration for passive audiences.
"Coyote Walks Around" on Saturday night reminded (mostly passive) listeners that in some places singing and dancing are part of nature and everyone is a musician.
This evening of dancing and storytelling -- with the Northern Pueblo Tewa Dancers, the Little Wolf (Cheyenne) Dance Group and Joe Bruchac, a teller of traditional tales -- was not without show-business infiltrations, but through its sometimes too-shiny costumes and occasional appeals to cuteness, one felt the simple hommages to the eagle, butterfly and buffalo and entered into the disciplinary tug-of-war between beating drums and moving feet.


COMPANY NEWS: Summer Release; A Bug Repellent For Children's Use
As mosquitoes prepare to haunt summer barbecues and deer ticks threaten to spread Lyme disease, a new biotechnology weapon is ready for deployment.
To produce an insect repellent for use by children, the Littlepoint Corporation, a small Cambridge, Mass., concern, has borrowed a controlled-release technology developed a decade ago for cancer treatment.
The product, called Skedaddle, is supposed to remain on the skin longer than many other repellents but reduce the amount of the active ingredient, known as DEET, that is absorbed into the skin.
The lotion comes in boxes of 12 premeasured pouches.


What Is Fried and Has Six Legs? Welcome to Insect Cuisine
ACCORDING to food hygiene guidelines published by the Food and Drug Administration, consumers have cause for concern when more than one insect is found in a 50-gram sampling of cornmeal.
But Gene Defoliart, emeritus professor of entomology at the University of Wisconsin at Madison, thinks the F.D.A. is shortchanging the public.
In his opinion, a truly tasty recipe for flour calls for several hundred dry-roasted insects, ground up in a blender.
Dr.
Defoliart publishes "The Food Insects Newsletter." He will be the keynote speaker tonight at the New York Entomological Society's 100th-birthday bash, the Centennial Bug Banquet, where more than 100 entomologists and amateur insectophiles will gather to celebrate the idea of insects as food.


Bridge
The United States College Bridge Championships, sponsored by the American Contract Bridge League and the American College Union-Institute, were staged in Memphis on Friday and Saturday.
Top honors went to Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, ahead of the University of Maryland, California Institute of Technology, the University of Kentucky and Auburn, in that order.
Those teams had survived zonal competition to earn the right to play in Memphis.
The winning team consisted of Brady Richter, Scott Bieber, Ron Sperber and Andrew Skolnick.
Richter and Skolnick had a busy weekend, for they graduated in Troy, N.Y., on Friday and then flew to Memphis just in time to start play.


National Income Realty Trust reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Lifeway Foods Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


N.F.L. Owners Focus Attention on Labor Agreement
National Football League owners, hopeful of reaching a compromise with players over free agency, met for about six hours today behind closed doors to discuss significant issues in an effort to avoid a trial scheduled for June 15 in Minneapolis.
Although the focus on a labor agreement at the owners' spring meetings pushed back talk about expansion, Sacramento and Oakland, Calif., were eliminated, leaving five cities -- Baltimore; Charlotte, N.C.; Jacksonville, Fla., Memphis and St.
Louis -- still in contention for the two franchises.


Pazienza Is Trying to Make a Comeback in More Ways Than One
The car that cut in front of Kurt Reader's Camaro last November on U.S. 1 in Warwick, R.I., forced Reader to jam on the brakes.
In the passenger seat, Vinny Pazienza watched in horror as the Camaro skidded across the highway and into oncoming traffic.
In that instant, Pazienza, a world champion boxer, grabbed the door handle to brace for the collision he knew was inevitable.
At first, Pazienza believed that it was Reader who had gotten the worst of the crash.


Denver Plans to Shut Its Alternative School
Denver's only alternative school for students at risk of dropping out will graduate its first senior class next month.
It will also be the school's last.
The Denver Public Schools administration plans to shut the school, called High School Redirection, at the end of June.
The reasons it gives are budget constraints and opposition to innovations embraced by the school.
The school, opened four years ago, gives no grades, allows its 250 students to learn at their own pace and assesses academic progress through projects, essays and personal journals.


A Long Run to the Top At Marsh &amp; McLennan
A.
J.
C.
Smith ran the New York Marathon from 1984 to 1989 and posted quite respectable times of roughly 3 hours 30 minutes for each race.
Not once, he said, did he experience the high from finishing the race that people told him to expect.
"It didn't feel like such a triumph for me," he said.
But yesterday, Mr.
Smith, who is known by his nickname, Ian, came much closer to feeling the exhilaration he was seeking.
After 30 years with the Marsh &amp; McLennan Companies -- a market leader in many of its businesses, which include insurance and reinsurance brokering, consulting and investment management -- Mr.
Smith was promoted to chairman and chief executive.


65 Are Arrested in Malcolm X Demonstration
Sixty-five demonstrators were arrested yesterday as a march commemorating the birth of Malcolm X moved through midtown and lower Manhattan, disrupting traffic along its route during the late afternoon and evening, the police said.
The protest, which was described by the police as largely peaceful and orderly, drew as many as 600 demonstrators, some of whom occasionally sat down in the middle of the street, said Sgt.
Tina Mohrmann, a police spokeswoman.
Most of those arrested were charged either with disorderly conduct or obstructing traffic, Sergeant Mohrmann said, and most were issued summonses to appear in court and then released.


Strober Organization Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Theater in Review
Tone Clusters  SoHo Rep 46 Walker Street TriBeCa Through June 7 By Joyce Carol Oates; directed by Julian Webber; set, Kyle Chepulis; costumes, Mary Myers; sound, David Schnirman; lighting, Don Holder; video, Mark Frankel; production stage manager, Kathryn Brannach.
Presented by SoHo Rep, Marlene Swartz and Julian Webber, artistic directors.
WITH: Richard Adamson, Kathryn Langwell, John Nacco and Black-Eyed Susan.
No real-life television personality is as unctuously grandiose as the offstage voice (Richard Adamson) who harangues the parents of a convicted murderer in Joyce Carol Oates's disturbing one-act play "Tone Clusters." Sounding like Rod Serling as a supercilious philosophy student, the unnamed interviewer gushes, "We have here the heartbeat of parental love and faith. It's a beautiful thing."


CHRONICLE
The McDonald's generation confronted the English tea yesterday afternoon, and from all appearances, it was a success, though there is little likelihood that hamburgers will be supplanted by scones and clotted cream.
Twenty-four boys, the entire fifth grade at Browning School on Manhattan's East Side, went to Restaurant Charlotte at the Macklowe Hotel to learn the etiquette of tea.


Port Jefferson Auto Dealer Forfeits Most of His Assets
In one of the largest forfeitures of business assets ever approved by a civil court, John McNamara, the Long Island auto dealer and developer accused of defrauding General Motors of $436 million, has agreed to turn over close to $400 million in assets to the Federal Government.
Under the agreement, a court-appointed trustee will manage Mr.
McNamara's businesses and oversee the liquidation of his assets to satisfy his creditors.


Two Children Die In Separate Falls
An 8-year-old Manhattan boy fell to his death yesterday afternoon after climbing out a window in his family's 12th-floor apartment on the Upper East Side, the police said.


Avatar Holdings reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Transcapital Financial reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Theater in Review
Testimony  Henry Street Settlement's Louis Abrons Arts Center 466 Grand Street Lower Manhattan By Safiya Henderson-Holmes; directed by Raina von Waldenburg; set, Nathan Jones; lighting, Marty Liquori.
New Federal Theater, Woodie King Jr., producer, Shoestring Productions, Lynn K. Pannell, artistic director and producer.
WITH: Marty Liquori, Julie Bray-Morris, Mantee M. Murphy and Sonita Surratt.
There seems to be no bottom to the personal suffering caused by the racial animosity that Safiya Henderson-Holmes explores in her second play, "Testimony."


In Barcelona's Tapas Bars, Lusty Food Into the Night
THERE is no better way to sample the distinctive cuisine of Barcelona and the city's buoyant nightlife than in its tapas bars.
Every evening about 7 o'clock, a tidal wave of ravenous Barcelonans floods these aromatic agoras, which range from sleek spots with black-tie waiters to humble mom-and-pop operations with a docile dachshund as an official greeter.
Experienced Spain hands will note that Barcelona, compared to Madrid and other major Spanish cities, is not a big-league tapas town.
You don't necessarily stumble upon tapas bars on every block as you do in other parts of Spain; you have to look.
But what you find can be sublime: exquisite fresh shellfish, lusty country sausages, golden fried cod fritters, fresh anchovy and tomato sandwiches, and much more.


Licenses, and Liberty
The legislation is called "motor voter" for short, and by approving it today the Senate can enlarge democracy.
Exhorting citizens to vote is mere piety without doing what this bill would do, make it easier to register to vote.
Barely half the eligible voters participated in the 1988 Presidential election and, given wide expressions of disgust with politics, there's no reason to think turnout will improve this year.
Indeed, it can't improve much so long as only 60 percent of eligible voters are registered.


Puritan-Bennett Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Holopak Technologies Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


ConVest Energy Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


New Campaigns
*
B.V.D. underwear is reinforcing selling points of durability and quality in print advertisements by Warwick Baker &amp; Fiore, New York.
The ads, which replace a television campaign, present rival brands in "second careers" like polishing silver.
Each ad asks, "What will your underwear be doing a year from now?" and answers, "Chances are, if they're B.V.D. underwear, you could still wear them."


Roanoke Electric Steel reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Benton Oil &amp; Gas Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Corrections
A brief article in Business Day yesterday about an out-of-court settlement by Eli Lilly &amp; Company in a case involving use of the pregnancy drug DES referred incorrectly in some editions to the judge who sealed the settlement on Friday.
He was Judge Jack B. Weinstein of the Federal District Court in Brooklyn.


Consolidated Stores reports earnings for Qtr to May 2


Scientific Software-Intercomp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Industrial Lands Renew Call for Trade Accord
A group of major industrialized nations called anew today for early completion of the current global trade liberalization talks, warning that failure would risk bringing "fragmentation, conflict and inefficiency" to international commercial relations.
Yet nothing occurred at the annual ministerial meeting of the 24-nation Organization of Economic Cooperation and Development to suggest that the main obstacle to success -- a deadlock between the United States and the European Community over agricultural subsidies -- was close to being overcome.


Mitel Corp.  reports earnings for Revenue


Energy Bill Moves Through House
After weeks of deadlock among several House committee chairmen, a complex energy bill is beginning to emerge that would give tax breaks for developing renewable fuels and limit offshore oil drilling.
Lawmakers could take up the measure as early as Wednesday.
No fewer than nine committees have contributed nearly 200 versions and amendments, including expansion of the assets of the Strategic Petroleum Reserve and a requirement that utilities help pay the cleanup costs for uranium enrichment plants.


JAPANESE DECLINE TO CONDEMN ARMY
The Japanese Government, by far Thailand's largest source of foreign aid and a major influence in economic growth, said today that it would not press the country's leadership to stop the crackdown on anti-Government protesters.
The country's chief Cabinet secretary, Koichi Kato, said only, "We hope order is quickly restored."


Harvey Group reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 1


Codenoll Technology reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Jacor Communications reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Kazakhstan Accepts Atom-Arms Pact
President Bush and President Nursultan A. Nazarbayev of Kazakhstan agreed today on plans to make the former Soviet republic a non-nuclear state within the decade, effectively clearing the way to put into effect a year-old nuclear arms reduction treaty between Washington and the remains of the old Soviet Union.
In a two-day visit to Washington that ended today, Mr.
Nazarbayev pledged to eliminate the 104 long-range Soviet SS-18 nuclear missiles, each tipped with 10 warheads, that are now deployed in Kazakhstan.


Mexico Disaster Had Roots in Policy
To the Editor:
The sewer explosions that killed more than 200 people, destroyed 1,422 homes, 450 businesses, 600 vehicles and turned Guadalajara, Mexico's second largest city, into a disaster area are just the tip of the iceberg.
Official unaccountability, negligence and macroeconomic mismanagement in Mexico are both chronic and rampant.
As happened during the Chicago flood and the Los Angeles riots, governments seem to have no trouble in finding scapegoats at the municipal or even state levels.
Mexico's attorney general has blamed local officials and the state-owned oil company, Pemex, for the explosions (news article, April 27).
His investigation established that the loss of life could have been avoided if public officials had acted to evacuate residents from the area of highest risk.


Analysis &amp; Technology Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Home Depot reports earnings for Qtr to May 3


Personal Computer Products reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Review/Television; Good Manners Come From the Barrel of a Gun
The scene: A supermarket parking lot.
A purse is snatched from a well-dressed businesswoman named Mrs.
Dean.
Running after the thief, Billy the checkout boy is fatally shot.
The woman keeps screaming about her purse.
Mrs.
Cage, an older woman who has been watching in horror, picks up the thief's discarded gun and fires a bullet directly between Mrs.
Dean's eyes.
That's one of the very few scenes in "Mrs. Cage" taking place outside the confines of the police station where she calmly turns herself in.
This 70-minute drama, adapted by Nancy Barr from her stage play, is essentially a two-character, single-room exercise, focused on Mrs.
Cage's thorough but sensitive interrogation by Lieut.
Ruben Angel.
The performances of Anne Bancroft and Hector Elizondo allow for no slackening in the necessary tension.
The "American Playhouse" presentation, directed by Robert Allan Ackerman, is on Channel 13 at 9 tonight.


PHONE COMPANY DIVISION BUYS 40,000 CELLULAR UNITS
Bell Atlantic's Mobile Systems/Metro Mobile division said yesterday that it had reached agreements with several manufacturers to buy 40,000 dual-mode cellular phones.
Bell Atlantic, based in Philadelphia, said the phones, which operate on both analog and cellular systems, would be available to customers as early as July.


COMPANY NEWS: Cafe Burger King; Espresso and Cappuccino Flow Into Mainstream
Some of the nation's most fashionable cafes and coffee bars are facing competition from an unlikely rival: Burger King.
Along with a Whopper and fries, visitors to Burger King restaurants in Washington state can now order a steaming cup of espresso or cappuccino.


Dinkins, in Puerto Rico, Signs AIDS-Care Accord
Rushing to heal some old political wounds in the Hispanic community, Mayor David N. Dinkins signed an agreement here today with the Mayor of San Juan that is intended to provide better access to AIDS care for Puerto Ricans who travel between New York City and their homeland.
But advocates here for people with AIDS immediately denounced the agreement, which does not provide for any financing or set any timetable for achieving its goals, as merely a publicity stunt meant to benefit Mr.
Dinkins and the San Juan Mayor, Hector Luis Acevedo, who is running for re-election and has made AIDS a major campaign issue.


Dialogue: A Voodoo Amendment?; Discipline Is Overdue
The balanced budget constitutional amendment I have introduced now has 14 Republican and 16 Democratic co-sponsors.
It is more workable than the version Ronald Reagan championed and more flexible than Thomas Jefferson's suggestion that the Constitution ban deficits.
The amendment would make fiscal responsibility the general rule instead of the rare exception.
This is needed because the political will to reduce the deficit is absent in the White House and in Congress.
Critics wish for the day when our leaders will come to grips with the deficit crisis without a constitutional crutch.
But danger is upon us.


Children's Discovery Centers reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


International Epitek reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Buckle Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 2


AT BREAKFAST WITH: Alec Baldwin; A Cup of Cappuccino Named Desire
SAY Alec Baldwin in Hollywood, and 10 movie executives will tell you that he blew his last movie deal, that if he'd played his cards right, he could have been Bruce Willis.
This is a goal?
Say Alec Baldwin in New York and first you have to explain what the movie deal was. (He was set to co-star in "Patriot Games," the sequel to "The Hunt for Red October," for $4 million, and then co-star in the sequel to "Patriot Games" for $6 million).
He also wanted to act on Broadway in "A Streetcar Named Desire," but the timing didn't work and he lost both movies.
In Hollywood this is all seven deadly sins rolled into one.
Here, the reaction is equally incredulous: He was going to do the sequel to a
sequel?
Please.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Democrats; Clinton's Platform Gets Tryouts Before Friends
In the past 48 hours, Gov.
Bill Clinton has talked to students in Oregon, gay and lesbian Democrats in Los Angeles and shipbuilders in San Diego.
Just today, he hopscotched across four time zones, replenishing the fast-emptying coffers of his Presidential campaign.
The Clinton organization hoped to raise $1.5 million this week, the most of any single week during the Presidential race and enough to offset the borrowing the campaign has made against its expected receipt of Federal matching funds.


Food Notes
The Plumcot Arrives
The plumcot is a new purplish-red fruit with the shape and velvety finish of an apricot and the softer, juicy, tart-sweet flesh of a plum.
Too bad they couldn't breed it so the golden flesh comes away from the pit, like an apricot's, instead of clinging like that of most plums.


Numismatic Mystery: A New Turn in the Case of the Chrysanthemum Coins
After two years of Government leaks and speculation, one of Japan's most intriguing financial whodunits has entered a new chapter.
A lawsuit filed here this morning demands resolution of the mystery: Did the Japanese police uncover the biggest and most well-financed counterfeit operation in history, or instead commit a major blunder by seizing 103,000 genuine gold coins as fake and incorrectly accusing a Briton of dealing in them?


Willard Rhodes, 91, An Educator in Music
Willard Rhodes, an ethnomusicologist and emeritus professor of music at Columbia University, died on Friday in a nursing home in Sun City, Ariz., where he lived.
He was 91 years old.
He died of complications from Alzheimer's disease, said his daughter, Joy Cooper of Ossining, N.Y.


Krystal Co. reports earnings for Qtr to March 29


VGM Capital reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


New York State Colleges Need a Fiscal Pledge for the Future; Revive Bundy and TAP
To the Editor:
I am dismayed at the manner in which independent higher education has been treated in the recently adopted New York State budget.
Bundy Aid, a program of direct financial support to independent colleges, has been tragically dismantled.
Inaugurated in 1969, Bundy was a smart investment for New York, and its abandonment will be costly to the state.
Without it, independent colleges must increase tuition, forcing many lower- and middle-income students to enter public universities where a much greater portion of their education is subsidized by the state.


Campus Journal; Another Early Bloomer Out of Johns Hopkins
Pankaj Merchia will graduate Thursday from Johns Hopkins University, having earned degrees in three majors in three years.
His grade-point average of 3.8 out of a possible 4.0 got him into Harvard Medical School, but he has deferred his entry for a year while he studies medicine in India on a $15,000 fellowship he won.
He is all of 18 years old.


German Hollywood in the Making
The giant Babelsberg studio in Potsdam, where some of the world's most memorable films were made, has been sold to a French conglomerate that hopes to turn it into one of the world's largest and most modern film, television and radio production centers.
The buyer, Compagnie Generale des Eaux, known as C.G.E., is the largest film producer in France but is known principally as a real estate developer.


U.N. Experts Now Say Baghdad Was Far From Making an A-Bomb Before Gulf War
An extraordinary secret gathering of nuclear-weapon designers from the United States, Britain, France and Russia has concluded that on the eve of the Persian Gulf war, Iraq was further from producing a nuclear weapon than had been estimated, United Nations officials say.
The designers were sent by their countries at the request of the International Atomic Energy Agency to review evidence brought back from Iraq by inspectors who went there to destroy Baghdad's nuclear program.


Amstar Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Emerging Mexico Fund reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


ABOUT NEW YORK A Devoted Baker Fills the Hands of the Homeless With Kugel
IT takes all kinds to make a great city.
Today, we visit Peggy Bakewell, who among other accomplishments, bakes very well.
Her latest triumph is a tasty version of lokshen (pronounced LOKE-shun) kugel, the Yiddish name for a traditional East European dessert.


Wilshire Oil Co. of Texas reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Alabama Senate Bars Vote on School Aid Plan
A $410 million package of tax increases and education reforms that were being considered by the Alabama Legislature died late Monday night when the State Senate refused to bring the measures to a vote.
Advocates of the proposed legislation said that outright opposition to tax increases and the pressure of considering the tax package, budget measures and other bills on the last day of the regular legislative session had combined to derail the proposal.


Longview Fibre Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Xylogics Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to April 25


To Criticism, U.S. Unveils Report on Police Brutality
More than a year after completing a study of police brutality in response to the beating of a black Los Angeles motorist, the Justice Department released the survey today but said it was unable to draw any conclusions about when, where or why police officers engage in misconduct.
Critics in Congress, whose pressure on the Justice Department finally forced the report's release, quickly criticized the study as an attempt to paper over the problems of police brutality to appease law-enforcement officials and conservative voters.


Books of The Times; A Life Full of Men, None Good
Time and Tide  By Edna O'Brien 326 pages. Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $21.
At an inward-looking moment in her new and most deeply felt novel, Edna O'Brien writes of "the involuntary shudder that keeps reminding us we are alive." All through "Time and Tide," her benighted heroine gasps for air as she swims against the tides of convention in Ireland and England.


Environmental Power reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


American International Petroleum reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Cos Cob Library Rescued
The library in this section of Greenwich, which had been scheduled to close next month because of budget cuts, has been spared.
After a public outcry against the closing of the 62-year-old library, the Greenwich Board of Estimate and Taxation voted Monday night to restore $119,000 in financing that will keep it open for another year.
Cuts in state aid were not as severe as expected, allowing the money to be allocated to the Cos Cob Library.
The decision is subject to approval by the town's local assembly, but no opposition is expected.


Hancock Fabrics reports earnings for Qtr to May 3


Turkey, Tuna or Soy: The Post-Modern Burger
COFFEE shops with menus that never seem to change now have signs posted in their windows: "We Have Turkey Burgers." Fancier restaurants are encouraging their beef-wary, well-heeled patrons to try charred tuna burgers.
And everywhere, even in notoriously dull company cafeterias, vegetable burgers are cooking on the grill.
The nouveau burger has arrived.
Or at least, it's trying to.
Restaurants are coming up with alternatives to the traditional hamburger, driven by boredom or fear of fat or simply the desire to be different.
Matthew Kenney, the chef at Alo Alo on the Upper East Side, recently started offering a burger made with fresh salmon, coriander, shallots, Tabasco and capers, served on brioche with a watercress-tomato salsa.


Two Shots, From the Rear
Pathologists who performed the autopsy on President Kennedy now reaffirm that he was struck by two rifle shots from the rear.
By organizing and publishing this restatement of a key finding of the Warren Commission, The Journal of the American Medical Association has performed a service for reasonable people and reason.
Heated claims of conspiracy endure even after three decades; the clamor will probably never end entirely.
But this basic physical evidence survives and, to all those willing to listen, it offers proof against paranoia.


Holoco Mortgage Acceptance reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Wine Talk
SUMMER is white zinfandel time.
From now to the end of September, five million or so cases of this remarkable American invention will disappear at picnic lunches, garden parties, weddings, graduations, brunches, bar mitzvahs, office bashes, boat launchings, christenings, al fresco dinners, tete-a-tetes and assorted trysts.
Traditionalists shudder at all of this and insist that the good name of a great wine has been besmirched.
Zinfandel is a red wine, they thunder; if God meant it to be white, he would have provided the proper grape.


24-Hour Weekend Gambling Becomes Law in Atlantic City
Gov.
Jim Florio today signed into law a bill that allows 24-hour gambling at Atlantic City casinos on weekends, holidays and certain other days.
The new law also relaxes the Legislature's controls on the gambling industry.
"This bill changes some of the outdated regulations governing the casinos," Mr.
Florio said in a statement.
"We'll always keep a close eye on how the casinos operate. But we've learned a few things in the last 12 years, and one of them is that casinos need to have the flexibility to respond to the changing conditions of the marketplace."


Helping Stores to Track What's Hot, and Not
When Federated Department Stores Inc. emerged from bankruptcy protection in February, the born-again company was no longer simply an operator of eight department store chains.
Federated had entered the information-processing business.
Through its Sabre Group (not to be confused with American Airlines' Sabre reservation system), Federated is selling to other retailers the computerized inventory-management and back-office record-keeping service it uses in its own stores.
R.
H.
Macy &amp; Company has been a Sabre client since 1990, under a contract worth $6 million a year to Federated.


Jaruzelski, Defending Record, Says His Rule Saved Poland
Some of Eastern Europe's Communist leaders have faded into obscurity, and others have repented their life's works.
But Wojciech Jaruzelski of Poland, the last party chief in the region to be chased from the world stage, stands unbowed as he seeks to secure his place in history.
The 68-year-old general is in the midst of a publicity blitz defending his record.
He has completed two books this year, a memoir published in France and a detailed defense, issued this week, of his decision in 1981 to impose martial law and crush the Solidarity movement.


Corrections
An article by The Associated Press on the Company News page of Business Day on Saturday about the dismissal of a lawsuit filed by the Atari Corporation against the Nintendo Company misstated the jury's ruling.
In a partial verdict, the jury said it had not been proved that Nintendo intended to monopolize the market.


Eating Well
FOR those of us who love sweets too much for our own good, the discovery of no-fat baking ranks right up there with the discovery of penicillin.
Before we go any further let's be clear: desserts baked without fat will never taste as good as desserts baked with fat.
So the brownies made with applesauce and egg whites taste of cocoa instead of chocolate rich with butterfat.
And the zucchini bread has a little rubbery spring in each bite.
But it's amazing how quickly you can get used to such baking when you crave something sweet but don't want 20 grams of fat along with it.


Nike Campaign Does It Again
For the second time in two years, Wieden &amp; Kennedy in Portland, Ore., has won a Stephen E. Kelly Award for the best magazine advertising campaign.
It won the $100,000 prize for work for Nike Inc.
The agency won the 1991 Kelly, announced last night by the Magazine Publishers of America at a dinner in Los Angeles, for three four-page print advertisements in a Nike campaign aimed at women.


ShoLodge Inc.  reports earnings for 16wks t0 April 19


Bulls Romp Behind Jordan and Pippen
It was something like the first beautiful day of spring after a long, blustery winter.
The Chicago Bulls went out for a walk, found all roads paved and wound up taking a pleasant, leisurely jog.
In fairness to the Cleveland Cavaliers, who were easily beaten, 103-89, tonight in Game 1 of the Eastern Conference finals, they were on the road at Chicago Stadium against the defending champions just 48 hours after eliminating the Boston Celtics with a seventh-game victory that was perhaps the biggest in that franchise's undistinguished history.


Book Notes
Winning an Author
Random House was stunned two weeks ago when HarperCollins wooed away Barbara Taylor Bradford, one of its most important authors of commercial fiction.
Now Random House has struck back by snatching one of HarperCollins's best-selling authors, Marianne Williamson, whose inspirational advice book, "A Return to Love," has been a runaway hit.
Neither Harold Evans, publisher of the Random House adult trade division, nor William M. Shinker, publisher of the HarperCollins adult trade division, would characterize this as the beginning of a publishing war.
But Mr.
Evans did say he was still irritated with Mrs.
Bradford and HarperCollins, adding, "It certainly does seem like an interesting competition has emerged."


Brutal Betrayal in Thailand
Apologists for last year's military coup in Thailand argued that it was benign, even constructive.
The democratic government it ousted was clearly corrupt.
The technocrats it appointed to office were intelligent, honest and competent.
And the coup's mastermind, Gen.
Suchinda Kraprayoon, solemnly promised that he would never take political power into his own hands.
But constructive coups are as rare in real life as unicorns.
Today, General Suchinda runs Thailand as its unelected Prime Minister.
He has brought back corruption and suffocates democratic government.
Worst of all, he has ordered his troops to fire their M-16's at pro-democracy demonstrators.
Scores have been shot in Bangkok.
Protests have spread to other cities and the death toll climbs.


U.S. Broadcasting Outpost in Berlin Signs Off After 46 Years
Throughout the cold war, the United States maintained huge military forces in West Germany to guard against the Soviet threat.
Its only notable presence in the East was a West Berlin radio station whose call letters are RIAS.
Until the Berlin wall came down in 1989, RIAS was the source of objective information and some dazzling entertainment programs, from orchestral music to cabaret.
The station was sponsored by the United States and run by Germans.


Velarde Wins It For Yanks In the 10th
The Yankees had just loaded the bases in the 10th inning against Mark Eichhorn, and Randy Velarde was afraid to peer back into the dugout.
Was Buck Showalter going to pinch-hit for him in the 4-4 game?
Would he get a chance to erase his costly eighth-inning error?
Velarde never looked back at Showalter.
He did not have to.
Instead, Velarde drove a 1-0 sinker over right fielder John Morris's head for a run-scoring single that pushed the Yankees past the Angels, 5-4, in dramatic fashion last night at Yankee Stadium.


TSI Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 29


Bush to Set Up Research Banks For Fetal Tissue
President Bush said today that the Government would set up storage banks for fetal tissue to be used in medical research but that tissue from induced abortions would be excluded.
The Bush Administration said the centers would collect the tissue from spontaneous miscarriages and tubal pregnancies for transplant research, which shows promise in treating Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's disease and a host of other conditions.


SportsTown Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to May 2


Leeco Diagnostics reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Arrhythmia Research Technology Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Deopham Green Journal; Over the White Cliffs Come G.I.'s Making Amends
They were teen-agers, mostly, when they landed in Britain, the first wave of American soldiers and pilots on their way to the war in Europe.
Now, on the 50th anniversary of that friendly invasion, thousands of aging World War II veterans are coming back.
For many, like the men of the United States Army Air Force's 452d Bomb Group, it is an occasion for sweet reunion.
More than 70 veterans of the unit joined local townspeople today in this rural section of Norfolk, to place a stone marker where runways long ago crossed the open farm fields, launching B-17's toward targets across the English Channel.


New School's Graduates Hear Lament for U.S.
About 2,000 graduates, teachers, family members and friends filled the wooden pews of Riverside Church yesterday morning for the 56th commencement of the New School for Social Research.
In his opening remarks, Jonathan F. Fanton, president of the New School, lamented a lack of leadership in the country, saying it was responsible for low voter turnouts.
"We are experiencing a drought in leadership," he said, "not simply in terms of competence, but in terms of ethical behavior as well."


Dayton Hudson reports earnings for Qtr to May 2


Losers in Bus-Service Battle: Disabled Preschoolers
It has been three weeks now since a political fight between New York City and Albany halted the buses that carry thousands of disabled children to the city's private preschools, and Zachary Emmer's carefully structured routine has fallen apart.
His mother, Sharon, has juggled her schedule and a baby daughter trying to take him to his school in Queens.
Some days she makes it.
Some days she does not.
Zachary, who is 4 years old and autistic, doesn't understand what has gone wrong.


Optek Technology Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to May 1


G.M. Adds More Stock To Offering
The General Motors Corporation got more takers than it expected for its stock offering yesterday, enabling the nation's largest industrial company to sell 55 million shares, or 5 million more than it had planned.
And the final price, $39 a share, was only 25 cents below G.M.'s closing price yesterday of $39.25 on the New York Stock Exchange.
The offering price reflects confidence among investors, because demand at nearly the current market price exceeded the planned supply of shares.


Job for James Hoge Reported
A search committee for the Council on Foreign Relations is expected to recommend to the council's board when it meets on June 2 that James Hoge, former publisher of The New York Daily News, be appointed editor of Foreign Affairs, a participant in discussions about the position has reported.
Foreign Affairs, published by the council, is one of the premier analytical foreign-policy journals.


Teacher Admits Aiding Jailbreak, Police Say
A criminal-justice professor who taught a course on "alternatives to prison" has confessed to helping two inmates escape from a medium security prison in upstate New York last week, the state police said today.
The two, serving time for murder and robbery, remain at large.
Michael T. Petrik, 30 years old, of Hicksville, a professor at Nassau County Community College here, is charged with providing a tool that Christopher Rodriquez, 23 years old, and Lawrence Rose, 29, used to cut a hole in a chain-link fence at the Mid-Orange Correctional Facility in Warwick, N.Y., last Tuesday.
Mr.
Petrik then waited for them in a car and drove them from the prison, the police said.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: On the Trail
Brown Urges Input but Misses Chance
CLEVELAND, May 19 (AP) -- Edmund G. Brown Jr. says the Democratic Party's platform committee should hold public hearings on the policies it will support.
But Mr.
Brown skipped the public hearing the committee did hold.
The Presidential candidate held a news conference today to make the appeal for public hearings in the same hotel here where the party held its only national platform hearing a day earlier.
More than 90 people testified at the 14-hour hearing, but Mr.
Brown did not ask to speak, party officials said.


Saberhagen on Disabled List
The Mets announced today that Bret Saberhagen had been placed on the 15-day disabled list because of tendinitis in his right index finger.
Saberhagen, the right-hander who had been phenomenal on the mound of late, will not be eligible to return until May 31.


4 Officers Arraigned in Drug-Selling Case
A New York City police officer who is considered a ringleader in a cocaine ring that linked Brooklyn to Suffolk County told the police after his arrest that "for years the cops have been trying to get me," but that "it finally took Suffolk to get him," a prosecutor said today.
The prosecutor, Tracy Hoffman, a Suffolk County assistant district attorney, made the statement about Officer Michael Dowd, one of four officers who were arraigned today.
Bail was set ranging from $150,000 to $300,000 at their arraignment on cocaine charges.


Worth Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


DEATH CASE GOES TO COURT AND TV
In court appeals and television appearances a day before his scheduled execution, Roger Keith Coleman tried to plead his case today for a Federal hearing on his 1981 murder conviction in a Virginia court.
The case has become a bizarre mix of law, politics and public relations that has come to symbolize the bitter issues surrounding the death penalty in America.
Citing as reasons for further hearings for Mr.
Coleman allegations that he had ineffective counsel and was unable to present evidence that pointed to another suspect, supporters say his case dramatizes the degree to which even substantial questions of guilt or innocence in death penalty cases no longer merit Federal hearings.
Critics, including a majority of those in Grundy, Va., where the murder and rape in which he was convicted took place 11 years ago, say Mr.
Coleman was fairly prosecuted and deserves to die Wednesday night in Virginia's electric chair.


Schilling and Hollins Help Phils Top Astros
Phillies 4, Astros 3
PHILADELPHIA, May 19 (AP) -- Dave Hollins had the first two-homer game of his career, and Curt Schilling pitched six shutout innings in his first start in two seasons tonight as the Philadelphia Phillies beat the Houston Astros, 4-3.
Hollins hit a bases-empty home run off Butch Henry (0-4) in the third and added a two-run homer in the fifth following a walk to Ruben Amaro.
Hollins has five home runs this season, one less than he had last year.
Reds 7, Expos 4


Enzon Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Edisto Resources reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
April housing starts fell 17 percent, as builders broke ground on new homes at a rate of just 1,115,000.
The figure was largely seen as a slowing after unsustainably rapid increases.  [ D1. ]
A complex energy bill is beginning to emerge after weeks of deadlock among several House committee chairmen.  [ D13. ] Companies
General Motors got more takers than it expected for its stock offering, enabling it to sell 55 million shares, or 5 million more than it had planned.
The final price was $39 a share.  [ D1. ]


College Professor Is Charged With Aiding Prison Break


CAMPAIGN OPENING IN A DIVIDED ISRAEL
The campaign for Israel's national election in June got under way officially today with the opposition Labor Party enjoying an impressive lead in opinion polls and the governing Likud Party seemingly in trouble with many of its traditional supporters.
While cautioning that it is too early to translate polls into predictions, many commentators sense that discontent is widespread, especially over the sluggish economy, and that voters are ready to take out their anger on Likud.


New York State Colleges Need a Fiscal Pledge for the Future
To the Editor:
When the New York State Legislature recently passed the 1992-93 budget, it approved devastating financial cuts, tuition increases and financial aid reductions to the city and state university systems.
With the $74 million budget cuts to CUNY and $143.5 million to SUNY, New York State has slashed higher education support by 17 percent since 1990.
Moreover, with the $500 tuition increase approved for CUNY, these students must now bear the burden of an 88 percent tuition increase over the last three years.
Somehow New York's legislators have forgotten that CUNY and SUNY were established to provide quality, affordable education to those who might otherwise not be able to attend college.


Earl Morris; Ex-Bar Group Leader, 83
Earl Morris, former president of the American Bar Association, died today at the Charleston Area Medical Center, where he was being treated for a fractured vertebra after a car accident near here last Friday.
He was 83 years old.
The cause of death was a heart attack, the hospital said.


MDT Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Vast Discretion for Governors In Decisions on Death Penalty
The announcement on Monday that Gov.
L.
Douglas Wilder of Virginia would not stop the execution of Roger Keith Coleman highlighted the vast discretion that many governors have in considering whether to block the death penalty.
Although 36 states now allow capital punishment and executions are becoming more common, legal experts say there are no formal guidelines to help governors decide when to block an execution.


Finalists Chosen By Brown-Forman
The Brown-Forman Beverage Company has named five finalists in a review on its account, which Ally &amp; Gargano in New York had handled before being dismissed in March.
Phil Lynch, director of corporate communications in Louisville, Ky., identified the finalists yesterday as: Altschiller Reitzfeld , New York; Carmichael Lynch, Minneapolis; FCB/Leber Katz Partners, New York; McCabe &amp; Company, New York, and Mullen Inc., Wenham, Mass.


Some Back Florio on Tax; Others Side With G.O.P.
Republicans swept to total dominance of the New Jersey Legislature last November by riding a crest of voter anger over Gov.
Jim Florio's tax increase in 1990.
So the one thing that is clear is that the people of New Jersey want a tax cut, and anybody who stands in the way is committing political suicide.
Right?
Wrong.


APL Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Dropout Rate Down Sharply for New York Schools
New York City yesterday reported a significant decline in the number of students dropping out of high school, putting it ahead of other major cities that have also noted such declines.
Board of Education officials claimed credit for the change, saying years of hounding truants and pressing students to complete their required courses were finally paying off.
But they acknowledged that a sluggish economy, with diminished job prospects, might be partly responsible for the improvement.


Vari-Care Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Spike Lee Says Money From Blacks Saved 'X'
Spike Lee announced yesterday that a group of prominent blacks had donated an undisclosed amount of money to help complete work on his forthcoming film, "Malcolm X."
He said the donors were Bill Cosby, Oprah Winfrey, Michael Jordan, Earvin (Magic) Johnson, Janet Jackson, Prince, and Peggy Cooper Cafritz, founder of the Duke Ellington School of the Arts in Washington.


Dial Direct To Moscow And Beyond
The former Soviet Union, which only last year could receive fewer telephone calls from beyond its borders than a medium-size Manhattan apartment building, got direct-dial service yesterday to more than 2,000 cities in 15 republics.
For the first time, calls from the United States do not need the help of an American operator and are not shuffled through the inefficient and sternly monitored lines in Moscow.
But the former Soviet Union still has relatively few lines, antiquated equipment, some of which predates the 1917 Revolution, and is hemmed in by restrictions by the West on how much and what kind of advanced equipment it can buy.
For these reasons, the new republics will still only have the telephone abilities of a large Manhattan apartment building.
Many Calls Don't Get Through
There are now 421 international long-distance circuits, quadruple the number only nine months ago, when the former Soviet Union had 91 circuits, enough for only 91 simultaneous conversations.
In A.T.&amp; T.'s Network Operating Center in Bedminster, N.J., which monitors the world's telephone traffic, the first three letters of Moscow on a map of the world are permanently lighted in red, indicating that a large number of calls cannot get through.


Adam Smith Would Bless a Balanced Budget
To the Editor:
"Unbalanced" (editorial, May 10) predicts terrible consequences if a constitutional amendment mandating a balanced budget were to be adopted.
This prediction reminds one of a drug addict's forebodings about the harmful consequences that would supposedly follow in the wake of giving up the drug habit.
To place this matter in perspective, deficit spending as a deliberate Government policy was initiated by the Administration of Franklin D. Roosevelt to counteract the depression of the 1930's.
At the time, the Government's finances were in excellent shape.
This reality enabled the Government to borrow money at extremely low interest rates and to extend a helping hand to the private sector.


Market Place; Gold Loses Its Appeal As a Haven
FORGET about gold as a haven.
That is what thousands of investors did last year, as buying of gold for a secure investment declined sharply in Europe and North America.
And don't worry about the Russians.
Their gold selling spooked the market for several years.
But as a menace, they are receding.
The new bogymen are government central bankers, whose gold selling could stifle any rally.


Dialogue: A Voodoo Amendment?; No Will. No Way!
If there is little political will to realize a goal, putting it into the Constitution will not help.
Thus, a constitutional amendment requiring a balanced budget will work as well as the Prohibition amendment.
The futility of using constitutions to balance budgets is clear from the experience of state governments.
While 49 have constitutional provisions or legislation requiring a balanced budget, many routinely resort to outrageous accounting gimmicks to "balance" budgets, and many have created "off-budget" agencies.
State provisions, which generally apply only to operating budgets, often permit borrowing for capital budgets.


Review/Television; From Illusion to Knowledge to Church
It's a heady few days for Channel 13, as the station moves in a sort of theological ascent from tonight's program on imagination to tomorrow's on knowledge to Friday's on faith.
"Masters of Illusion," at 10:30 tonight, is a fast and fascinating look at the development of perspective by such Renaissance masters as Piero Della Francesca and Leonardo da Vinci, Michelangelo and Raphael, Uccello and Mantegna.
To James Burke's illuminating narrative, the camera shows off such tricks of the eye as vanishing points and explores the uses of light and shade and point of view that transformed the history of painting.


International Contour Technology reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Review/Music; With Debussy on the Harmonica, Audience Comfort Is the Goal
Hedonism is not in fashion.
Serious times, serious art.
A painful world, pained music.
A younger generation reared in the anger and protest of rock-and-roll has looked for social meaning in the songs and big-band music of the 1930's and 40's and found them wanting.
Next to the merciless music by Kurtag and Schnittke or the cruelties of Henze and Rihm, recent stabs at a new Romanticism seem almost sheepish if not guilt ridden.
So what are we to make of the New York Pops happily celebrating its ninth season at Carnegie Hall on Monday night?
It was an unashamed assortment of nostalgia, populism and hokum.
Like a stiff drink after work, it did the world no particular good but at least bestowed upon the recipient an angst-free hour or two.


Azerbaijan Communists Yield to Nationalists
After a tumultuous week in which former Communists returned briefly to power, the Azerbaijani Parliament voted early today to dissolve and to transfer authority to a National Council dominated by the nationalist Popular Front.
The midnight vote ended a political crisis fueled by Azerbaijan's failure to halt an Armenian offensive in Nagorno-Karabakh, the enclave over which the neighboring Caucasus republics have battled now for five years.


Review/Pop; Rock With Hillbilly Angst
"What I lack in talent, I make up for in nerve," said the country-rock singer Jason, formerly of Jason and the Scorchers, at the Bottom Line last Wednesday night.
He certainly understands his limitations.
As a singer, Jason can't boast an immediately recognizable or pitch-perfect voice, and he's not a guitarist who tosses off galloping, flashy leads.
He can't claim authorship of some of the best songs he has recorded, from the Scorchers' "Absolutely Sweet Marie" (written by Bob Dylan) to the new "One Foot in the Honky-Tonk" (co-written by the country singer Kevin Welch, and the title track of Jason's solo debut album on Liberty Records).
But Jason (who goes without his last name, Ringenberg) can perform like nobody's business; he attacks each song with the vengeance of a hellhound.
Wearing a bright-red rhinestone-studded jacket and skinny black rock-and-roll jeans, sporting the Dwight Yoakam I'm-not-balding cowboy hat look, he spent his set charging about the stage as if on the eve of Judgment Day.
He twirled his microphone cord like a lasso, gripped the mike stand as if his legs would buckle, and then fell to his knees to drive home particular notes on pain and misery.
He grinned, kicked and howled.
He stomped all over country, and retuned rock with hillbilly angst.


COMPANY NEWS
BIC Corp., Milford, Conn., agreed to acquire Wite-Out Products Inc., the second-largest American manufacturer of correction fluid.
Terms were not disclosed.
COLLEGE BOUND INC., Plantation, Fla., an educational courses and services concern, agreed to sell its subsidiary, Apts, a test preparation company, to its former owner, Jack Goetz, subject to approval by the Federal Bankruptcy Court.
Terms were not disclosed.


Mercom Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Drivers to Vote on Contract That Would Reduce Staffing
Newspaper delivery drivers are scheduled to vote tomorrow on new contracts that would sharply reduce their numbers over several years and introduce other economies in exchange for job guarantees, retirement bonuses and other incentives.
The latest version of the contracts with The New York Times and a distributor would for the first time permit part-time workers as drivers, something long opposed by the union, which has insisted on full-time wages no matter how many hours are worked.


'I've Never Felt Like A Stranger at Home'
To the Editor:
Although I too am a Japanese-American, I found David Mura's "Bashed in the U.S.A." (Op-Ed, April 29) disturbing because his attitude about his heritage and looks is, and should be, far from universal among Japanese-Americans.
I am half nisei and half sansei (second- and third-generation Japanese-American).
My Japanese mother was born an American citizen and was raised on a small farm in Utah.
My father was born in Japan and came to the United States at age 9.
In 1951, at 40, my father was naturalized as an American citizen.
This was his lifelong dream despite having lost everything during World War II when he was treated as an enemy alien.


Car Mart Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Corrections
An article yesterday about the sentencing of a Nazi war criminal in Stuttgart referred to the Simon Wiesenthal Center incorrectly in some copies.
It is based in Los Angeles.


LeaRonal Inc. reports earnings for Year to Feb 29


Ecogen Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Teen-Agers Found Slain In the Bronx
Three teen-age boys -- two 15-year-olds and one 16-year-old -- were found shot to death late Monday night in a neighbor's Bronx apartment where they had gone to watch videos, the police said.
As of late yesterday, investigators said, they had not determined a motive.


Keating Associate Pleads Guilty
A former top aide to Charles H. Keating Jr., the owner of the Lincoln Savings and Loan Association, pleaded guilty today to Federal bank and securities fraud charges, becoming the second Keating associate in less than a week to admit wrongdoing in the institution's $2.6 billion collapse.
Judith E. Wischer, 43, of Paradise Valley, Ariz., pleaded guilty to two counts of bank fraud and one count of securities fraud during a hearing before United States District Judge Mariana Pfaelzer.


Court Blocks Giant Tower Proposed By Kalikow
Peter S. Kalikow's plan to replace 4 of 14 historic tenements on the Upper East Side with an enormous apartment tower was blocked yesterday by a New York State appeals court, which upheld the landmark designation of the entire tenement complex.
As significant as the impact is on Mr.
Kalikow's project, the unanimous ruling by the Appellate Division of the Supreme Court in Manhattan could send an even broader signal: that landmark designations cannot be compromised for political reasons.


Executive Changes
AMERICAN EXPRESS TRAVEL AND TRAVEL MANAGEMENT SERVICES GROUP, New York, a unit of American Express, named John J. P. McDonnell senior vice president and chief financial officer.
CHEMED CORP., Cincinnati, a diversified company with interests in plumbing, janitorial products and services, medical and dental supply distribution and pharmacy management, named Kevin J. McNamara vice chairman, secretary and general cousel and Timothy S. O'Toole executive vice president and treasurer.


Tarnished Rainbow; Under the Stars, a Bitter Strike
Susan Grymes stood before 30 Rockefeller Center and faced a dilemma.
Next to her, two dozen strikers called to her, sometimes plaintively, sometimes angrily, not to go in.
Above her, 65 floors to be exact, the panoramic views, the ballroom in the clouds, the elegant 1930's decor, the spicy salmon tartare -- in short, the Rainbow Room -- called to her to come up.
She paused to glance at a union flier, then forged through the revolving doors, her husband and two friends in tow, grimacing under a barrage of chants, whistles and catcalls from the strikers.


Abitibi-Price Announces a Sale to Alco Standard
Abitibi-Price Inc., the world's leading producer of newsprint and 82 percent owned by the Reichmann brothers of Toronto, announced today the sale of its paper distribution business in both the United States and Canada to the Alco Standard Corporation of Valley Forge, Pa.
The sale price was $340 million (Canadian), or $284 million (United States).
The transaction has been under negotiation for the last two years, said Ronald Y. Oberlander, president and chief executive officer.
He insisted at a news conference here that it was not related to the Reichmanns' decision last Thursday to seek court protection from creditors in the Canadian real estate operations of their privately owned Olympia &amp; York Developments Ltd.


Yields Down Moderately On Bank Funds and C.D.'s
Yields on bank money market accounts and certificates of deposit fell moderately in the week ended today, The Bank Rate Monitor said in its most recent survey.
The decline for the last week was sharper outside the New York area, where the yields on both money market accounts and six-month certificates of deposit dropped four basis points.
There are 100 basis points in a percentage point.
In the New York area, the average commercial bank and savings banks rates were off one basis point.


Fred's Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 4


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.25-6.5
6.25-6.5
8.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.75
3.88
5.76
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.52
3.60
5.49
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.61
3.68
5.67
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.83
6.94
7.92
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.76
7.81
8.24
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.68
8.75
9.30
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.61
6.62
7.22
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-13  THAILAND ROUNDS UP PROTESTERS
Soldiers arrested thousands of demonstrators in Bangkok, snuffing out a new round of protests led by Thais enraged by army attacks that have left dozens of civilians dead.
The military-dominated Government appears to have succeeded, for now, in quelling the protests.
A1
The Thai middle and upper classes are protesting, too.  A10
Japan said it would not press Bangkok to halt the crackdown.
A10  POLISH GENERAL UNBOWED
Wojciech Jaruzelski, the former leader of the formerly Communist Poland, seems unbowed these days as he works to secure his place in history.
The general is in the midst of a publicity blitz: He has completed two books, a memoir, and a detailed defense, issued this week, of his 1981 decision to impose martial law.
A1  NORTHERN NIGERIA BLEEDS
Nigerian troops put down communal riots in the north that have taken at least 200 lives of Muslims and Christians in the last three days in Kaduna state.
Hospitals and morgues in the region are overflowing.
A3  WAS IRAQ TRULY NUCLEAR?
An extraordinary secret gathering of nuclear weapons designers from the United States, Britain, France and Russia has concluded that on the eve of the Persian Gulf war, Iraq was further from producing a weapon than had been estimated.
A6
Voters in Iraq's Kurdish north lined up early and late to cast ballots.
A6  NUCLEAR PACT WITH KAZAKHSTAN
President Bush and the visiting leader of Kazakhstan agreed on plans to make the former Soviet republic a non-nuclear state within the decade, effectively clearing the way for application of the strategic arms reduction treaty between Washington and the Soviet Union's heirs.
A3  BOSNIAN CRIES OUT FOR HELP
In an impassioned plea for intervention to save his country, the Foreign Minister of Bosnia and Herzegovina said in Washington that he regarded international inaction thus far as a "disgrace for humanity.  A5  ISRAELI LABOR PARTY LEADS POLLS
Israel's campaign got officially under way, with the opposition Labor Party enjoying an impressive lead in polls and the governing Likud Party seemingly in trouble with many of its traditional supporters.
A7  Deopham Green Journal: The Yanks are back in East Anglia.
A4  Azerbaijan's Parliament dissolves and transfers its authority.
A12  National A14-21, B7  QUAYLE SEES URBAN DECADENCE
In a direct appeal to Republican conservatives two weeks before the California Presidential primary, the Vice President delivered a speech in which he said that the Los Angeles riots were a result of a "poverty of values" in urban areas and that the nation should show no sympathy to the rioters.
A1
Excerpts from the Vice President's speech.  A20
The Justice Department issued its study on police misconduct.  A18
Another April riot, in Long Beach, was largely overlooked.
A20  BUSH AND THE ENVIRONMENT
As the recession lingers and the election nears, the Administration has engaged in a pattern of changing environmental laws and rules so that more Federal land and natural resources will be opened to development.
A1  ACTION ON FETAL RESEARCH
President Bush said the Government would set up storage banks of fetal tissue to be used in medical research.
But the banks would collect tissue only from miscarriages and tubal pregnancies, not induced abortions.
Critics said this would never be enough.
A1  BACKING FOR WARREN REPORT
Breaking their 28-year silence, the two pathologists who performed the autopsy on President Kennedy affirmed their finding that he had been hit by only two bullets, fired from above and behind, and that one of them had caused the head wound that killed him.
And five doctors who cared for the wounded President in the emergency room of a Dallas hospital said they had observed nothing that would contradict the pathologists.
A1  COSTS OF PEACE, AND A DIVIDEND
Congress is drawing up plans to set aside $1 billion from the 1993 Pentagon budget to help displaced military personnel and communities hurt by military cutbacks.
A14  DISPUTED EXECUTION NEARS
A bizarre mixture of law, politics and public relations dominated what may have been Roger Keith Coleman's last full day on earth.
Mr.
Coleman, who has been joined by many supporters in his assertion that he is innocent of murder, is to be executed by Virginia tonight.
A14
Governors wield vast discretion on clemency.  A14  PEROT AND HIS FINANCES
A financial disclosure form described by election officials as the most extensive they can recall offers only a suggestion of Ross Perot's vast wealth.
A21
On the road, Clinton is stitching together his message.  A21
Brown assailed the Democratic platform process.
A21  Education Page B8  A high school for dropouts closes, partly because it is too innovative.
Campus Journal: At Johns Hopkins, an 18-year-old has earned 3 degrees.
Metropolitan Digest, B1 DROPOUTS IN DECLINE
Fewer students are dropping out of school in New York City than in previous years.
School board officials take credit for the change, saying years of hounding truants and pressing students to complete required courses are paying off.
The dropout rate has improved nationwide, but New York has done even better than most cities.
A1  REVIVING THE WEST SIDE
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and Mayor David N. Dinkins have agreed on yet another plan to revive the West Side of Manhattan with a new highway, this one from the Battery to 59th Street.
The plan, the latest effort to resuscitate a waterfront left derelict by the decline of shipping, designates three riverfront sites for commercial or residential development.
A1  Business Digest, D1  The Living Section C1-13  The post-modern burger.
C1  Barcelona's tapas bars.
C1  Health Page C14  Is there male menopause?
Sports B9-14  Baseball: Yanks win in 10th.
B9  Basketball: Pride as Knicks leave.
B9  Arts/Entertainment C15-22  Film: "The Enchantment" C15  Obituaries D21  Editorials/Op-Ed A22-23  Editorials A22  Two shots, from the rear.
Brutal betrayal in Thailand.
Licenses, and liberty.
Dying for federalism.
Letters A22  Anna Quindlen: No place like home.
A23  Jenonne Walker: No more Yugoslavias.
A23  Paul Simon: Discipline is overdue.
A23  Rudolph G. Penner: No will.
No way!
A23


Westwood Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


GZA GeoEnvironmental Tech reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29


New York State Colleges Need a Fiscal Pledge for the Future; What's at Stake
To the Editor:
We cannot pretend to offer quality higher education through our state's public and private institutions without paying for it, one way or another, as your April 22 editorial "Higher Education -- or Lower?" indicates.
State financing for higher education -- public and private -- is sadly out of sync with expectations for quality.
Even in these dire economic times, action is possible right now.
We can begin immediately by formulating (at long last) a coherent, rational public policy for higher education.
What's at stake is not simply the future of our colleges and universities.
Hanging in the balance is the educated work force that the modern industrial economy requires -- and, more important, the future of our children.
DENNIS O'BRIEN Albany, May 1, 1992 The writer, president of the University of Rochester, is chairman of the Commission on Independent Colleges and Universities.


Valley Forge Scientific Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


'Buckyballs' as Filters: Purer Gases May Result
The "buckyball," a type of carbon molecule shaped like a soccer ball, may prove to be a highly efficient filter for separating gases, according to scientists at Sandia National Laboratories in Albuquerque, N.M.
Buckyballs, which were discovered in the mid-1980's, are hollow molecules of 60 or 70 carbon atoms that resemble the geodesic domes designed by R. Buckminster Fuller, the late architect and inventor.
Technically, the molecules are called buckminsterfullerenes.


Paul Harris Stores Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to May 2


Public &amp; Private; No Place Like Home
Homeless is like the government wanting you locked up And the people in America do not like you.
They look at you and see Beast!
I wish the people would help the homeless And stop their talking. -- Frank S. Rice, The Rio Times
The building is beautiful, white and beige and oak, the colors of Yuppie.
The rehab of the Rio came in $700,000 under budget, two months ahead of schedule.
The tenants say they will not mess it up, no, no, no.
"When you don't have a place and you get a good place, the last thing you want to do is lose it," said one man who slept in shelters for seven years, seven years during which you might have gotten married, or lost a loved one, or struck it rich, but all this guy did was live on the streets.


Review/Film; A Freudian Fairy Tale in Which Passion Is All
"The Enchantment," a Japanese film opening today at the Joseph Papp Public Theater, is a richly romantic melodrama that would seem to suggest that schizophrenia is the common cold of contemporary Tokyo.
Yet it is a work of such self-assured style and acerbic humor that it also suggests that Shunichi Nagasaki, the man who directed it, could be one of Japan's more promising new film makers.
The title is appropriate.
"The Enchantment" is a hip, dark fairy tale for movie Freudians, about a passion so all-consuming that it has the power to transform reality for the object of that passion.
In its particulars, "The Enchantment" recalls those lush Hollywood melodramas of the 1950's in which women suffer dreadfully, sometimes to the point of permanent psychological damage, in a world in which nothing matters except love.


CUOMO AND DINKINS OFFER A NEW PLAN FOR THE WEST SIDE
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and Mayor David N. Dinkins have agreed on a plan to revive Manhattan's decrepit West Side waterfront with a 40-acre ribbon of parkland that would be bordered by a proposed new highway and commercial development from the Battery to 59th Street.
The plan, the latest in a long series of efforts to resuscitate a waterfront left derelict by the decline of shipping, designates three riverfront sites among the aging piers for commercial or residential development.


As Knicks Depart, Riley Reflects With Pride
The Knicks packed their belongings in their cars, said their goodbyes and drove away, leaving behind a season they could be proud of.
Two days after their season-ending loss to the Chicago Bulls in Game 7 of the Eastern Conference semifinals, the Knicks met for the last time at their practice site.


Oshap Technologies Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


KMC Enterprises Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Bosnian, in U.S. to Seek Aid, Assails Inaction
In an impassioned plea for armed intervention to save the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina from starvation and slaughter, the country's Foreign Minister said here today that the world's inaction was a "disgrace for humanity."
The Foreign Minister, Haris Silajdzic, said the world was standing on the sidelines as it had done in the face of Nazi atrocities in the 1930's.


Cato Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to May 2


Corrections
Because of an editing error, a list in Business Day on Monday with an article about large book advances for authors omitted an agent for Kitty Kelley.
He is Wayne Kayback.
The list also referred incorrectly to a part of the Kelley deal; audio rights were not included.


60-Minute Gourmet
WITH Memorial Day around the corner, many cooks' thoughts turn to barbecues.
If you are limited to a city apartment without a suitable terrace, broiling is the next-best method.
In fact, from purely a cooking standpoint, broiling is often preferable because less moisture is lost than when cooking over an open fire.
Whichever method you choose, there are ways to save cooking time by making a quick sauce from marinating liquids.
Marinades are so often discarded when they could be put to good use.
Those concerned about the liquid's having been in contact with raw meat should understand that the process of sauce reduction, which brings it to a boil, sterilizes it.
In the recipe here, reduce the marinade liquids by one-half over high heat immediately after cooking the brochettes.


Integrated Waste Service reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  A NEW VISION FOR THE WEST SIDE
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and Mayor David N. Dinkins have agreed to create a joint agency to revive Manhattan's decrepit West Side waterfront, a potentially significant milestone in a project that has been stalled more than two decades.
They envision a 40-acre ribbon of parkland straddled by a new highway from the Battery to 59th Street and three possible riverfront sites for commercial or residential development.
A1.
A DECLINE IN DROPOUT RATES
New York City reported a significant decline in the number of students dropping out of high school.
Board of Education officials said that years of hounding truants and pressing students to complete their courses were finally paying off.
But they acknowledged that a sluggish economy, with diminished job prospects, might be partly responsible for the improvement.
A1.
AN AIDS ACCORD, AND QUESTIONS


Review/Theater; Stylish and Affluent Extra Man With Dark Views and Dark Plot
The title of Richard Greenberg's new play about contemporary Manhattanites, "The Extra Man," has the ring of S. N. Behrman and Philip Barry.
One pictures an elegant bachelor in a tuxedo, a Cary Grant updated to the Jay McInerney era, making mischief at dinner parties of the rich and famous.
But Mr.
Greenberg, whose other plays about New York's present-day upper middle class include "The Maderati" and "Eastern Standard," is not in so buoyant a mood.
While his extra man is a bachelor, a congenital partygoer and a mischief-maker, this one leaves wrecked lives, not smashed champagne flutes, in his nocturnal wake.
Remarkably unpleasant and thoroughly misanthropic, "The Extra Man" is a daring effort not to be dismissed lightly.
It's a play that wants to make the audience at the Manhattan Theater Club uncomfortable and does so, though not always in the way its author intends.
At once underwritten and overdirected (by Mr. Greenberg's longtime collaborator, Michael Engler), "The Extra Man" lacks the surgical comic precision its dark mission requires.
For every scene in which Mr.
Greenberg levels his indictment against humanity with his typically astringent wit, there is at least another one that coarsens his case or muddies it.


Healthcare International reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Consolidated Imaging Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
May 15
May 8
May 17
1992
1992
1991
Gasoline production, daily
7.1
6.9
7.0
Distillate production, daily
2.9
2.8
2.8
Gasoline stocks
215.9
216.3
209.4
Distillate stocks
90.5
89.8
101.9
Crude imports, daily
5.8
6.0
6.3
Product imports, daily
2.1
2.0
1.6
Crude stocks
353.7
353.5
344.9
Crude production, daily
7.2
7.2
7.3
Refinery utilization (%)
89.3
85.0
86.3
(Source: American Petroleum Institute)


Theater in Review
Dancing on the White House Lawn  The Ballroom 253 West 28th Street Manhattan Through May 30  By Donna Blue Lachman; directed by David Petrarca.
Presented by Tim Johnson.
WITH: Ms.
Lachman.
Anyone who ever boasted of being a hippie is likely to relate to the true stories that Donna Blue Lachman, a 41-year-old Chicago-based playwright and actress, tells in her engaging autobiographical monologue, "Dancing on the White House Lawn."


Doctors Affirm Kennedy Autopsy Report
Breaking a 28-year silence, the two pathologists who performed the autopsy on President John F. Kennedy have affirmed their original findings that he was hit by only two bullets, fired from above and behind, and that one of them caused the massive head wound that killed him.
And four of five other doctors who attended the President in the emergency room of a Dallas hospital said they observed nothing while treating him that contradicts the pathologists' findings.
They also criticized another doctor in the emergency room that day, one whose new book asserts a conspiracy to cover up evidence that the President was shot from the front, not the back.
Some Questions Answered
The two pathologists, who were Navy medical officers at the time of the autopsy, and the five other doctors have not previously discussed the Kennedy assassination, except before the Warren Commission that investigated it.
They made their assertions in interviews reported in the May 27 issue of The Journal of the American Medical Association.


I.B.M. Shows Library for Data Storage
I.B.M., seeking to fill a glaring hole in its $7.2 billion computer data-storage business, yesterday introduced its first tape library system to handle vast storehouses of corporate information automatically.
The market for the digital tape libraries is booming, as large data processing customers attempt to cope with an information explosion created by new computer applications affecting virtually all aspects of business and government.


MLX Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Corrections
An article in Business Day yesterday about a settlement by Shearson Lehman Brothers Inc. and the New York Stock Exchange over an accusation of stock manipulation characterized an article in Equities magazine incorrectly.
The article did not state that two former Shearson executives, Mitchell R. Meisler and Michael Dobin, had manipulated stocks.
Neither Mr.
Meisler nor Mr.
Dobin was involved in the case that led to the settlement.


Personal Health
DESPITE renewed interest in estrogens to treat the sometimes distressing symptoms of menopause and its long-term effects on the health of the heart and bones, fewer than one woman in five who has reached that stage of life now uses hormone replacement therapy.
For those who do not, many other options are available to help limit the immediate and distant health effects of the menopausal decline in estrogen.
Hormone replacement is clearly not for every menopausal woman.
Some have medical conditions or family medical histories that make hormone therapy inadvisable.
Some fear the suspected long-term risks, like breast cancer, and others react adversely to the treatment.
Even among those who start hormone therapy, only about one-third use it regularly, and many abandon the treatments after the most common immediate symptoms of menopause, hot flashes, subside.


Banyan Strategic Land Trust reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Personal Finances; Bulging Document Shows Perot Wealth
An extensive financial disclosure form made public today for Ross Perot suggests how vast his wealth is, while also showing the Dallas businessman to be an investor with most of his money in American holdings.
Mr.
Perot was required to file the 132-page report with the Federal Election Commission last Friday because, even though he has not formally declared his Presidential candidacy, he has raised or spent more than $5,000 to promote it.


CHRONICLE
During the evening of readings held by the Literacy Volunteers of New York City on Monday, BARBARA BUSH told ARNOLD SCAASI, who sat next to her, "Tonight was a 100-percent evening."
The First Lady, who wore a short black and white polka-dot Scaasi dress, was the honored guest at the event, which has become a ritual on the social calendar.
Reading from "The Reader," a short story by John Lang, she could not resist deftly interjecting her spouse's name into the narrative.
"You didn't think I'd not mention the world's greatest reader," she said with a broad smile.


As Trash Piles Up, Yonkers Mayor Takes On Teamsters
In a test of wills between a new administration and the politically powerful teamsters' union, the Mayor today threatened stiff fines for sanitation workers whose slowed pace had resulted in 200 tons of trash piling up along city streets.
Since last Thursday, a lot of garbage has gone uncollected and non-emergency police calls have backed up, apparently because of a work slowdown touched off by recent layoffs and contract disputes involving municipal workers in the state's fourth-largest city.
Bomb threats caused the temporary evacuation of City Hall and the Police Department last week, and the evacuation of City Hall and the Department of Parks and Recreation today.


Campaign Promotes Hepatitis Vaccine
The National Foundation for Infectious Diseases is introducing an unusually bold and colorful public service campaign aimed at alerting young adults to the dangers of hepatitis B.
The campaign, created by Creamer Dickson Basford Public Relations and Commotion Marketing in New York, was financed by a $200,000 grant from SmithKline Beecham in Philadelphia.
It is scheduled to be introduced in Washington today.


Randers Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


McCarty-Cooper Tribal Art Is Sold
The tribal-art collection of William A. McCarty-Cooper, an interior designer, was auctioned yesterday for a total of $3.3 million at Christie's in New York.
Bidding was frequently enthusiastic, and dealers and collectors seemed relieved that in this troubled period 143 of the 180 offerings were sold at the auction, which had been estimated to bring $3 million to $4 million.
Mr.
McCarty-Cooper collected tribal art between 1984 and his death last May in Los Angeles at age 53.
Twelve of the carvings and artifacts up for bidding were inherited in 1984 from his companion and adoptive father, Douglas Cooper, the British historian of the Cubist period.
This was the final session of the sale of the McCarty-Cooper collection, which also included Cubist art and furnishings.
In all, it brought $28 million.
The Cubist art, which was sold last week, brought $21.5.


2 Big Agencies Waiting for Chrysler's Other Shoe to Fall
THERE is an adage in the agency business that shops should approach their work as if every advertisement they create for clients might be their last.
Now, two giant agencies handling two giant automotive accounts are confronting exactly that unpleasant possibility, because one of those accounts has been a target for extinction.
Last week, Robert J. Eaton, the designated successor to Lee A. Iacocca as chairman of the Chrysler Corporation, confirmed speculation that the No. 3 auto maker would phase out one of its four car lines to reduce sales and marketing costs and, it is hoped, improve the awareness of Chrysler's remaining brands.
Any such decision, said Mr.
Eaton, who is Chrysler's vice chairman, would affect either Plymouth or Eagle, which sell fewer units than the company's Dodge and Chrysler nameplates.
Not since 1960 has an automotive agency faced a similar problem.
Then, too, it was Chrysler that discontinued one of its car lines, DeSoto, in a decision that cost BBDO , which had handled DeSoto since 1944, a multimillion-dollar acount.
The demise of Plymouth, which Chrysler introduced in 1928 as an alternative to lower-priced automobiles like Chevrolet and Ford --"Look at all three," early campaigns urged -- would be a blow to Bozell Inc. in Southfield, Mich.
Plymouth ad spending last year totaled $36.1 million, according to Advertising Age.
And if the Eagle brand, which had an estimated $29 million in ad spending last year, goes, it would be a blow to Campbell-Mithun-Esty , which also handles that account out of Southfield, a Detroit suburb.
Chrysler introduced Eagle in 1987 after acquiring American Motors, which had developed the line as an automobile companion to its Jeep sports-utility vehicles.
As a result of Chrysler's plans, each agency finds itself in a highly unusual position.
Not only is each required to continue selling cars to consumers in an unruly economic climate, agency executives must somehow also sell the client, no less, on the necessity of continuing the car line itself.
"The only thing the agencies can do is to make a last-ditch effort to sell the strategy for those products and how they fit into the marketplace," said Allen A. McCusker, a principal of the Canaan Parish Group, an advertising and marketing consulting company in New Canaan, Conn.
"Go in and make a defense," he advised, "that says, 'If you spend more money and say so-and-so, we could make a business out of this.' "
Two executives who advertise automobiles not directly competitive with Plymouth or Eagle also offered suggestions.
"Either agency should not worry about itself, but about Chrysler," said Marvin Sloves, chairman and chief executive of Scali, McCabe, Sloves in New York, which handles Mercedes-Benz of North America's national account.
"It's an opportunity to show you care about the client," Mr.
Sloves added.
"The very act of doing that, being honest and fair, might help you get more business from Chrysler."
Indeed, advertising history bolsters Mr.
Sloves's argument, because BBDO did not fare too badly when Chrysler closed DeSoto.
To compensate the agency for that loss, Chrysler awarded BBDO another of its accounts, Dodge, which had been at the Grant agency.
And BBDO has kept Dodge to this day.
But Martin Puris, president and chief executive at Ammirati &amp; Puris in New York, which handles BMW of North America, was less sanguine about the agencies' ability to influence Chrysler.
"An agency in this sort of situation is trapped," he said.
"They can make the case for their particular brands, but in the end, the decision will be made for such a wide variety of reasons. I would say my prayers."
For whichever agency whose car line is selected to go the way of the Packard and Studebaker, the loss is likely to be cushioned by additional work that it already performs for Chrysler.
Besides Plymouth, Bozell handles advertising under the Chrysler name, for Chrysler cars, the Town and Country mini-van and corporate image ads.
Chrysler ad spending totaled $119.7 million last year, according to Advertising Age.
And in addition to Eagle, Campbell-Mithun-Esty handles Jeep.
According to Advertising Age, Chrysler spent $58.2 million last year on Jeep ads.


Software Etc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 2


Leisure Concepts Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Bonilla Ignites Mets to Victory
Forget the tale of the tape.
It was inadequate for the story of Bobby Bonilla's home run.
The shot in the sixth inning might have traveled 430 feet, and 450 wouldn't be hard to believe.
Its measurement, though, didn't begin to quantify its significance.
Bonilla, whose power outage had darkened his ebullient disposition and drained the Mets of offense, unloaded a two-run blast to right-center to unburden himself of anxiety and secure what became an 8-0 rout of the Padres.


Artra Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Wheaton Is Upset
Top-seeded David Wheaton of the United States was upset yesterday by Lars Koslowski of Germany in the first round of the Muratti tournament in Bologna, Italy.
Koslowski made quick work of Wheaton, defeating him by 6-4, 6-3 in the $240,000 event.
Wheaton was the only American playing in the clay-court ATP tournament.
In other upsets, Diego Nargiso of Italy defeated Javier Sanchez of Spain, seeded third, 6-2, 6-3.
Nargiso is ranked 82d in the world, while Sanchez is ranked 33d. (AP)


Tumult of Los Angeles Echoed in Long Beach
Once again, Cambodian refugees here have been made the victims of a sideshow, their adopted city largely ignored in its copycat wave of rioting last month, much as the fighting in their homeland was overshadowed in the 1970's by the Vietnam War.
Three hundred forty fires were set, 1 person died, 361 were injured and 1,200 people were arrested in the worst civil disorders in the history of Long Beach.
But residents watching on television for news of their city found mostly the flames of Los Angeles, 20 miles north.


Theater in Review
Macbeth  One Dream Theater 2 North Moore Street TriBeCa Through June 7 By William Shakespeare; directed by Edward Berkeley; set and costumes by Miguel Lopez-Castillo; lighting by Steven Rust; fight director, Bjorn Johnson.
Presented by the Willow Cabin Theater Company.
WITH: John Billeci, John Bolger, Laurence Gleason, Cecil Hoffmann, Angela Nevard, Adam Oliensis, Dede Pochos, Linda Powell and Michael Rispoli.
An impish spirit of mirth keeps flitting through the Willow Cabin Theater Company's production of "Macbeth" at the One Dream Theater, upending what appears to be an attempt to present the tragedy seriously.
Scottish accents wander from mouth to mouth and then fade altogether; Lady Macbeth's doctor is a startlingly campy apparition who adds no credibility at all to the sleepwalking scene, from which the doomed woman flees with a shriek to empty tombs; wounded Macduff and dead Macbeth scurry offstage on their knees after the last battle.


Congress Seeks $1 Billion for Helping Those Hurt in Military Spending Cuts
In a largely symbolic effort to soften the blow of declining military spending, Congress is drawing up plans to set aside $1 billion in the Pentagon's budget next year to help communities, displaced military personnel and workers at weapon factories.
Supporters of the plans concede that $1 billion in a military budget of more than $275 billion will put only a dent in the problem.
But proponents say the spending could be matched with state and local funds and used in proven programs adopted by private businesses.


Deane Marks Lee; Supporter of Charities, 74
Deane Marks Lee, a longtime resident of White Plains, N.Y. who was active in several Westchester County charities, died yesterday at White Plains Hospital.
She was 74.
Mrs. Lee died of lung cancer, said Heidi Bulow, one of her grandchildren.


Littlefield, Adams &amp; Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Vincent and Steinbrenner Have a Chat
George Steinbrenner, who nearly two years ago chose a permanent ban as the Yankees' managing partner instead of a two-year suspension, met yesterday with Fay Vincent, the commissioner of baseball, seeking to change their agreement so he can return to active duty with the Yankees.
Steinbrenner and his lawyer, Arnold Burns, met for slightly more than an hour with Vincent and Steve Greenberg, the deputy commissioner, at the Ritz-Carlton Hotel in Manhattan.  'Further Discussion'


Olympia Gives Warning on One Building
A unit of Olympia &amp; York Developments Ltd. yesterday told holders of two series of bonds it sold to finance 55 Water Street that starting next summer it would not be able to make its debt payments on the property, a 3.6-million-square-foot office building in lower Manhattan.
The structure at 55 Water Street, the largest office building in the world, is one of Olympia &amp; York's most troubled New York City properties.
Its value has fallen drastically over the last six years, and it has an asbestos problem that will cost at least $20 a square foot to remedy.


Islanders Still Frozen In a Transition Game
The partial sale of the Islanders was announced Dec. 10.
The deal, which included a transfer of management power, was approved by the National Hockey League on April 6.
But the four Long Island-based investors who are to take over the business are still on the outside looking in.
At a critical time of the year, when the June draft is being planned and season tickets are being marketed, the franchise limps along under its old management.
John Pickett still owns 100 percent of the team.
Bill Torrey is still general manager and chairman.
Just what is going on here?
"Obviously, it is taking somewhat longer than we had hoped," said Robert Rosenthal, one of the new investors, who is to become one of two co-chairmen.
"Our agenda is to get it completed by the end of this month. I am optimistic. I believe we will be able to close this transaction by the end of the month. By June, instead of fledgling, prospective new owners, we will be partial owners of the team."
Perhaps such a delay is to be expected in one of the more unusual transfers of power in the recent history of local pro sports franchises.
Pickett put his team on the market in early 1991, but couldn't get a buyer for the whole thing at the price he wanted.
So he sold 10 percent of the Islanders to a group headed by Rosenthal and three partners, who have the option to buy up to 50 percent in five years.
In addition, all parties say, the new investors will have full operational control, although Pickett will be consulted on the overall budget.
Among the snags in this arrangement are the signing of "consents" by businesses that have contracts with the franchise.
These businesses include Nassau County, which owns Nassau Coliseum, where the Islanders play, and SportsChannel, the cable TV company that carries their games.
Rosenthal said there was no major problem with the county.
When asked about SportsChannel, he said he couldn't discuss details of the Islanders' contract with that operation.
There has been recent speculation that SportsChannel might have the right to renegotiate the deal, which pays the team an estimated $10 million per season.
Calls to SportsChannel yielded no answers.
Pickett didn't return a call for comment.
Another, major part of the transition that is unsettled is the role of Torrey.
After 20 years as the team's most influential executive, Torrey isn't certain to return.
The new group has offered him a position as general manager.
His title of chairman would be shared by Rosenthal and Stephen Walsh, another investor, but Torrey may retain a voice on the league's board of governors.
"We are having ongoing discussions with Bill Torrey at this point and nothing has changed," said Rosenthal, who chose his words carefully.
"It is our understanding that if Bill remains as the general manager, he will have a place in the league. It is our feeling at this point that if Bill stays as the general manager, he will be on the board of governors representing the Islanders."
In recent weeks, Torrey's name has been linked to several franchises in the market for executives, including the Hartford Whalers, who last week dismissed Ed Johnston, their vice president and general manager.
Neither Torrey nor Richard Gordon, owner of the the Whalers, returned calls requesting comment.
In 20 years with the Islanders, Torrey has a record that has covered the spectrum.
He built an expansion team that won the Stanley Cup in four consecutive seasons from 1980 through 1983.
He also oversaw the decline of a franchise that now is among the league leaders in empty seats and has failed to qualify for the playoffs in three of the last four seasons.
Is Bill Torrey part of the problem?
Will Torrey be part of the solution?
These are major questions to be decided by a minority ownership, perhaps as soon as next month.


INSIDE
200 Die in Nigerian Riots
Troops in armored cars and helicopters put down riots in northern Nigeria that the police said had taken the lives of more than 200 Christians and Muslims.
Page A3.
Furor Over Study on Police
A Justice Department study of police brutality drew few conclusions, an outcome that brought immediate criticism in Congress.
Page A18.
Auto Dealer to Forfeit Assets
The Long Island auto dealer accused of defrauding General Motors has agreed to turn over close to $400 million in assets.
Page B1.
Is There a Male Menopause?
Some studies suggest a slump of the male hormone testosterone with age, but there is a deep division on whether supplements are needed.
Page C14.


Salvador Nava, Mexico Politician And Ophthalmologist, Dies at 78
Salvador Nava Martinez, an ophthalmologist whose gritty political battles against Mexico's long-ruling party made him a symbol of opposition demands for greater democracy, died on Monday night in his home city of San Luis Potosi.
Dr.
Nava, who was 78 years old, died of a heart attack provoked by an abdominal infection, his son, Manuel Nava, said by telephone from San Luis Potosi.


Britain Will Not Seek U.S. Pilots' Extradition
The Government made clear today that it would not try to extradite or prosecute two United States Air Force pilots found by a British inquiry to have been responsible for killing nine British infantrymen in an air-to-ground missile attack during the Persian Gulf War.
"The sad fact is that terrible accidents of this sort do sometimes occur," Prime Minister John Major said in the House of Commons.
The debate was prompted by the finding of a coroner's jury on Monday night that the Britons' deaths had been caused by the American pilots' errors and failure to observe standard procedures.


To the Kurds, Wistful Wish Becomes Real
Long before polls opened early today in this dusty collective village in Kurdish-controlled northern Iraq, Sultan Bagok Mustafa was waiting to vote in the Kurds' first free elections outside of Iraqi control.
When polling doors opened at 8 A.M. in a rustic primary school classroom here, Mr.
Mustafa was the first villager through.


Kaiser Steel Resources reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Angelica Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to May 2


Economic Scene; Heading Off Heroin's Return
WHAT turned thousands of ordinarily law-abiding citizens of Los Angeles into looters?
While the seeds of the Los Angeles riots were surely nurtured in the deep muck of poverty and racial rage, economists who study illicit markets suggest there is a lot to be learned about explosive changes in crime from mundane analysis of deterrence and opportunity.
And the most striking explanation for such discontinuities is what Mark A. R. Kleiman of Harvard's Kennedy School of Government calls "enforcement swamping" -- the disequilibrium created when forces of deterrence are overwhelmed.
Once stated, the idea seems obvious: lawbreaking can have positive feedback effects, making it "cheaper" for others to join the fray.
But obvious ideas can be profound.
Mr.
Kleiman, the author of a new book on drug policy, "Against Excess" (Basic Books), contends that enforcement swamping explains why the use of crack cocaine reached epidemic proportions in the 1980's in spite of the billions spent to fight it.
And failure to learn from that failure, he argues, could lead to a heroin epidemic in the 1990's.


Liposome Technology Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Shakespeare Then, Shakespeare Now: What They Read in High School


Liberty Homes Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt *
Alabama Power Co., Birmingham, a unit of Southern Co., Atlanta, is offering $200 million in 8.50 percent first-mortgage bonds due May 1, 2022, priced at 99.375 to yield 8.557 percent through Kidder, Peabody.
Nonrefundable for five years, the bonds are rated A-1 by Moody's and A by S.&amp; P. *
Heritage Media Services Inc., a unit of Heritage Media Corp., Dallas, filed for up to $150 million of senior secured notes due 2002 through Goldman, Sachs.


Doubts Are Disappearing As Guerrero Shows the Way
Roberto Guerrero is amazed, and slightly upset, at how much healthier he has looked to everyone else since May 9.
That was the day he won the pole position for the Indianapolis 500 on Sunday by clocking a speed of 232.482 miles an hour.


Elisabeth Marton, Theater Agent, 90, In U.S. and Abroad
Elisabeth Marton, an agent who represented foreign playwrights in the United States and American playwrights overseas, died at her home in Manhattan on Monday.
She was 90 years old.
Ms. Marton died of a stroke, said Morton D. Stone, her companion.


Mahomes Leads Twins Past Jays
Twins 7, Blue Jays 1
TORONTO, May 19 (AP) -- Pat Mahomes, a rookie, allowed four hits in seven innings tonight to lead the Minnesota Twins to their fourth consecutive victory and ninth in 10 games, 7-1, over the slumping Toronto Blue Jays.
Mahomes (3-1) struck out five and walked three.
Tom Edens pitched the final two innings for his first save of the season as the Twins sent the Blue Jays to a season-high fifth consecutive loss.
White Sox 2, Royals 1


Dying for Federalism
"This is a case about federalism," said the Supreme Court last year as it ruled that Roger Coleman had forfeited his right to a Federal court hearing on his murder conviction and death sentence.
By federalism, the Court meant trusting states to provide justice without Federal judges' intrusions.
Mr.
Coleman's execution, scheduled for tonight in Virginia, perverts federalism.
It marks a modern low in the Federal judiciary's default as a guardian of justice.
In the name of states' rights, it exalts a state's right to take a life by invoking dubious technicalities.
And it exposes the utter failure of a governor and state legislature to secure fairness in capital cases.


Inmac Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to April 25


Military Crackdown in Thailand Blunts Protest Against Army Rule
Thai soldiers rounded up and arrested thousands of anti-Government demonstrators in the streets of Bangkok on Tuesday, snuffing out new, spontaneous protests led by Thais enraged by army attacks earlier this week that left at least 20 civilians dead.
Thousands of troops moved quickly this morning to contain new protests reported in the Thai capital.
On Tuesday, demonstrations were put down by squads of edgy soldiers who fired streams of bullets into the air.


ENVIRONMENT LAWS ARE EASED BY BUSH AS ELECTION NEARS
As the recession hangs on and the election nears, the Bush Administration has followed a pattern of altering environmental laws and regulations to open more Federal land and the nation's natural resources to development, top Administration officials say.
The pattern emerged last summer, when the White House proposed eliminating restrictions on building and development on half the nation's wetlands.
Since then the Administration has fostered a flurry of new proposals to make more of the nation's coal, timber, oil, water and land available to industry and agriculture.


Bush and Top Lawmakers Confer
President Bush and Congressional leaders met today to try to reach a consensus on a new urban policy, but as Republican and Democratic lawmakers left the White House they voiced very different visions of what should be done in the aftermath of the civil unrest in Los Angeles.
The kernel of their dispute was predictably money.
Democrats reissued their call that the 1990 budget agreement be reframed to permit transferring money from military programs to social ones.
Republicans warned that giving money to inefficient city governments, most of which are controlled by Democrats, would deepen the recession and fail to improve the lives of the urban poor.


People
*
Two executives at Levine, Huntley, Vick &amp; Beaver, New York, which closed last year, have joined other agencies.
Len Sternbach, who had been executive vice president and director of operations, was named senior vice president at Deutsch Inc., New York.
And James Dragoumis, who had been executive vice president and director of account services, was named executive vice president and marketing services director at Waring &amp; LaRosa, New York. *
Andy Dijak, who joined Ammirati &amp; Puris, New York, last May as one of two senior creative executives on the BMW account, has left the agency, said Martin Puris, the president and chief executive, confirming a report in Adweek.
Mr.
Dijak, a senior vice president and associate creative director, gained attention when his driver's license appeared in a BMW advertisement.
Mr.
Puris said a successor was being sought.


Mobile America Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


American National Petroleum reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Calprop Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Tufts Picks Michigan State's Leader as New President
Tufts University announced today that John DiBiaggio, the president of Michigan State University, would become Tuft's new president, replacing Jean Mayer.
Dr.
DiBiaggio, 59 years old, has spent most of his career as an administrator in public universities, the last seven years as president of Michigan State.


Officer Is Charged With Manslaughter
A New York City Housing Authority police officer has been indicted on manslaughter charges for shooting a man sitting in a parked car in Lower Manhattan 11 weeks ago, the Manhattan District Attorney's Office announced yesterday.
The indictment said Officer Jonas Bright, 39 years old, "recklessly caused" the man's death.
Based on the account of a woman in the car, the Housing Police Department has contended that Officer Bright fired his revolver when the man made a sudden movement.


Treasury Securities Up Sharply
The weakest monthly set of housing data in eight years pushed prices of Treasury securities up sharply yesterday, and long-term interest rates fell to their lowest levels since early February.
The housing data showed that starts fell by 17 percent last month, and that permits to build new houses fell for the second straight month.
The figures were far weaker than Wall Street economists had expected, and heightened expectations among credit market participants that the Federal Reserve Board would move soon to lower short-term interest rates.


Transactions
Baseball  American League
CHICAGO WHITE SOX -- Recalled Roberto Hernandez, pitcher, from Vancouver of the Pacific Coast League.
Optioned Esteban Beltre, shortstop, to Vancouver.
CLEVELAND INDIANS -- Placed Dave Otto, pitcher, on the 15-day disabled list.
Recalled Dave Rhode, infielder, from Colorado Springs of the Pacific Coast League.


Bangkok Upheaval Follows Year of Friction
More than a year of political friction, constitutional debate and military maneuvering lay behind the confrontation that exploded on the streets of Bangkok over the last 10 days, pitting the Thai Army against thousands of unarmed civilians in Bangkok and other cities.
The crowds were demanding the resignation of an unelected Prime Minister, Suchinda Kraprayoon, a recently retired general.
As supreme commander of the Thai armed forces, General Suchinda had plotted his way to power on a series of broken promises to restore a still-fragile democracy the army had abolished in February 1991.


S. Hadi Raza Ali; Pakistani Diplomat, 49
S.
Hadi Raza Ali, a Pakistani diplomat, died on May 11 in Islamabad, where he resided.
He was 49 years old.
He suffered a heart attack while jogging, the Pakistan Mission to the United Nations said.


Another Attempt at America's Heart
He has probably reached a point in his career at which comparisons with Jesse Owens no longer serve him properly.
In a dozen years of international competition, Carl Lewis has run and jumped into a higher level of consideration, certainly high enough to be considered the greatest Olympic track athlete the United States has ever produced.
Maybe high enough to be the greatest in any sport.
Owens's permanance as an Olympic icon was compressed into one bolt of brilliance, in the daunting Games of Nazi Berlin in 1936.
But Lewis matched Owens's performance -- with gold medals in the 100 meters, the 200 meters, the long jump and the 400-meter relay, at the Los Angeles Olympics in 1984 -- then set off to surpass those accomplishments over the next seven years.


Sports of The Times; Everybody's Imitating Commercials
YOU know sports are becoming too violent when even the baseball managers start fighting.
Personally, I blame television for Tony La Russa and Buck Showalter cocking fists last Sunday.
If television did not show violent items like hockey and basketball and commercials, this would be a safer world.
It is not a happy trend, these lean and angry whippersnappers who try to punch out each other's lights at home plate.
I can remember when most managers and coaches were wizened old codgers who sat around and conducted informal seminars on life and times.


Longs Drug Stores reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Corrections
A picture caption yesterday about Adirondack Park misidentified the man shown standing in woods.
He was Ray Fadden, who operates an Indian museum in the village of Onchiota in the park.


Mobile Phones Primed, Affluent Thais Join Fray
On one side of the battle are the guns. On the other, the cellular phones.
The protests that have shaken Thailand this week may long be remembered, not just for the brutal Government response, but for the way Thailand's middle and upper classes, fast growing and until now largely silent, stepped forward to demand a say in their Government.


Mercury Air Group reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Notre Dame Is Beaten By Stanford
Stanford University crushed the hopes and dreams of Notre Dame, an underdog challenger, today and reaffirmed its position as the dominant force in collegiate tennis by winning the National Collegiate Athletic Association team championship.
Seeded second, Stanford swept past the 10th-ranked Fighting Irish, 5-0, in singles.
Under its veteran coach, Dick Gould, Stanford has now won the team title 10 times in the last 16 years, beginning in 1977 when a separate team event was introduced.


Dundee Capital reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Multi-Color Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 29


Quotation of the Day
"In 1963, we proved at the autopsy table that President Kennedy was struck from above and behind by the fatal shot. I am tired of being beaten upon by people who are supremely ignorant of the scientific facts of the President's death." -- DR.
JAMES J. HUMES, a pathologist.  [ B7:1. ]


Cuomo Assailed for 'One-Shot' Budgeting
The state Comptroller, Edward V. Regan, charged today that the level of "one-shot" financing in the state budget adopted last month was much higher than the estimates provided by Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo.
The one-shots are much criticized because they represent sources of income that, by definition, do not recur in subsequent budgets.
As such, they may help to aggravate potential deficits in the future.


As Giants Shift Line, Roberts Is Reluctant
Less than 16 months ago, the Giants won Super Bowl XXV with an offensive line of, left to right, Jumbo Elliott, William Roberts, Bart Oates, Eric Moore and Doug Riesenberg.
Now they are shuffling three of those five players, and while the coaches expressed enthusiasm over the moves, Roberts did not.
As the Giants began a three-day minicamp for veterans today at Giants Stadium, Coach Ray Handley played down the significance of the changes, designed to improve pass protection.


Comarco Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 3


CF Income Partners reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


A Male Menopause? Jury Is Still Out
WITH talk of menopause reaching a passionate pitch nationwide, many are beginning to ask how the other half of the baby-boom generation is faring as it approaches 50.
They are wondering whether middle-aged men experience a drop in the sex hormones that sculptured their youthful bodies and minds, and if so how that biochemical dip might affect their health and temperament.


Dell Computer Profits Jump
The Dell Computer Corporation, a leading maker of I.B.M.-compatible personal computers, said today that it had earned $19.7 million in the first quarter, nearly twice the profit of the corresponding period a year ago.
Dell said it had earned 52 cents a share, on sales of $366.1 million, during the three months that ended on May 3.
In the 1991 period, the company earned $10 million, or 30 cents a share, on sales of $174.8 million.


Defense Sees Warmus as Framed in Killing
In closing arguments today at the Carolyn Warmus murder trial, her lawyer argued that the victim, Betty Jeanne Solomon, was "unwanted baggage" to her husband, Paul, and that he, not Ms.
Warmus, had the motive and the opportunity to kill her to clear the way for a series of affairs.
In saying Paul Solomon framed his former lover, the defense lawyer, William I. Aronwald, returned to a theme that has been woven through two trials of Ms.
Warmus, who is charged with shooting to death Mr.
Solomon's wife and then going out with him for drinks and sexual relations in her car.


MSA Realty Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Work Recovery Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Northgate Computer Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Ultrak Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


John Van Buren Sullivan, 78; Steered WNEW to Leading Spot
John Van Buren Sullivan, a broadcast industry executive whose stewardship of the radio station WNEW-AM in New York City in the 1960's made it one of the most influential and profitable in the country, died on Monday at his home in Larchmont, N.Y.
He was 78.
Mr.
Sullivan died of a heart attack, said a spokesman for the John J. Fox Funeral Home of Larchmont.


Cuomo Presses Issue Of Jobs for Veterans
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo's office has accused Mayor David N. Dinkins of reneging on a promise to help disabled veterans who were barred from peddling on Fifth Avenue by a state law passed last year.


Lemieux Comes Back In Very Good Form
Penguins 5, Bruins 2
PITTSBURGH, May 19 (AP) -- Mario Lemieux never thought his comeback could be this good.
Ray Bourque never thought his could be this bad.
Lemieux scored twice and set up another goal and Bourque drew two critical penalties that swung the momentum Pittsburgh's way as the Penguins went two games up on the Bruins with a 5-2 victory tonight in the Wales Conference finals.


Administration Must Decide On LTV Unit's Sale to French
The Bush Administration must decide soon whether to permit a French concern to buy a leading American military supplier, a landmark decision that has important consequences for American national security, global competitiveness and thousands of jobs.
At issue is the $300 million sale of the LTV Corporation's missile division to France's Thomson-CSF, one of the world's largest military companies.


Metropolitan Diary
A FRIEND writes:
I was walking down Prince Street the other day, and a little boy, maybe 6 or 7 years old, yelled down at me from a fire escape: "Excuse me, has anybody told you that you look like Michelle Pfeiffer?"
"Why, no," I said delightedly. "No one has ever told me that."
"I didn't think so," the boy said.
. . .


MIP Properties Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


U.S. Finds Japan Unfair In Pricing Its Mini-Vans
Supporting Detroit's Big Three, the Bush Administration said today that Japanese mini-vans were being sold in the United States at improperly low prices, a decision that will further strain trade relations between the two countries and could produce higher sticker prices for the imported Japanese vehicles.
The Commerce Department ruling -- that Mazda mini-vans were being sold at 12.7 percent below their fair value and Toyota vans at 6.75 percent below fair value -- pleased General Motors, Ford and Chrysler, which sought an investigation last year.


The Pop Life
Retro to the Future
When "Shake Your Moneymaker" (Def American) by the young group the Black Crowes arrived two years ago, old and arthritic rock stars probably got a gleam in their eyes.
The album, which eventually hit the No. 4 spot in Billboard, was unabashedly retro, mining white derivations of black American blues and rhythm-and-blues.
It's a sound that has gained plenty of fans, because in the few years since the release of the first album, the Black Crowes have become a major draw on the rock circuit.
There was hope for the ancients yet.
The group, from Atlanta, has just released its second album, "The Southern Harmony and Musical Companion," (Def American) and it doesn't do much new; the lead singer, Chris Robinson, still echoes Rod Stewart and the band still sounds at times like the Rolling Stones.
At best, it gets a crunching rock sound, and the album, recorded mostly without overdubbing, has a tight, early 1970's feel to it.


Blessings Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to April 18


Cagle's Inc. reports earnings for Year to March 28


TV's 'Normal' Violence
To the Editor:
Of course you're right about the extremity of the crime problem ("The Tides of Crime," editorial, April 25).
And getting rid of guns would surely help.
But you also briefly mention the climate of violence brought about by war.
Can I be the only one who thinks that we all live in a climate of violence created by television and the movies?
I recently bought a television after three years without one, and I am astonished at the level of violence there.
Half of the shows involve someone getting killed or beaten.
"The Silence of the Lambs" won the Oscar.
All this creates the belief that violence is normal.
And as long as we think that, we will never solve the crime problem.
We will also never get real gun control, because most Americans want their guns, because violence is normal.
BOB JOHNSON Ann Arbor, Mich., May 4, 1992


17% Drop In Starts Of Housing
In what was largely seen as a slowing in the wake of unsustainably rapid increases, builders broke ground on new homes at a rate of just 1,115,000 last month, 17 percent below the March pace, the Commerce Department reported today.
It was the biggest decline in eight years and embraced all regions of the country.
In addition, permits issued for future construction fell 3.3 percent.


QUAYLE SAYS RIOTS SPRANG FROM LACK OF FAMILY VALUES
In a direct appeal to the Republican conservative base two weeks before the California Presidential primary, Vice President Dan Quayle said today that the Los Angeles riots were the result of a "poverty of values" in the inner cities and that the nation should show no sympathy to those who joined in the civil unrest.
Seeking to shore up President Bush's support in the most populous state, and to lay groundwork for his own political future, Mr.
Quayle appeared before the Commonwealth Club of California to deliver the sort of tub-thumping message that conservatives, including some of the Vice President's supporters, contend is lacking from Mr.
Bush's oratory.
Transition to Middle Class?
"I believe the lawless social anarchy which we saw is directly related to the breakdown of family structure, personal responsibility and social order in too many areas of our society," Mr.
Quayle said in his first trip to California since the rioting, which left 58 dead and caused hundreds of millions of dollars in property damage.


Stocks Down in Tokyo
Stock prices were slightly lower in Tokyo today.
After trading in a narrow range throughout the trading session, the Nikkei index of 225 issues closed down 79.18 points, or less than 1 percent, to 18,674.93.
The index rose 311.01 points on Tuesday.


Dell Computer Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to May 3


Eerie Night Sounds, to Save the Jungle
PRESERVING the rain forests was the goal, and "glamazon" was the look, at Don't Bungle the Jungle II, a benefit party on Monday night at Amazon Village on Pier 25.
Eerie, windy and dark, it was a night for ferocious fashion, rap music and a traditional American Indian sundown ceremony.


Amerifax Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Judge to Release Plan to Redraw Congressional Lines Tomorrow
The former judge appointed by a Federal court to redraw the districts for New York State's Congressional delegation said today that he intends to release a preliminary plan by Thursday morning.
If the official, Frederick B. Lacey, a former Federal district judge from New Jersey, does release the plan by then, he will have taken barely a week to do what state lawmakers have been unable to do for months.


Judge Grants Macy Time For Planning
A Federal bankruptcy judge yesterday gave R. H. Macy &amp; Company more time to prepare a long-term business plan and a reorganization plan to usher the retailer out of Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection.
After the hearing, Myron E. Ullman 3d, a Macy co-chairman and co-chief executive, said the retailer would announce within days which stores it planned to close.
Macy has said it will close up to 10 of its 120 Macy's and Burdines department stores.


Communication Intelligence Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Giants Given H.I.V. Tests
Coach Ray Handley said today that Giants players had undergone testing for H.I.V., the virus that causes AIDS, as part of their routine physical examinations before the start of this week's minicamp.
"I knew it was being done," Handley said.
Handley would not offer details of the testing procedure.
Giants' sources, who asked not to be identified, said the testing took place on Monday, when the players reported.
They said this was the first time the Giants had tested for H.I.V.


Tecogen Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 28


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Primaries; PEROT'S STRENGTH SHOWN IN OREGON
In a startling demonstration of electoral strength, Ross Perot captured a significant portion of Republican and Democratic votes in Tuesday's Oregon primary, according to interviews with voters leaving polling places, and he may have done the same thing in Washington State.
Mr.
Perot's exact totals are not known because all his support was from write-in votes, which Oregon law does not require to be counted in primaries, except in special circumstances.
And in Washington, where the primary was a popularity contest unrelated to convention delegates, write-ins need not be tallied for a week after an election day.


Worldwide Computer Services reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Addington Resources reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Asamera Minerals reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Indy Rookies Seeing the Hazards
When Nelson Piquet, the three-time Formula One world champion, talked last March about his planned debut at the Indianapolis Motor Speedway, he discussed the high speeds there and said with a laugh: "I hope I don't scare myself."
On May 7, while practicing for his first Indianapolis 500, the 39-year-old Brazilian experienced something much worse than a bad fright.


Roberts Pharmaceutical Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


ATCO Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


For Entrances, Just the Right Sound
PEOPLE install new doorbells for all sorts of reasons.
But most want a bell that is both functional and attractive, according to Deirdre Quinn, who manages a doorbell-lined showroom at Hobb Electrical Supply in Manhattan.
"They want a louder bell, or a nicer sound," she said.
"Or they upgrade the house and decide to get something different."
Though it's a household accessory that attracts minimal attention, a doorbell can be an appealing, and amusing, grace note.
It can be weirdly evocative, like the ones that sound like high school bells.
Or showy: the Westminster chime, redolent of the BBC, is a big seller, in both four-note and eight-note versions.
And for residents who can't commit to a single tune, there are models that can be programmed to play anything from the opening notes of Beethoven's Fifth Symphony to Happy Birthday.


Corrections
A news analysis article on Tuesday about United States policy toward Haiti referred incorrectly to the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide's visit to Washington in March.
The exiled Haitian President did meet with a senior Bush Administration official, Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d.


Some Authors Still Lean On a Nurturing Editor
Alice Hoffman was something of a prodigy novelist in 1977, when she was 25 years old and published her first novel, "Property Of." The critics praised her luminous voice, but Ms.
Hoffman was not entirely happy.
She and her editor had not developed any particular rapport, and she decided she wanted to work with someone else.
So she sent out the beginning pages of a new manuscript to several editors at different publishing houses, all of whom praised the work boundlessly.
One editor did not.
One editor said the writing was beautiful, but the story wasn't working.
Try it again, she said.


Datakey Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 27


A Bipartisan Caucus Tackles Urban Aid Proposals


Robert Warner, 80, a Physician Specializing in Disabled Children
Dr.
Robert Warner, who helped save tens of thousands of youngsters from retardation by fostering the invention of a simple test now given to all American babies and millions more worldwide, died on Sunday at Buffalo General Hospital.
He was 80 years old and lived in Buffalo. He died of cancer, his family said.


Vintage Petroleum reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


To Solve Urban Crisis, New Version of W.P.A.
To the Editor:
"The Los Angeles Law: Use It" (editorial, May 14) seems to hold that the solution to our urban crisis is putting more money into old programs that haven't succeeded.
Contrary to your suggestion that welfare recipients or the unemployed are not educationally or emotionally ready for stable jobs, the inner-city poor are ready and willing to work.
Their only handicap is a welfare system that robs them of a sense of community and motivation.


Perkin-Elmer Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


CAR MAKER TO INVEST $2 BILLION IN POLISH VENTURE
The Italian auto maker Fiat S.p.A. agreed yesterday to invest around $2 billion for 90 percent of a venture with the Polish car maker FSM, the biggest investment yet by a foreign company in Poland.
The deal, signed by the Polish Finance Minister Andrzej Olechowski and Fiat's deputy chairman, Renato Ruggiero, ends months of difficult negotiations over pricing.
An agreement in principle was reached last October after five years of discussions.
But the final signing, which was set for May 28, had been delayed by negotiations on the price.


Delaware Otsego Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


One Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Seles at Pathmark Tourney
MONICA SELES, the top-ranked women's tennis player in the world, has entered the Pathmark Tennis Classic at Mahwah, N.J., for a second straight year.
Seles's appearance at the tournament, July 13-19, will be her first this year in the New York metropolian area.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Social Distortion  The Academy
Throughout Social Distortion's show on Saturday night, the group's front man, Mike Ness, used only one guitar.
He had a succinct vocabulary of chords, which he strung together into the blunt, direct phrases of punk rock.
He played the whole show at more or less the same volume level (loud), and the band shifted tempos from aggravated blues to adrenalized country to modest thrash only enough to delineate each song from the next.
Culled primarily from the group's two most recent albums, "Somewhere Between Heaven and Hell" and 1991's "Social Disortion" (both on Epic), Mr.
Ness's songs reworked similar thematic turf again and again: "Bad Luck," "Born to Lose," "Sick Boys" and "Story of My Life" are all tales of love gone wrong, luck run dry, lonely nights and endless days.


Independent Bankgroup reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Prices Drop on the Fed's Inaction
Prices of Treasury securities moved lower yesterday after the Federal Reserve Board indicated that it had not eased monetary policy again.
Expectations of a Fed easing were high after a report Tuesday that showed renewed weakness in the housing industry during April.


Serbs Hold 5,000 Hostages Fleeing the War in Bosnia
Serbian leaders in Bosnia and Herzegovina said today that their guerrillas would not release about 5,000 women, children and elderly people being held in a Sarajevo suburb until the Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina lifted blockades of Yugoslav Army barracks and met other conditions.
On Tuesday night, Serbian gunmen halted a column of about 1,000 cars, 20 buses and 10 vans in the suburb of Ilidza as the refugees attempted to leave Sarajevo, the Bosnian capital.
Serbian forces have besieged and bombarded Bosnia and its capital for more than a month in an effort to partition the republic. 2,200 Dead, 7,600 Wounded
Officials of the Children's Embassy, a local relief group that organized the convoy, said they had obtained written guarantees of safe passage from officials of the self-styled Serb Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Serbian guerrilla forces, together with the virtually all-Serb Yugoslav Army, have overrun more than 60 percent of Bosnia, driving non-Serbs from their homes.


Tejon Ranch Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


American Integrity Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Banyan Hotel Investment Fund reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Weldotron Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29


Espey Manufacturing &amp; Electronics Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Castle Energy Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Garnet Resources reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Electrohome Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Wisdom on the Waterfront
After 20 years of false starts, unkept promises and obstructive lawsuits, it seems too much to hope that maybe this time New Yorkers can finally reclaim Manhattan's decaying West Side waterfront.
But the new agreement between Gov.
Mario Cuomo and Mayor David Dinkins sounds so plausible that it might finally end the paralysis.
It deserves every chance.
The plan wisely combines parkland with some commercial development to help pay the bills.
It calls for 40 acres of waterfront parkland and esplanade bordering a new six-lane boulevard and development at three locations -- Pier 40, the Chelsea piers and property adjacent to the Javits Convention Center.


What's in a Name? For Stores, Success
NAMES matter; consider what might have been if Marla had been named Mary.
And coming up with a name for a new store or restaurant is as critical to its success as deciding what to sell or serve.
It can be agony.
Should the name try to be funny, like Live, Shop, Die (a used clothing store)?
Or aim for an air of mystery, like Zona (a Southwestern furniture and housewares store, as in AriZONA), or offer a just-the-facts-ma'am statement like Service Hardware?


Carter Hawley Hale reports earnings for Qtr to May 2


KRUG International reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


International Family Entertainment reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Maple Leaf Foods reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Universal Medical Buildings L.P.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Inland Gold &amp; Silver reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Robb Aide Pleads Guilty in Election Schemes
A former top aide to Senator Charles S. Robb of Virginia admitted today in Federal court that he had violated Federal election and wiretapping laws as part of a plan to gather damaging information on his boss's political adversaries.
In doing so, the aide, David K. McCloud, contradicted Mr.
Robb's version of how the Senator first learned of the existence of taped telephone conversations of Gov.
L.
Douglas Wilder of Virginia and others.


Chemical Bank To Sell Stock
The Chemical Banking Corporation said yesterday that it would offer 12.5 million shares of cumulative preferred stock with an annual dividend rate of 8 3/8 percent at $25 a share.
The preferred stock offering is Chemical's first since May 1991 and reflects the bank's improved financial health since that sale.


Grunfeld Is a Candidate for Bucks' Post
Ernie Grunfeld is a candidate to become the Milwaukee Bucks' next general manager, Dave Checketts, the Knicks' president, confirmed yesterday.
Grunfeld, the Knicks' vice president of player personnel since April 1991, has not been officially contacted by the Bucks.
But Checketts said he was "certain that a request to talk to Ernie is forthcoming; I know there's interest on their part."


The Chintz, The Bikes: It's Summer
As the summer season gets under way in the Hamptons, there are two not-to-be-missed stops as one winds one's way east.
Ruby Beets Antiques, at Route 27 and Poxybogue Road, Bridgehampton, is Sharone Einhorn and Tom Flynn's new shop.
It is a small house filled with things to please those obsessed with yard sales and antiques shows.
"It's a shop-oholic's dream," Ms.
Einhorn said.
"We buy things we like so, hopefully, if we get stuck with them it's not too bad," Mr.
Flynn added.


Chairman of Orion Is Leaving
The Orion Pictures Corporation said yesterday that its chairman, Eric Pleskow, would leave the company on July 1.
Mr.
Pleskow's contract at Orion continues to 1994, but the longtime film executive said, "There is little for me to do at this point."
Orion has filed for bankruptcy and is in talks with a variety of possible buyers.
Indeed, one executive who has followed Orion, and who insisted on anonymity, said of Mr.
Pleskow's departure: "It was just a matter of time. He had not been active for several months."


Japan Ends Fingerprinting of Many Non-Japanese
After years of bitter protests and debate, the Parliament passed a bill today that will eliminate routine fingerprinting of permanent foreign residents, a practice that many non-Japanese have regarded as a humiliating symbol of government-sanctioned discrimination.
While the news was welcomed by many foreigners, especially the Korean residents who will be the principal beneficiaries, many insisted the bill leaves in place an extensive system of unfair controls on non-Japanese residents.


Executive Changes
P.
F.
COLLIER, New York, an encyclopedia publishing unit of Macmillan Inc., appointed Robert R. Schmieder senior vice president of domestic sales and Michael J. Goodkin senior vice president of marketing and international sales.
CHICAGO CORP., Chicago, an investment banking unit of Chicorp Inc., named Kenneth F. Puglisi senior vice president of equity research.


Thai King Uses His Scepter Sparingly
Through four decades of intermittent crises, the people of Thailand have turned again and again to the soft-spoken, somber, enigmatic man who occupies one of the world's most powerful yet mysterious thrones.
Today King Bhumibol Adulyadej, Rama IX of the Chakri dynasty, placed himself between the army that redefined the monarchy's role and the people who want his moral force behind their peaceful political revolution.
"We are fighting in our own house," he told two equally uncompromising politicians, Prime Minister Suchinda Kraprayoon and the populist leader Chamlong Srimuang, as they sat at his feet.
"It is useless to live on burned ruins."


Windmere Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Lifesource Biomedical Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


COMPANY NEWS
AMERICAN CYANAMID CO., Wayne, N.J., a chemical company, and Metallgesellschaft Corp., Frankfurt, have formed a venture, Fortier Methanol Co., to convert an ammonia plant at Cyanamid's Fortier operation to produce methanol.
AUTOMATED SECURITY P.L.C., St.
Petersburg Fla., and Sensormatic Electronics Corp., Deerfield Beach, Fla., a maker of electronic surveillance equipment, said Sensormatic had bought the European loss-prevention business of Automated.


Baryshnikov in Benefit
Mikhail Baryshnikov will perform in "Dancers and Friends: An Evening of Solos and Duets" tomorrow at 7:30 at the Joyce Theater (175 Eighth Avenue, at 19th Street, in Chelsea).
The program, which also includes performances by Rob Besserer, Kate Johnson, Chris Gillis, Moses Pendleton and others, is a benefit for Friends in Deed, an organization founded by Mike Nichols and Cynthia O'Neal that provides free services to people with life-threatening illnesses.
Tickets for the performance are $250; for the performance and reception with the dancers, $350.
Information: (212) 861-6445.


Zero Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


HOME IMPROVEMENT
REPLACING broken sash cords or chains in double-hung windows with counterweights is not too difficult if you know what to expect and have some carpentry experience.
These windows often have counterweights, which help raise the sashes, on each side. (Sashes are what the frames holding the window panes are called.) The weights are hidden in cavities behind the window trim.
Cords or chains connect the weights to each sash and also help keep the window up.
The cords or chains are visible in the window tracks (the channels in which the sashes slide), when the sashes are down.
When the cords or chains break, the sashes are hard to raise and won't stay up unless propped.
Replacing broken sash cords and chains can usually be accomplished in an afternoon; if the sashes are heavy, ask someone to help.


Boston Celtics L.P.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Virginia Executes Inmate Despite Claim of Innocence
JARRATT, Va., May 20
Roger Keith Coleman, a trobubled coal town loner whose claims of innocence focused international attention on the death penalty, was executed late tonight by two jolts of current in Virginia's electric chair here.
Eleven years after the rape and murder of his sister-in-law in Grundy, Va., Mr.
Coleman today took and failed an extraordinary polygraph test, was denied two appeals by the United States Supreme Court and was executed after eating a dinner of pepperoni pizza, fudge cookies and a 7-Up soft drink.


Airgas Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Prosecutor Reviews Case Tying Killing To Warmus
Too much evidence to be coincidence ties Carolyn Warmus to the shooting of her lover's wife, a prosecutor argued today in his final statement at the murder trial of the former Westchester schoolteacher.
The prosecutor, James A. McCarty, reviewed testimony that he said proved Ms.
Warmus had an obsessive love for Paul Solomon, the slain woman's husband.
He recalled testimony by witnesses who said Ms.
Warmus had purchased a gun and once bought a glove like one found next to the body of the victim, Betty Jeanne Solomon.
He pointed to records that showed someone used Ms.
Warmus's telephone line to call a gun shop hours before the murder.
Nothing to Gain
"These aren't a series of coincidences, ladies and gentlemen," he said.
"Sooner or later the picture should become clear to you: you can see Carolyn Warmus doing this."


Dinkins Greeted as a Friend In the Dominican Republic
Mayor David N. Dinkins took his Caribbean campaign to the Dominican Republic today, where he received a rousing welcome from the leaders and people of this nation, which has the fastest-growing immigrant population in New York City.
For today, at least, it appeared that Mr.
Dinkins had left his highly publicized problems with Hispanic leaders and citizens behind in Puerto Rico, where for two days he was accused of political opportunism.


Foxmoor Industries reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Brooke Group reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Garden Q. &amp; A.
Edible Flowers
Q.
I've been eating fresh chrysanthemums in salads in restaurants, but often they're bitter.
What chrysanthemum do you recommend that is both edible and palatable? -- Copeland H. Marks, Brooklyn.
A.
Edible flowers intrigue gardeners and cooks not only for their use as flavoring but as a decorative garnish to brighten summer fare.
The chrysanthemum, which is believed to have originated in China possibly before 500 B.C., is one of a number of floral favorites.
In the June issue of "The Avant Gardener," Thomas Powell, its editor and publisher, notes that "young leafy shoots of Chrysanthemum coronarium, called chop suey greens, are used like spinach." Very likely this is the species you are looking for.
One way to avoid a bitter flavor is suggested in "The Forgotten Art of Flower Cookery" (Harper &amp; Row, 1973) by Leona Woodring Smith.
She advises pulling the petals, en masse, from the flower head, and then cutting off the white or sometimes greenish-colored heels by which the petals are attached.
This is the portion that produces a bitter taste.
The flowers and leaves of nasturtiums and violets, the flowers of pansies, carnations, marigolds and roses and the leaves of scented geraniums are also used in cooking.
Many culinary herbs have attractive and tasty flowers too, among them garlic chives, thyme, borage, basil, coriander and mint.
Do not use flowers from florists since these may have pesticides on them.
The June issue of "The Avant Gardner" is devoted entirely to ornamental edibles.
For a copy send $2 to Horticultural Data Processors, Box 489, New York 10028.
One Sex or Two
Q.
I've heard the terms monoecious and dioecious for years.
Can you explain what they mean? -- Christine Tomkins, Commack, L.I.
A.
The terms come from the Greek: monoecious means one household; dioecious means two.
Monoecious plants are those with both male and female reproductive organs on the same plant.
Dioecious plants have male and female organs on separate plants.
Many hollies, for example, are dioecious.
To have the decorative holly berries, there must be a male holly within bee-flying distance of the females.
One male plant is useful for pollinating several females.
The male, or pollen-bearing, portion of the flower is called the stamen.
The female or seed-bearing portion is the pistil.
Insect-Resistant Grass
Q.
Can you tell me something about the insect-resistant grass seed I've seen in garden centers?
Is it safe? -- Fred Graze, Clinton, Conn.
A.
This grass contains a naturally occurring fungus called an endophyte, which grows within the plant tissue.
The fungus repels a number of insects that feed on the lower stem and crown, among them aphids, armyworms, chinch bugs, cutworms and sod webworms.
"We really don't know why the insects stay away," said John DeMatteo, an agronomist with the Loft Seed Company in Bound Brook, N.J.
"We're not sure if the insects are killed -- we don't find dead bodies -- or if they ingest it and then hate the taste so much they fly off." Eight years ago Loft Seed Company introduced a grass seed called Repell, one of the first endophyte-containing perennial rye grass seeds.
Although endophytes were known in the last century, they have only recently been bred into the grasses sold for home lawns.
Endophyte-containing grasses are now marketed by several companies under different brand names.
Among the species that may contain these endophytes are perennial rye grass, chewings fescues, hard fescues and tall fescues.
These grasses are considered safe for home use.
They are not injurious to children, dogs or cats "even if they chew on them a bit," Mr.
DeMatteo added.
"The only animals likely to experience an adverse reaction are those that regularly feed or graze on grass, like sheep, cattle and horses," he said.
"But these grasses are not recommended for use in such areas."
. . .
Address questions to Garden
Q. &amp; A., The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York 10036.
Those of general interest will be published.
Unpublished questions cannot be answered individually.


Recognizing Macedonia Can Only Fuel Conflict
To the Editor:
In "The Name Game in Macedonia" (editorial, May 15), similar to "The Two Macedonias" (editorial, April 5), you insist on the recognition of the "defenseless nation of two million Slavs, Albanians and Turks" with the name of Macedonia.
This name was usurped by Stalin and Tito in 1945 for expansionary reasons in the Greek region of Macedonia, Aristotle's birthplace, and in the Aegean Sea.
If it is not for future expansion, why don't the Skopjan leaders use a name related to their Slavic heritage, of which they should be proud?
After recognition of this tiny republic, Slav, Albanian, Greek, Bulgarian or Turkish minorities may try to join their neighboring mother countries and engage in bloody fighting similar to that of Bosnia.
Such editorials may fuel further conflicts and the "Balkanization" of the area, which may be worse than the Lebanon strife, with the possible involvement of neighboring countries.


6th-Inning Debacle Seals the Mets' Fate
It was an inning ugly enough to disfigure more than a single game.
The ineptitude in the sixth that cost the Mets six runs and led to a 12-6 loss to the Padres, was bound to further dismay management and demoralize the bullpen.
The Mets, leading by 4-3, imploded in a circus of hits as the Padres transformed the scoreboard from 4-3 to 9-4.


America's Urban Apartheid
Stirred by the smoldering ashes of South-Central Los Angeles, a new generation of politicians is poised to make the same mistakes about cities, race and poverty that were made after the Watts riots 27 years ago.
They do not realize that urban poverty can be overcome only by bringing down the walls between cities and suburbs.
Liberals appeal for large-scale Federal aid for inner-city social welfare and economic development -- the Big Buck strategy.
The Secretary of Housing and Urban Development, Jack Kemp, renews his call for inner-city enterprise zones, public housing "perestroika" and "empowerment" -- the Big Bootstrap strategy.


Everex Systems reports earnings for Qtr to May 3


Gantos Inc.(X) reports earnings for Qtr to May 2


Cuomo Sides With Disabled Veterans Who Peddle
Nine months after their peddling stands were banned from midtown, disabled veterans contend that they have not received the training or jobs they were promised by the upscale businesses that sought their ouster, and Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo has taken their side.
Unless Mayor David N. Dinkins makes "substantial progress" toward compensating the vendors by Friday, Governor Cuomo said he would seek to overturn the ban, one of his top aides informed the Mayor's office on Monday.


Resource America Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Hills Department Stores reports earnings for Qtr to May 2


Accuhealth Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


PEPSICO BUYS HALF OF CALIFORNIA PIZZA KITCHEN CHAIN
Pepsico Inc. has added some new flavors to its pizza menu, including Peking duck, Thai chicken and Shrimp-pesto pizza.
No, the company's Pizza Hut unit is not going through a midlife crisis.
Pepsi said yesterday that it had acquired 50 percent of California Pizza Kitchen, a 25-shop gourmet pizza chain.
No terms were disclosed, but the seven-year-old chain, based in Los Angeles, is expected to have sales of $60 million for the year ending on June 30.


Executed in Virginia


PharmaKinetics Laboratories reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Exploration Co. of Louisiana reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Versa Services reports earnings for Qtr to March 25


LifeCall Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Citizens Utilities reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Penn St. Accepts Bowl Bid. Really.
Penn State football fans, who have been known to make their autumn travel plans by the thousands, can now price those advance purchase fares to spend New Year's Day at the Blockbuster Bowl.
The Nittany Lions, facing a season in limbo as an independent team before joining the Big Ten conference for the 1993 season, announced yesterday an agreement to play in the third Blockbuster Bowl at Joe Robbie Stadium in Miami on the afternoon of Jan. 1, 1993.


TIS Mortgage Investment Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


New York Passes Goodwill Review
A committee that will choose the site of the 1998 Goodwill Games completed a two-day tour of the metropolitan area yesterday and found the region a greater possibility than expected.


SBE Engineering Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Arizona Instrument Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


West Point-Pepperell reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Escapee From Prison Is Captured in Hotel
An inmate who escaped from a medium-security prison in Orange County last week was captured Tuesday afternoon in a hotel in Manhattan, the state police said yesterday.
The inmate, Christopher Rodriguez, 23 years old, was arrested without incident at 1:30 P.M. as he walked into the lobby of the Belleclaire Hotel at 77th Street and Broadway, said Maj.
James D. O'Donnell, commander of Troop F in Middletown.
Mr.
Rodriguez was traced to the hotel through an anonymous tip to the New York City police on the 911 telephone line.


Macy Says It Will Close 8 Stores, Including 4 in the New York Area
R.
H.
Macy &amp; Company said yesterday that it would close eight department stores, including four in the New York region, by Aug. 1 as part of its effort to restore the financial health of its bankrupt business.
Macy's departures will leave many neighborhoods bereft of department stores that served as the centerpieces of once-thriving urban hubs like the Flatbush section of Brooklyn, downtown Newark and Main Street in Columbia, S.C.


Archer Communications reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Highridge Exploration reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Abraxas Petroleum reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Designs Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 2


Columbia Laboratories reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Cryomedical Sciences Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Saskatchewan Oil reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Chemical Leaman Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 29


Quadra Logic reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Whitehall Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
American Standard Inc. is offering $250 million of 11.375 percent senior debentures due 2004, at 100, to yield 11.375 percent, through First Boston.
Callable on May 15, 1997, the debentures are rated B-1 by Moody's Investors Inc. and B by Standard &amp; Poor's Corp.


Man Pleads Guilty In Smuggling Case
A former South African military officer pleaded guilty today in Federal District Court here to a single charge stemming from a smuggling operation that brought rhinoceros horns and the heads and skins of other endangered species into the United States.
The plea by Marius Meiring, 44 years old, once the second-highest ranking South African Defense Force officer in Namibia, ends a case that started with a sting operation conducted in part by United States wildlife and firearms agents in 1988.


Semiconductor Packaging Materials reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Ah, the Horse
TO celebrate the horse, Hermes, the French accessories company, is introducing a new porcelain pattern.
Called Cocarde de Soie, it is based on Hermes's Rubans du Cheval silk scarf pattern.
The teapot (left) is part of a 23-piece set that includes six plates, three cups and saucers, cake and tart platters, a soup tureen, a sauce boat, a salad bowl and an oval pickle dish.


Trial Opens Against Former Milken Aide
A Federal prosecutor described Michael R. Milken yesterday as the mastermind of a securities fraud and embezzlement scheme and said the jailed financier would be the leading prosecution witness against one of his closest aides.
Mr.
Milken, who is serving a 10-year sentence, pleaded guilty in 1990 to securities fraud that was in part related to the charges against the aide whose trial is now beginning.


Valley Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Sheffield Industries reports earnings for Qtr to March 27


Zeos International Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Senate Passes Bill to Force States to Make Voter Registration Easie
With Democrats seeking higher turnouts at the polls, the Senate voted 61 to 38 today to make voter registration easier by allowing people to register by mail and as they renew their driver's licenses.
Changes in voter registration and limits on campaign spending have been the subjects of some of the most heated and partisan debate in the Senate this year, as Republicans and Democrats jockey to exploit or duck the electorate's cynicism and anger.


Money Market Fund Yields Show Mixed Trend in Week
Yields offered by money market funds monitored by IBC/Donoghue's Money Fund Report were mixed in the latest reporting week, with tax-exempt yields falling while taxable yields were unchanged.
The tax-exempt yields fell for the second straight week.
Walter K. Frank, the chief economist at Donoghue's, said that it was possible that rates could rise just a little in the weeks ahead.
This is because the recent fall was in anticipation by many analysts of a cut in official interest rates by the Federal Reserve.
But Mr.
Frank said that he did not expect the Fed to cut rates in the near term.


All American Semiconductor reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Silvar-Lisco reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Consensus Means Waterfront Project for West Side May Actually Get Built
Unlike the doomed ambitions of three governors and three mayors for the West Side of Manhattan, the agreement by Mario M. Cuomo and David N. Dinkins this week to redevelop the waterfront represents a broad consensus, not merely of politicians but of their constituents.
As a result, the redevelopment may actually take place.


Utilx Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Shame in Our Time, in Bosnia
A "disgrace for humanity." The words uttered in Washington Tuesday by Haris Silajdzic, Foreign Minister of beleaguered Bosnia, should chill the hearts of all who despise naked aggression.
The Serbian strongman Slobodan Milosevic steps up his brutal bombardment of Bosnia's capital, Sarajevo, and his "ethnic cleansing" of Serb-occupied territory.
Hundreds die; ancient towns are turned to rubble.
And what is the response of the U.S., the European Community and the U.N.?
Sighs, shrugs and evasions.


Review/Piano; Mordecai Shehori in Competition With Himself
The pianist Mordecai Shehori first began to come to public attention about a dozen years ago.
It seemed, even then, that he should have been better known than he actually was.
He had an extraordinary presence at the keyboard, a fine sense of color and line, and the unusual ability to hold one's attention through music's silences as well as its sounds.
Since then, the enthusiastic notices have multiplied.
But his career has not taken off and, except among a committed group of listeners, he is still little known.
On Tuesday night in Weill Recital Hall, there was no mistaking Mr.
Shehori's resemblance to his younger self.
He was attentive and thoughtful and provocative; he produced a warm tone, and lyrical gifts were much in evidence.
His ideas were sometimes convincing, sometimes distracting, but never careless.


Comstock Resources reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Clemens Benefits From Burks's Slam
Red Sox 6, Mariners 4
BOSTON, May 20 (AP) -- Ellis Burks hit a tie-breaking grand slam in the eighth inning and Roger Clemens and the Boston Red Sox beat the Seattle Mariners, 6-4, tonight for a three-game sweep.
Clemens (6-3), coming off consecutive shutouts, allowed two runs on six hits in eight innings.
Tony Fossas relieved to start the ninth and left with one out and two runners on base.
Jeff Reardon allowed a two-run pinch-single to Kevin Mitchell before finishing for his 10th save in 10 opportunities.
It was his third save of the series and the 337th of his career, leaving him four shy of Rollie Fingers's all-time record.
Blue Jays 8, Twins 7
TORONTO (AP) -- Pat Borders singled home the winning run with the bases loaded in the 10th inning and Toronto stopped its longest losing streak of the season at five games by nipping Minnesota.


Books of The Times; Making Documentaries for Roosevelt
F.
D.
R.'s Moviemaker  Memoirs and Scripts  By Pare Lorentz  243 pages.
Illustrated.
University of Nevada Press. $29.95.
Pare Lorentz, the great American documentary film maker, didn't live to see the publication of his invaluable "F. D. R.'s Moviemaker," but fortunately he completed the manuscript before his death on March 4 at the age of 86.
The book is a personal monument to his trailblazing and a reminder of the glory years of that overlooked art form, the social documentary.


COMPANY NEWS: High-Tech Humor; In the Battle With Machines, Smile
Most people find little to laugh about when it comes to computers, especially those who've actually tried to use them.
But don't try to tell that to Rich Tennant.
Mr.
Tennant, 45 years old, is a market maker, so to speak.
In the last eight years, he has become one of the country's leading computer cartoonists.
With a eye for "the stupid things in our lives," Mr.
Tennant specializes in creating strange, off-center man-machine relationships in his high-tech cartoons.


Alfred McClung Lee Dies at 85; Professor Was Noted Sociologist
Dr.
Alfred McClung Lee, a sociologist whose work explored critical areas of American life from race relations to journalism during a 50-year career, died on Tuesday at his home in Madison, N.J.
He was 85 years old.
Dr. Lee died of congestive heart failure, said his son, Alfred McClung Lee 3d.


Father's Illness Brings Arrest
The Pittsburgh Steeler cornerback ROD WOODSON and his brother were arrested on charges of battery and resisting arrest following a disagreement over whether to remove their terminally ill father from life support, authorities in Fort Wayne, Ind., said.
The police were called to the family's home about 4:30 P.M.
Tuesday as a precaution.
Woodson and his mother, LINDA, told authorities that JAMIE WOODSON, Rod's brother, was on his way to the home and they expected trouble.


All the Networks Exult As Sweep Month Ends
Every broadcast network had some statistic to brag about as the May rating sweep ended last night in one of the closest finishes ever.
But there was intense disagreement about which network will best be able to carry the May results into the next television season.
May is the most important of three major sweep months (the others are November and February), when the networks try to maximize their audiences for the benefit of their affiliated stations.
Those stations sell advertising for the next quarter based on the sweep numbers.


Compumed Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


CONGRESS BACKS 27TH AMENDMENT
Seizing on a chance to improve their public image, both houses of Congress today overwhelmingly backed the newly ratified constitutional amendment, first proposed 203 years ago, that prohibits them from voting themselves immediate pay raises.
The votes today came 24 hours after the 27th Amendment to the Constitution had already been made the law of the land with its publication in the Federal Register by Don W. Wilson, Archivist of the United States.


Addvantage Media Group reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Jet Aborts Landing, Averting Collision Above La Guardia
A USAir Shuttle jet approaching La Guardia Airport aborted its landing on Monday morning and passed perilously close to a United Airlines jet taking off, Federal and airline officials said yesterday.
The pilot of the United jet, Flight 69 to Chicago carrying 90 passengers and crew members, reported that the USAir plane passed within 50 to 75 feet as it swerved to miss the United plane after aborting its landing at 11:11 A.M.


For Better Living Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 28


Anagel-American Shipholdings Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Fault Lines Foretell Social Earthquakes
To the Editor:
You note that a juror reinforced suspicions of racism in the Los Angeles verdict "by discounting any link between the verdict and the rioting: 'I think they were just waiting for something to happen so that they could go out and destroy people's lives and their property' " ("The Other Jury," editorial, May 1).
With respect to the jury, your evaluation may be correct.
To say that "they were just waiting for something to happen" in order to riot may indeed reflect racism.


System Software Associates Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Trans-Lux Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Growing
WHEN the dogwoods have leafed out and the leaves of the shadblow are the size of a squirrel's ear, it's time to plant the corn.
It's best to get it in the ground before the moon is full -- which was last Saturday, so I'm a little late.
"The leaves are signs that the soil is warm enough to plant, and the gravitational pull of the moon helps the growing of the corn," said Nanepashemet, whose Wampanoag ancestors fished and hunted and farmed along the coast of Massachusetts a thousand years ago.


Smithfield Foods Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to May 3


Barrett Resources Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Missing Definition Trips Madrid: Just What Is a Cultural Capital?
One can hardly blame Madrid for seeming a bit defensive.
This grand metropolis of the booming new Spain is feeling decidedly third rate in its de facto cultural competition with Barcelona and Seville this year.
They have the Olympics and Expo '92 with lavish arts programs to match.
Madrid, aside from its already extensive normal cultural offerings, has the status of 1992 Cultural Capital of Europe.
This honor, conferred on a different city each year by the European Community, is meant to enhance culture for the host's citizens and attract the attention of the rest of Europe.
But conversations with Spanish officials in Madrid and European officials in Brussels indicate that the title is still in the process of refinement.
Meaning no one is quite sure what a "cultural capital" is supposed to be or do.


Transalta Utilities Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Group Lags In Race Over TV Advance
In a blow to its hopes of developing the official transmission standard for broadcasting high-definition television, a consortium that includes NBC and North American Philips announced today that it had slipped behind schedule.
The group, one of the principal competitors in the race, said it would not show up on time for testing at a federally supervised laboratory scheduled to begin on June 3.


Market Place; A Glimpse Into Perot's Portfolio
Ross Perot got rich in computers, and his current stock market investments show a decided tilt toward technology companies.
But he has also made money lending to R. H. Macy &amp; Company, getting out at a profit before the retailer went bankrupt.
He also made millions speculating on the Japanese stock market.
Those are some of the items detailed in Mr.
Perot's financial disclosure form filed with the Federal Election Commission covering his investment activity last year.


2 Pistons, 2 Bulls and a Spur
DENNIS RODMAN andJOE DUMARS of Detroit, and MICHAEL JORDAN and SCOTTIE PIPPEN of Chicago joined San Antonio's DAVID ROBINSON on the N.B.A.'s all-defensive team, which was announced yesterday.


New Jersey's Silent Republicans
Gov.
Jim Florio had good reason to veto a penny rollback in New Jersey's sales tax.
The Republicans who won control of the State Legislature last fall still won't say how they'll cover the loss of revenue.
Until they are ready to face up to the bad news, their only responsible course in the voting scheduled for today is to sustain the Governor's veto.
Public uproar over tax increases cost Mr.
Florio his majorities in both houses last November.
The Republicans now have a comfortable two-thirds majority in the Assembly, and a Senate majority that's just barely two-thirds.
If party lines hold, they can override anything he vetoes.
His earlier vetoes of two minimum wage bills were not challenged, but the tax veto forces a showdown neither side can escape.


U.S. Caps Amount Of Interest Offered By Weakest Banks
The Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation placed new limits today on the rates that the nation's weaker banks and savings and loans can offer customers.
The move, a step toward reregulating interest rates, will make it easier for strong banks to grow and harder for some weak banks to survive.
The new rules, which stem from a banking law passed by Congress in 1991, separate the nation's 14,370 banks and savings and loans into three classes, based on their ability to absorb losses.
Only the financially healthiest institutions will be allowed to pay whatever interest rates they choose, which will mean less competition for deposits and far fewer -- if any -- opportunities for savers to find exceptionally high rates paid by some banks and savings and loans.


Westport Bancorp Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Big G.M. Issue Lands, and Price Holds Up
Shares of the General Motors Corporation barely budged yesterday, slipping 25 cents, to $39, as the stock market tried to digest 55 million new shares of the company's stock.
Traders said Morgan Stanley, the lead underwriter for Tuesday's huge offering, was "supporting" the stock, meaning it was actively buying shares at the $39 offering price to keep the price from falling.
Trading volume was extremely heavy, with nearly 17 million shares changing hands.
G.M. was the most active issue by far on the New York Stock Exchange, and Morgan Stanley was said to have bought more than half of those shares.


QuesTech Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Barra Inc. reports earnings for Year to March 31


Laser Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Western Gas Resources reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


No Miracle on Market St. for Final Retail Holdout
AT the end yesterday, a floorwalker could roll a bowling ball down almost any aisle at Macy's in Newark and not hit anyone.
Sunday newspaper inserts announced specials or extended store hours at Herald Square and many branches, but not in Newark.


Transmedia Network Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


SOUTHWEST AIR TO SPLIT STOCK AND RAISE DIVIDEND
Southwest Airlines, after expanding rapidly in California and Chicago as weaker carriers retreated in the last year, said yesterday that it would split its common shares 2 for 1 and raise its dividend by 12 percent.
The number of outstanding shares will double to more than 93 million on July 15, and the yearly dividend after the split will be 5.6 cents a share.
The price of Southwest's shares, which reached a record high of $44.50 last week, gained 87.5 cents, to $43.625, yesterday on the New York Stock Exchange.


Total Research Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Cavs May Be Taking Soft Touch Too Far
The Cleveland Cavaliers are a very nice team: that may be taken as a compliment or an insult.
A thank you to the Cavaliers is certainly in order for sparing us at least two more weeks of "As The Bird Turns," that predictable and played-out Boston soap opera.
But if the Cavaliers are to strike a figurative blow for the advocacy group known as Basketball-as-Ballet, if they are going to discredit the Knicks and their brutish predecessors, the Detroit Pistons, they need to push the Chicago Bulls to six games, and preferably seven.


RESULTS PLUS
SOCCER  Lone Goal Decides Cup  A Dutchman, Ronald Koeman, gave Barcelona the European Cup for the first time in its 93-year history with a stunning goal off a free kick eight minutes from the end of overtime in a 1-0 victory over Sampdoria of Genoa yesterday at Wembley Stadium in London.
Koeman, hugged by Coach Johan Cruyff after the final whistle, has scored all his 13 league goals this season from free kicks or penalty shots.
His goal against the Italians in the 112th minute of yesterday's match brought the club title back to Spain for the first time since 1966, when Real Madrid won for the sixth time.
France also won the doubles and beat Sweden by 2-1.
Forget and Henri Leconte scored a 6-3, 6-4 victory over Edberg and Anders Jarryd.
Coming off one of his rare clay-court victories at the German Open in Hamburg, where he defeated last year's Wimbledon champion, Michael Stich, Edberg has run into trouble on the clay at Dusseldorf.
McCarthy will face a Florida freshman, Lisa Raymond. (AP) RUNNING  Rogers Comes in Second  Bill Rodgers, the four-time winner of the Boston and New York City Marathons, won the second annual U.S.
Healthcare Corporate Classic yesterday in Stamford, Conn.


Ares-Serono Group reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Beard Oil Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Corrections
A short article by The Associated Press in Business Day yesterday about earnings at British Airways P.L.C. misstated its profit in the latest quarter.
The airline reported a profit of $37 million in its fiscal fourth quarter ended March 31, not a loss of $56 million.


Quality Products Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Giga-Tronics Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 28


Koll Management Services Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Quotation of the Day
"I would like both of you to talk face-to-face, not to confront each other. Try to solve this problem." -- KING BHUMIBOL ADULYADEJ of Thailand, talking to the antagonists in his country's violent upheaval.  [ A1:2. ]


Pratt Hotel Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


CBS Is Silent, but Then There's the Next Season
Murphy Brown's newborn son has not yet been named, but there is not much chance he will be J. Danforth Brown.
Though the comments of Vice President Dan Quayle about the television show "Murphy Brown," single motherhood and morality set off a storm of reaction around the country yesterday, very few of those involved with the program had much to say.
Only the creator of the series, Diane English, who issued a statement on Tuesday, has responded publicly.
Ms.
English said that if Mr.
Quayle opposed the decision made by the show's title character to have her baby out of wedlock, "he'd better make sure abortion remains safe and legal."


Diodes Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Steve's Homemade Ice Cream Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 28


Cracker Barrel Old Country Store Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 1


Rentz Takes 2d-Round Lead
Larry Rentz, the assistant pro at Winged Foot, is taking advantage of the migration of Bruce Zabriski to the PGA Tour and Jim Albus to the Senior PGA Tour.
Zabriski and Albus dominated the Dodge Classic, one of the area's major tournaments for club professionals from the metropolitan area, in recent years.
Zabriski won it twice in the last three years, and Albus was a winner in 1983 and always considered a favorite.
Rentz has succeeded them as the man to beat.


Western Investment Real Estate Trust reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Madeleine F. Gutman, An Arts Promoter, 68
Madeleine Feldman Gutman, who promoted free music, art and other cultural events in Greenburgh, N.Y., died on May 10 at St.
John's Riverside Hospital in Yonkers.
She was 68 years old and lived in Hastings-on-Hudson, N.Y.
She died after an accident at home, her family said.


JAPANESE PARLIAMENT BACKS FOREIGN INVESTMENT
The Japanese Parliament yesterday approved a bill that will enable foreigners to buy up to 20 percent of NTT, Japan's biggest telecommunications carrier.
But analysts are divided on the appeal of the shares.
The law, which takes effect after related bylaws and regulations are decided, will also let foreigners buy up to 20 percent of Japan's largest international telecommunications carrier, the Kokusai Denshin Denwa Company.


Analog Devices Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 2


Bank of N.Y. To Buy Part Of Barclays
The Bank of New York Company, in a move to strengthen its presence in New York's suburbs, said yesterday that it had signed a letter of intent to acquire Barclays Bank of New York N.A.
The agreement would add 63 branches to the Bank of New York's existing network of 223 branches in the metropolitan area.
The deal, the terms of which were not disclosed, would also add $2.2 billion in net assets to the bank, which has assets of $40.1 billion.


Jordan Cautions Islam on Jerusalem's Shrines
Jordan called today for an end to a dispute over the restoration of the Dome of the Rock and other Muslim holy places in Jerusalem, warning that the controversy could prompt Israel to interfere and even open the question of placing Muslim shrines under international control.
Last week Saudi Arabia offered to assume "all expenses" for a project to restore the Dome of Rock, Al Aksa Mosque and other Muslim sites.
The offer brought a sharp retort from Jordan, which has acted as custodian of Muslim shrines in Jerusalem for more than 40 years.


A Colorful Carpet to Protect Street Trees
SOME might argue that it's the height of masochism.
But helping to improve the plight of a city street tree also means an improvement to the city air and to the city ambience.
Every street tree needs a human friend.
After all, life at the edge of a busy sidewalk isn't easy.
Street-tree problems include a lack of soil nutrients or organic matter, a scarcity of water through the worst of summer heat, and trampled soil that is so compacted and devoid of air it could be mistaken for concrete.
The greatest outrage of all is when the tree's meager parcel of earth is turned into an outhouse for dogs.
Too few dog owners realize that these visits eventually kill trees, as dog waste will burn the roots and damage bark.


Concorde Career Colleges Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Venture Stores reports earnings for Qtr to May 2


Build an Empire! New York City Bonds in Yen
Going farther afield in its quest for financing, the Dinkins administration is planning to sell yen-denominated bonds to investors in Japan.
With an eye to lowering its borrowing costs, New York City has authorized the Nikko Securities Company to make preparations with Japanese authorities to sell up to $120 million of taxable yen-denominated bonds at some point this fall.


MacNeal-Schwendler Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Events: Harlem Tours, Roses, Student Designs
Historic Harlem
Morris Jumel Mansion, Jumel Terrace, between West 160th and 162d Streets; (212) 234-8206.
A guided tour on Sunday at 1:30 P.M. of the Jumel Terrace neighborhood is the first in a series of walking tours in Harlem.
Fee, $12.
Future tours will explore Striver's Row (May 31), Astor Row (June 7) and brownstones and churches in the Mount Morris Park neighborhood (June 14).
Fees are $10 to $15.
Rose Celebration
New York Botanical Garden, 200th Street and Southern Boulevard, Bedford Park
section, the Bronx; (212) 220-8777.
Rose Week, from Saturday through May 31, includes self-guided tours of the Peggy Rockefeller Rose Garden, advice from experts and children's events.
Garden hours: 10 A.M. to 7 P.M.
Tuesday through Sunday.
Suggested contribution: $3; $2 for students and those 6 to 16 and 62 or older.
Student Designs
Shirley Goodman center,
Fashion Institute of Technology, Seventh Avenue at 27th Street; (212) 760-7760.
Textiles, jewelry, hats, models of restaurant interiors and sculptures are on display through May 29.
Hours: noon to 8 P.M.
Tuesday through Friday; 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Saturday.
Free.
An Architect's Work
National Institute for Architectural Education, 30 West 22d Street; (212) 924-7000.
The work of John Lautner, a Los Angeles architect who studied with Frank Lloyd Wright, is on exhibit through June 5.
Hours: 10 A.M. to 4 P.M.
Monday through Friday.
Free.
Antiques Show
Long Island University, Southampton Campus gymnasium, Montauk Highway off Exit 67 of Sunrise Highway; (516) 765-5053.
A preview will be held from 6 to 9 P.M. tomorrow.
Tickets, $30.
Show hours are 11 A.M. to 7 P.M.
Saturday and Sunday.
Admission: $5.


Rabin Invokes Old Victory to Seek a New One in Israeli Election Campaign
"Israel Is Waiting for Rabin," campaign posters plastered across the country say, and for the benefit of the eight or nine Israelis who may not yet get the point, they show a photograph of Yitzhak Rabin at his no-nonsense best.
The slogan alludes to an old tune called "Nasser Is Waiting for Rabin."


Vishay Intertechnology Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Selfix Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 28


MicroProse Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Texfi Industries reports earnings for Qtr to May 1


Renaissance Energy reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Security Investments Group reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Honda Dealers Stay With Korey, Kay
Korey, Kay &amp; Partners in New York successfully defended its Tri-Honda Dealer Association account in a review, Herb Zeltner, an adviser to the metropolitan New York dealer group, said yesterday.
Billings on the account, which was placed in review earlier this month, were estimated at $10 million to $12 million.


US Facilities Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


InterVoice reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29


Voices From the Crowd: 'We'll Definitely Win!'
When the soldiers suddenly pointed their submachine guns menacingly at the crowd 100 feet away this afternoon and trotted forward, a young woman shrieked and started sprinting away.
"It's kill, kill, kill!" the woman, Narumon Siriratvarasa, a 21-year-old accounting student, screamed as she fled.


Big Local Phone Companies To Offer Fast-Data Services
A group of the nation's largest local telephone companies said yesterday that it planned to introduce two important methods of high-speed data transfer that use speeds up to 600 times faster than current communications methods.
The data-only methods, known as frame relay and switched multimegabit data service, will be offered over the next year or so.
Eventually, they could be the means toward fulfilling the Information Age's "multimedia" promise of simultaneously transmitting data, voice and video over a single communications circuit.


International Research &amp; Development reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Director Admits C.I.A. Fell Short In Predicting the Soviet Collapse
Responding to criticism that the Central Intelligence Agency failed to forecast the collapse of the Soviet system, its director, Robert M. Gates, today conceded shortcomings in the agency's analysis, but defended its overall performance over the years.
In a speech to the Foreign Policy Association in New York, Mr.
Gates, the Director of Central Intelligence, said that although the agency wrote many assessments describing a growing crisis in the Soviet Union, it was not until 1989 that agency analysts began "to think that the entire edifice might well collapse."


Waban Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to April 25


Banyan Mortgage Investors L.P. III reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Biomatrix Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Salomon Emerges With a New Personality
Salomon Inc.'s $290 million settlement is more than a slap on the wrist, Wall Street executives and analysts said yesterday, but far less than a full frontal assault that could have taken the firm down.
Still, Salomon's role in the Treasury-auction scandal has cost the firm far more than the fine alone.
Battered for nine months by what seemed like unending reverberations from the episode, Salomon has emerged a less aggressive and less profitable company than it was a year ago -- but it's alive.


BGS Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Spire Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Bunch Has Feeling H-Back Fits to a T
Jarrod Bunch's rookie season in pro football was hardly something to remember.
In last year's National Football League draft, the Giants drafted the 6-foot-2-inch, 248-pound fullback from Michigan on the first round.
In the entire season, he carried the ball once and caught two passes, and one of those pass completions was stolen by Ray Horton and became a touchdown for the Dallas Cowboys.


Capitalism for Emigres, in 12 Steps; Scientists From the Former Soviet Union Study an Unusual Subject: How to Get a Job
One by one, the emigre scientists -- specialists in ichthyology, pisciculture, biomineralization and more -- rose to present themselves.
"I am Bril," the first man began. "I come here two months ago from Minsk."


Review/Dance; 'Coppelia' Returns to Ballet Theater
"Coppelia," a perennial ballet favorite about a man silly enough to fall in love with a doll, returned to American Ballet Theater Tuesday night at the Metropolitan Opera House.
This season, the company is presenting each of its 19th-century classics for a week at a time.
In this case, several casts have a chance to appear in a rarity, a comic ballet.


Staar Surgical reports earnings for Qtr to April 3


Armanio Foods of Distinction reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Jamesway Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to May 2


Jean Philippe Fragrances Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Moira Dryer, 34, An Abstract Artist; Painted on Wood
Moira Dryer, an abstract artist known for working in glowing colors on sheets of plywood, died yesterday at her home in Manhattan.
She was 34 years old.
She died of cancer, said James McKinley, a friend.


Salomon Handles Big Ontario Issue
In the first global bond offering by an issuer other than the World Bank, the province of Ontario sold $2 billion worth of 10-year securities yesterday through an underwriting group led by Salomon Brothers.
The 7.75 percent bonds were priced at $99.486, to yield 7.825 percent -- 64 basis points, or hundredths of a percentage point, more than the prevailing yield on the Treasury's 7 1/2 percent 10-year notes at the time of pricing.
The securities are rated AA-2 by Moody's Investors Service and AA by the Standard &amp; Poor's Corporation.


Victory in House for Port Authority
The House of Representatives passed legislation Tuesday night giving local aviation agencies, including the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey, the power to enact stricter rules on jet noise than those set by the Federal Government.
One sponsor, Representative Susan Molinari, called the measure a "counterpunch" to recent attempts by the Federal Aviation Administration to force the Port Authority to abandon its plans for a quick phaseout of older, noisier aircraft at La Guardia, Kennedy International and Newark International Airports.


Tenney Engineering Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


American Southwest Mortgage Investments Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Sheets for a Cause
With a lieutenant colonel as a father, the family moved continually -- from Georgia to Kansas, Wisconsin and then Germany.
"We were always the two new weird twins in a new class," said Robert Kitchen, who with his brother Richard recently formed the R. W. Kitchen Design Studio in SoHo.
Although they had worked together before, the new partnership will mesh the brothers' talents: Robert has had a career as a painter, Richard as a textile designer.


The True Pro-Life Position
President Bush was engaging in cruel flimflam when he ordered establishment of a Government fetal tissue bank this week.
Fetal tissue can facilitate research for Parkinson's disease, Huntington's chorea, childhood diabetes, even Alzheimer's disease -- and it holds great promise as a treatment.
But Mr.
Bush's sham program would accept only tissue from miscarriages and ectopic pregnancies, which is very rarely suitable for research because it is usually defective or diseased.
The study of fetal tissue implanted in other humans has been at a virtual standstill since 1988, when, ignoring the advice of two Federal advisory panels, the Reagan Administration banned Federal financing for the research.
Women, the reasoning went, might choose to abort in the interests of medical research or ailing relatives, so Federal support of fetal tissue research was tantamount to encouraging abortion.


Morgan Stanley Stalks Olympia Assets
The struggle by financially troubled Olympia &amp; York Ltd. to keep creditors at bay appeared to be under further strain today, when it became known that Morgan Stanley had begun searching for Olympia assets it might seize to settle a legal dispute.
Morgan Stanley, the American investment bank, and Olympia, the Canadian real estate giant, have been battling over a contract involving 25 Cabot Square.
The building is a completed structure at Canary Wharf, the vast office development Olympia is constructing in East London.


Jail for Flowers, Former Giant
LARRY FLOWERS, who played with the Giants from 1980-85, mostly as a special-teams man, was sentenced in Newark Federal Court to two years in prison yesterday in a cocaine distribution ring protected by two police officers in Lodi, N.J. (AP)


Bridge
The traditional Eastern Regional Championships, which have been the focal point of the New York bridge calendar for 62 years, return to a traditional home tomorrow.
The Greater New York Bridge Association has scheduled play at the New York Hilton, Avenue of the Americas and 53d Street, where the tournament was played from 1964 to 1978.
It has been in other Manhattan hotels since then.
Following is the schedule:


Bionaire Inc. reports earnings for Year to Feb 28


Morgan Hydrocarbons reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Essex Financial reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.25-6.5
6.25-6.5
8.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.75
3.80
5.71
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.57
3.52
5.46
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.67
3.61
5.64
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.92
6.83
7.92
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.80
7.76
8.27
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.73
8.68
9.30
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.60
6.61
7.22
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


CliniCom reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Halifax Developments reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Sports of The Times; Meeting The Riley Standard
DURING the Knicks' theater-in-the-rectangle with the Chicago Bulls last week, the Jet coach, Bruce Coslet, was discussing the job Pat Riley had done in lifting the level of excellence and expectation for a pro basketball team that had once been a monument to mediocrity.
"I'd like to talk to him," Coslet said.
As a coach himself, Coslet realized that in a conversation with Riley he would surely learn something.
About teaching.
About motivating.
About handling a game.
About developing players.
About what every coach in every sport is trying to do: getting the most out of your players.
But what Coslet may not have realized is that Riley's success has created a challenge for every coach and manager in the New York area.


Carter, With Clinton at His Side, Praises the Candidate's Qualities
Former President Jimmy Carter met with Gov.
Bill Clinton in Atlanta today and made a case for sending another Southern Governor to the White House, saying that Mr.
Clinton has the "knowledge and integrity" to be President.
But for all of Mr.
Carter's kind words about the probable Democratic nominee and Mr.
Clinton's effusive praise of Mr.
Carter, the two men spent most of the news conference answering questions about Ross Perot, the Texas billionaire who is likely to wage an independent bid for the Presidency.


Corrections
An article yesterday about a White House plan to allow limited use of fetal tissue in medical research described the views of Senator Alan K. Simpson of Wyoming incorrectly.
He supports the right to choose an abortion under some circumstances.


Barringer Laboratories reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Artillery Fire, for a 2d Day, Booms Over South Lebanon
For the second day in a row, artillery duels raged in southern Lebanon today between Israeli troops and their militia allies and Muslim fundamentalist gunners..
United Nations officials said 350 shells struck 15 Muslim Shiite villages north of what Israel calls its security zone, killing a woman and wounding several others.
The guerrillas fired rockets into the zone, the officials said.
A 6,000 member United Nations peacekeeping force is deployed in the area.


Oxford Energy Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Allegheny &amp; Western Energy Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


'Nigerian Scam' Lures Companies
In the annals of white-collar crime, the trick known as the Nigerian letter scam already stands out as a testimony to criminal energy, not artistry.
Sleuths at Scotland Yard, the Federal Bureau of Investigation, Interpol and private investigators describe it variously as crude, amateurish and preposterous.
But they also agree it is one of the most wide-ranging and bizarre fraud schemes of recent years.
Thousands of American companies, including many in the New York area, have in the last 18 months received bogus letters that like many a street fraud preying on the greedy promise big payoffs in return for playing along and putting up some advance money, according to the International Criminal Police Organization.
That agency, known as Interpol, is the coordinating network for police internationally.
Loss Estimates Are Sketchy


Shaw Industries Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Williams Controls reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Applied Spectrum Technologies Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-14  STEP TOWARD NUCLEAR SAFETY
President Bush and the leaders of other major industrial democracies are expected to endorse a multibillion-dollar plan for improving the safety of nuclear reactors in the former Soviet Union and Eastern Europe at an economic summit meeting early in July.
A1  THAI KING GAINS PACT ON CLASHES
With Thailand's military Prime Minister and his Government's leading political opponent sitting at his feet, King Bhumibol Adulyadej secured an agreement intended to end clashes that have left scores of people dead on the streets of Bangkok.
A1
Once again, the Thai people turned in crisis to their King.  A8
Voices from the crowd of protesters: 'We'll definitely win!' A8  RABIN THE CONFIDENT
Yitzhak Rabin, leader of the Israeli Labor Party, talked about how he wished voters could choose their Prime Minister through direct elections.
He seemed to suggest that there was little chance of his losing in a head-to-head race against Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir.
A3  CAPITALIST NORTH KOREA?
The cost of North Korea's isolation is evident in places like Rajin, a grimy and remote port.
But Kim Il Sung's Government seems to have realized that international isolation is a dead end, and it has been courting investment by foreigners.
A10  VIOLENCE IN SOUTH OSSETIA
Gunmen opened fire on a bus carrying refugees from South Ossetia, a region seeking to break away from Georgia, killing at least 30 and dealing a blow to negotiations.
A5  THE C.I.A.
ANALYZES ITSELF
Responding to criticism that the C.I.A. failed to forecast the collapse of the Soviet system, the Director of Central Intelligence, Robert Gates, conceded shortcomings in the agency's analysis, but defended its overall performance over the years.
A6  SERBS HOLDING HOSTAGES
Ethnic Serbian leaders in Bosnia and Herzegovina said guerrillas would not free about 5,000 being held captive in a Sarajevo suburb until the Bosnian Government lifted blockades of Yugoslav Army barracks and met other conditions.
A14  Greystones Journal: The new abortion debate among Irishwomen.
A4  Japan ends fingerprinting of many of its non-Japanese.
A11  Jordan cautions Islamic countries about Jerusalem shrines.
A12  Mexico moves to overhaul its educational system.
A13  Germans asked the U.S. to strengthen environmental policies.
A14  National A20-27, B10-16  SALOMON BROTHERS SETTLES
Salomon Brothers agreed to pay $290 million to settle Government accusations that it had systematically submitted billions of dollars in phony bids in the Treasury auctions that finance the nation's debt.
The Government agreed not to bring any criminal charges against the investment house over its millions of dollars of illegal gain.
A1  NEW RULES ON INTEREST RATES
The F.D.I.C. placed new limits on the interest rates that banks without a strong capital base can offer depositors.
The move will make it easier for strong banks to grow and make it harder for some weak banks to survive.
A1  CENTER STAGE FOR MURPHY BROWN
A day after Vice President Quayle suggested that the television character Murphy Brown had served to hasten the erosion of family values by glorifying unwed motherhood, the White House first applauded, then dithered, then beat a befuddled retreat.
A1  ANOTHER GAIN FOR PEROT
In a startling demonstration of strength, Ross Perot captured a significant percentage of votes in Presidential primaries in Oregon and Washington State.
A1
Clinton met with Carter, and both talked of Perot.  A23
These are difficult times for the Republican Party.  A22  VOTER REGISTRATION BILL GAINS
The Senate approved legislation that would allow voters to register by mail and when they renew their driver's licenses.
The bill's chances of enactment are uncertain.
B11
Congressional negotiators agreed to save one Seawolf submarine.  A26
Congress gave its blessing to the new constitutional amendment.
A26  TACTICAL MOVE ON ABORTION
The legal staff of the American Civil Liberties Union's abortion rights team announced that it had severed ties to the A.C.L.U. and formed an independent organization.
A20  THE CHIEF ON THE KING VERDICT
The Los Angeles Police Chief said that when four officers were acquitted in the Rodney G. King beating, he was just as shocked as most people who had followed the case.
He had been certain, he said, that the officer who had delivered the most blows to Mr.
King would be convicted.
B12  AN EXECUTION IN VIRGINIA
Roger Keith Coleman, whose claims of innocence focused international attention on the death penalty, was executed in Virginia's electric chair.
A20
Texas executed a man convicted of killing a young girl.
A20  A legal battle has developed over excavation rights.
B13  Philadelphia is making strides toward righting its finances.
B14  A former Robb aide pleaded guilty in the wiretap case.
A27  Metropolitan Digest, B1 MACY'S TO SHUT 8 STORES
R.
H.
Macy &amp; Company said yesterday that it would close eight department stores, including four in the New York region, by Aug. 1 as part of its effort to restore the financial health of its bankrupt business.
The four other stores are in South Carolina, Maryland and Georgia, plus a Bullock's in La Habra, California.
About 1,850 employees will be affected by the closings.
A1  Business Digest, D1  The Home Section C1-12  These chairs were made for dancing.
C1  What's in a name?
For stores, success.
C1  At work with Stan Mack.
C1  Sports B18-23  Baseball: Yankees win in 12th.
B19  Mets lose to Padres.
B19  Columns: Anderson on coaching in New York.
B19  Football: Penn State in bowl.
B21  Tennis: The problems with junior tennis.
B19  Obituaries D29  Moira Dryer, artist  Dr.
Robert Warner, pediatrician  Arts/Entertainment C14-24  The Talk of Hollywood.
C17  Madrid stumbles on a definition.
C17  Word and Image: Some authors still lean on a nurturing editor.
C17  Editorials/Op-Ed A28-29  Editorials A28  Shame in our time, in Bosnia.
Wisdom on the waterfront.
The true pro-life position.
Jersey's silent Republicans.
Letters A28  William Safire: Punish the Serbs.
A29  Anthony Lewis: Mockery of Justice.
A29  Charles Keyes: The rising of the middle class.
A29  David Rusk: America's urban apartheid.
A29


F.A.A. Ends Detour of Jets, and Noise, Over L.I.
Amid bitter complaints from Queens officials, the Federal Aviation Administration today abruptly called off a noise-reduction experiment that had, without warning, diverted hundreds of low-flying aircraft from parks and working-class neighborhoods in Queens to affluent sections of Long Island, local officials said.
The experiment had brought wall-rattling roars and fumes of accelerating aircraft over the tended lawns and quiet streets of Great Neck and the even more affluent Kings Point, where people pay $700,000 and up for sprawling homes along narrow wooded lanes.


Overpopulation Becomes Our Problem Too; Next Green Revolution
To the Editor:
Food production has not won the race against population growth as proponents of the first green revolution once hoped ("Food Production and the Birth Rate Are in a New Race," The Week in Review, May 10), and agriculturalists intent on engineering a second revolution should heed the failures of the first one.
To win the race this time, both technical problems of growing food in a sustainable way and other nontechnological causes of poverty, hunger and poor productivity must be addressed.
Unfortunately, all too often new technological developments appear to imitate the environmentally unsustainable elements of the old green revolution and associated irrigation technologies.
Advances in biotechnology are often touted as a way to grow high-yielding crops without the green revolution's heavy dependence on pesticides.
A major focus of biotechnology research, however, is the development of crops that tolerate chemical weed-killers, and thus encourage pesticide use.


Essay; Punish the Serbs
In the face of Serbia's bloody invasion of its neighbors, President Bush has ducked under his desk in a way that recalls Benjamin Harrison's 1888 doctrine: "We Americans have no commission from God to police the world."
Excuses for inaction range from "it's Europe's problem" to "our vital interests are not involved" to "those historic hatreds run so deep, there's nothing anybody can do."


Voit Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 27


Can They Top That?
BECAUSE they shared an attraction to iron furniture, Brian Windsor and Cynthia Beneduce, antiques dealers, decided to open a store in which they would sell not only unusual folk art but also metal pieces that they had improved.


In the Box, in the Groove
SHE describes herself as a "graphic designer who draws and an illustrator who designs with type." So the project Laurie Rosenwald undertook for Morozoff Chocolates in Osaka, Japan, was perfect.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
Salomon Brothers agreed to pay $290 million to settle Government charges that it had systematically submitted billions of dollars in phony bids in Treasury auctions.
In a victory crucial for Salomon's survival, the Government also agreed not to bring any criminal charges.  [ Page A1. ]  The settlement is seen as more than a slap on the wrist but less than a frontal assault.  [ D8. ]
Macy said it would close eight stores, including four in the New York region, by Aug. 1.  [ A1. ]  Newark has lost the last symbol of a once-glorious mercantile history.
Newark Journal.  [ B4. ]


Emergency Room Alternative: Family Doctors
To the Editor:
"Escape the Emergency Room Trap" (editorial, May 4) quite correctly lauds the Dinkins administration for planning to spend $21 million to develop the Communi-Care program for New York City.
One of the program's major aims is to provide the residents of poor neighborhoods with alternatives to the emergency room for medical care.
But the establishment of alternatives to the emergency room will not assure a reduction in the utilization of emergency rooms.
Residents of middle-class and even upper-class neighborhoods will invariably be told to "go to the emergency room" by their private doctors in off hours and on weekends and holidays.


CHRONICLE
YELENA G. BONNER, the widow of Andrei D. Sakharov, the Soviet dissident and human-rights crusader, was in Washington yesterday for an announcement that a new major prize was being established in her husband's name.
The Sakharov Award, $100,000 and a sculpture by Maya Lin, the creator of the Vietnam Veterans Memorial, will be given every two years by the Gleitsman Foundation to individuals living outside the United States who have served as catalysts for positive social change in their homelands or beyond.
The first award will be given next May.


Home Video
Movies in video stores aren't just for renting anymore.
People buy them, too, and in increasing numbers.
Last year, sales of movies and other videocassettes accounted for about one-third of the revenues in the $11 billion video industry.
Analysts say the percentage is growing.
Disney's animated films, priced at about $25, sell by the millions.
Occasionally, studios offer certain non-animated titles at $25 when they are first released. (Hit movies are usually intended for rental and priced at about $100).
"Wayne's World" and "Hook," both due this summer, are to be offered at the lower price.


Review/Film; Kung Fu and Social Satire In a Martial-Arts Fantasy
The kung fu fighting sequences in Tsui Hark's "Once Upon a Time in China" are more than just balletic displays of martial-arts prowess.
They are extended acrobatic fantasies in which Wong Fei-hung (Jet Li), an invincible figure from modern Chinese folklore, executes whooshing Superman leaps and in one scene turns an umbrella into a miraculous combination of sword, shield, parachute and human-meat hook.
In the film's most spectacular duel, he and an adversary face each other across a scaffold of entangled ladders, which they treat as a kind of seesaw, flinging each other high into the air and landing securely after double somersaults.
Despite the frantic activity, the combat is strangely nonviolent.
As in other films of the kung fu genre, the haphazard synchronization of sped-up blows, which often seem to avoid landing on flesh, with the soundtrack's thuds and slaps creates an eerie sense of discontinuity.


Robeson Industries reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Trio-Tech International reports earnings for Qtr to March 27


Dress Barn reports earnings for Qtr to April 25


Scintrex reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Bay Meadows Operating Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Sports/Leisure Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Trimin Enterprises reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Views on Single Motherhood Are Multiple at White House
Thailand is in turmoil, the Federal deficit is ballooning and hot embers of racial resentment still smolder in the ruins of inner-city Los Angeles.
But today the high councils of government were preoccupied with a truly vexing question: Is Murphy Brown really a tramp?
A day after Vice President Dan Quayle suggested that the television show has served to hasten the erosion of family values by glorifying unwed motherhood, the White House first applauded, then dithered, then beat a befuddled retreat.


Oilgear Co. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Valley Forge Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Canyon Resources Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


WestAir Holding reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


SyStemix Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Valspar Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to April 24


With Design in Mind International reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Sega Links With Sony to Make CD Video Games
Sega of America has signed up a potent partner, Sony Electronic Publishing, to help develop a new generation of movie-like video games.
The games, featuring high-quality sound and realistic, rather than animated, characters will be an important weapon in the battle by the smaller Sega against the Nintendo Company, the market leader.
The broad alliance announced yesterday calls for Sony to tap its full stable of recording artists, actors and movies to create games for the new Sega machines, which will use compact disk technology.


American Funeral reports earnings for Qtr to March 29


Encore! This Time Hayes Is the Overtime Hero
A wonderful duel between Jim Abbott and Scott Kamieniecki dominated the action at Yankee Stadium last night as the former college teammates battled inning after inning.
But after nine innings were completed, the California Angels and the Yankees remained tied, 2-2, and neither wound up with a victory.
The game stretched into the 10th and the 11th with the score still tied.
Then the Yankees came to bat in the 12th against Chuck Crim.
Two players who have been searching for their batting stroke found themselves with a chance to erase some sour memories on a late night in the Bronx.
And erase them they did, as the surprising Yankees continued to roll along.


International Pursuit Corp. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Wetterau Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 28


Buses for Disabled Children To Roll in Albany Accord
A political dogfight that for three weeks kept thousands of disabled children away from preschool programs in New York City was settled tonight, clearing the way for the buses that transport the children to roll again beginning Thursday morning.
The dispute was a stark case study in how the lives of 7,500 small children with various physical, mental and emotional disabilities could be upended, as politicians in Albany and New York City fought over how to award and pay for the contracts for transporting them to treatment programs.


Michaels Stores reports earnings for Qtr to May 3


North Korea Asks Investors to Look Beyond Bleakness of Communist Decay
In his youth, Kim Il Sung fought his way to the leadership of this country, or so the legend goes, by fearlessly battling Japanese occupiers in guerrilla warfare in the scrubby hills of this cold and seemingly forgotten corner of the Korean peninsula.
Now those hillsides, here near the borders of China and Russia, are being stripped bare, presumably by villagers who are increasingly desperate for firewood and food.


Younkers Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to April 25


Corrections
An article on the Company News page of Business Day yesterday about R. H. Macy &amp; Company misidentified one of two Macy store chains expected to be affected by closings.
It was Bullock's, not Burdines, which is owned by Federated Department Stores Inc. (Closings did occur yesterday, and are reported today on page A1.)


Vidmark Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Honda Motor Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Cathedral Gold Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Sea Galley Stores reports earnings for Qtr to March 22


British Airways Plans A Slight Peak Fare Rise
Despite strong bookings, British Airways said yesterday that it planned to raise fares only slightly for the peak summer travel season on the main North Atlantic routes.
The good news for travelers was delivered by Sir Colin Marshall, British Air's chief executive, at a briefing for analysts and the press at the Pierre Hotel.
The airline is by far the largest carrier across the North Atlantic.


States Will Jointly Fight '900' Phone Fraud
Hoping to end fraud and deception involving pay-per-call "900" telephone numbers, the attorneys general of 46 states announced an agreement today to coordinate their enforcement efforts with the nation's three biggest long-distance companies.
Officials participating in the plan said that sharing information would make it easier for the carriers to shut down abusive companies and would be faster than having a law enforcement agency go to court with criminal or civil complaints.


Wiser Oil Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Joss Energy reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Qual-Med Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Trico Products reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Are You Urbane? Not if You Don't Know Brooklyn
Louise Weiss, a travel writer who has lived in Manhattan for years, has traveled the country and the world in search of exotic locales, but she had never ventured to Brooklyn until her blender broke.
"The only place on the entire East Coast that could repair it was in Brooklyn -- somewhere, God knows where, an hour and a half from Manhattan," Ms.
Weiss said.
"It was quite an adventure."


Honda Decentralizes Management
The Honda Motor Company restructured its senior management today for the second time in 14 months, in an effort to decentralize its worldwide operations and give regional executives more power.
A Honda spokesman, Shigeaki Kato, said the company was accelerating its trend toward decentralization and greater personal responsibility for decision making.


Dynatech Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Lechters Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to April 25


Corrections
The Sidelines column in SportsMonday this week misstated a comparison of attendance figures for major league baseball.
Total attendance through last Sunday's games was 2.1 percent higher than the corresponding total for 1991.


Larson-Davis Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Claire's Stores reports earnings for Qtr to May 2


Photronics Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


United Thermal Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Dominguez Services Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Winston Resources Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Service Corp. International Canada reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


These Chairs Were Made For Fun
"SMILE! Can't you see I'm a furniture designer" seemed to be the theme of this year's International Contemporary Furniture Fair in New York.
Nothing was more out of fashion than looking strict, dour and serious.
Rather, such designs as Michael Shane's Puzzle Pieces, a giant steel room divider, were, well, funny.


U.S.-Canada Trade Pledge
President Bush promised Canadian Prime Minister Brian Mulroney today that he would work to resolve trade disputes between their countries after Mr.
Mulroney told the President that the "harassment" of United States tariffs must stop.
Mr.
Bush and Mr.
Mulroney met at the White House, during which the Canadian Prime Minister complained in particular about an American lumber tariff that was reduced but not eliminated last week.


Fallon Top Winner At One Club Awards
Fallon McElligott in Minneapolis took top honors last night as the 16th annual One Show awards for creative excellence in advertising were presented by the One Club for Art and Copy in New York.
Fallon won 7 gold and 12 silver medals, as well as 7 bronze pencils, for work on accounts like Porsche Cars North America and Jim Beam Brands.


AmBase Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


A Co-Director Is Leaving American Ballet Theater
Jane Hermann, co-director of American Ballet Theater with Oliver Smith, will step down on Sept. 1.
Mrs.
Hermann said in a statement yesterday that she had chosen not to renew her three-year contract, which expires at the end of September.
In the statement, she said: "American Ballet Theater is a company close to my heart. Our relationship began many years ago in my role at the Metropolitan Opera House as director of presentations. My decision to join A.B.T. evolved from enormous admiration and love for this great company. However, it is time for me to move on. My devotion to A.B.T. remains, and I will support the board of directors in any decision they make." Mrs.
Hermann refused to comment further.


Pop and Jazz in Review
David Murray  Condon's 117 East 15th Street Manhattan Through Sunday
At its first set on Tuesday David Murray's big band took off on the last tune, a be-bop blues.
With Butch Morris conducting, the orchestra pulled off some fancy steps.
Mr.
Morris has made the band a genuinely improvising item; in his hands huge welts of sound rose up around soloists.
During the blues, he set off Don Byron's clarinet against just a rhythm section, and with his baton cued the bass, drums and piano into a set of complicated stop-time figures, adding volumes of intensity to the performance.


Moira Dryer, 34, An Abstract Artist; Painted on Wood
Moira Dryer, an abstract artist known for working in glowing colors on sheets of plywood, died yesterday at her home in Manhattan.
She was 34 years old.
She died of cancer, said James McKinley, a friend.


Consumers Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Review/Opera; Amato's Small-Scale 'Magic Flute'
There are many paths to Mozart's "Magic Flute." The ideal is a production that delves into the work's symbolism, strikes a balance between its comic and serious currents and persuades the listener that Tamino's quest for love and virtue really does require a nobility of spirit.
The Amato Opera, which performs in its own tiny theater at 319 Bowery, has neither the resources nor the inclination to stage a grandly philosophical "Magic Flute." But its endearingly modest and inventive production, which runs through Sunday, shows the work's resilience.
It is sung in the English translation by Ruth and Thomas Martin, and if the production sometimes leans too heavily toward broad comedy, it does not neglect the opera's uplifting sensibility.


Abroad at Home; Mockery of Justice
On one side in the lawsuit is the United States Government, represented by the Justice Department.
On the other is a group of Haitian refugees held at the U.S. base in Guantanamo, Cuba, represented by some Yale law students, their professor and other volunteers.
One might think that the Government would be content with those odds -- with its great advantages in power, money and legal resources.
Not so.


Salomon to Pay Phony-Bid Fine Of $290 Million
Salomon Brothers Inc. agreed today to pay $290 million to settle Government charges that the investment house had systematically submitted billions of dollars in phony bids in the Treasury auctions that finance the nation's public debt.
In a victory crucial for Salomon's survival, the Government also agreed not to bring criminal charges against the firm over its millions of dollars of illegal gain.
Other large Wall Street firms involved in complex fraud cases, notably E. F. Hutton and Drexel Burnham Lambert, were unable to survive criminal cases.
But scores of Salomon's customers -- municipalities, pension funds, mutual funds and states -- now will not have to reassess whether they can do business with an investment house facing criminal charges.
Reaching Crisis Proportions
The agreement ends a tumultuous chapter in the firm's 82-year history that reached crisis proportions last summer.
In August, Salomon acknowledged that it had occasionally submitted bogus bids to buy more Treasury securities than Federal regulations permit.
It then admitted that its senior executives, including the company's chairman and chief executive, John H. Gutfreund, knew for months about some of the phony bids but never told the public or Government officials.


First Chattanooga Financial reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


PARENT &amp; CHILD
WHEN a parent borrows money from a child, it can be an uncomfortable situation for both generations.
We've come to expect the opposite, with the younger generation asking the older for financial help to make a down payment, pay tuition or handle a crisis.
But there are times when parents must approach their children for assistance.
It is an act that can affect their relationship long into the future.
Dr.
Bernard Guerney Jr., a professor of human development and counseling psychology at Pennsylvania State University in State College, Pa., said: "There's an old saying: 'When a father helps a son, both smile. When a son helps a father, both cry,' In our culture, for a parent to borrow from a child is often considered shameful and embarrassing."


AID PLAN DRAFTED FOR ATOMIC SAFETY IN EASTERN EUROPE
President Bush and the leaders of the other six major industrial democracies are expected to endorse a multibillion-dollar plan for improving the safety of nuclear reactors in the former Soviet Union and Eastern Europe at their economic summit meeting in Munich in early July.
The plan, which is being prepared with advice from officials at the International Atomic Energy Agency here, would provide for refitting of some reactors with more modern safety features, the closing down of those considered too unsafe to be worth saving and the provision of alternative sources of electricity, including supplies from Western Europe, according to diplomats and agency officials here.
Billions to Prevent Catastrophe
Estimates of the cost of such a program, which is designed to prevent another nuclear catastrophe like the one in Chernobyl, vary from $10 billion to $20 billion.
The idea is to find this money over several years from a number of sources, including direct government grants, guaranteed government loans and loans from such development institutions as the World Bank, the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development and the European Community's European Investment Bank.


Elizabeth G. Estrin; Pediatrician Was 79
Dr.
Elizabeth Gougam Estrin, a physician in New Rochelle, N.Y., for more than 35 years and a member of the faculty at Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center in Manhattan, died on May 16 in Paris during a visit.
She was 79 years old.
Dr. Estrin died of a heart attack, said her son, James.


Review/Dance; Many Ways to See a Work
American Ballet Theater has offered a range of interpretive opportunities to very different dancers in "La Bayadere" this season.
The latest came from Steven Heathcote, a guest from the Australian Ballet, making a debut as the warrior hero Solor on Monday night at the Metropolitan Opera House.
The title role of Nikiya, the temple dancer, was performed by Cynthia Harvey, who portrayed Gamzatti, Solor's fiancee, when Alessandra Ferri (partnered by Julio Bocca) made her sole appearance as the bayadere on May 13.


Banyan Strategic Land Fund II reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Au Bon Pain reports earnings for 16wks to April 18


Tennis Center Plan Benefits Environment
To the Editor:
New York, a world-class city, deserves a world-class event, specifically the United States Open tennis tournament in Flushing Meadows-Corona Park under the expansion plan as reported in your news article of April 26.
This is a facility not just for Queens but for all of New York City and the rest of the country.
The benefits to New York City are unquestionably substantial, but just as important are the environmental benefits obtained through the development of the relocated pitch-and-putt golf course in a part of the Kissena Corridor that for decades has been left without care or cleanup.


Avecor Cardiovascular Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Allcity Insurance Co. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Loewen Group reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


INSIDE
Abortion Rights Tactic
The legal staff of the American Civil Liberties Union's abortion rights team announced that it had severed ties to the A.C.L.U. and formed an independent organization.
Page A20.
Voter Registration Bill Gains
The Senate approved a bill that would allow voters to register by mail and when they renew their driver's licenses.
It may face a veto.
Page B11.
The Chief on the King Verdict
The Los Angeles Police Chief said he was shocked when the officer who delivered the most blows to Rodney King was not convicted.
Page B12.
Cameras in New York Courts
New York legislators have reached an agreement to allow television cameras in state courtrooms, but with restrictions intended to protect witnesses.
Page B1.
Israel Campaign Fever
Electioneering heats up in Israel with an unstated message: forget about the party but think of Yitzhak Rabin, former military chief.
Page A3.
North Korea Seeks Investors
With its economy near collapse, North Korea has haltingly begun a campaign to end its isolation from Japan and the West.
Page A10.


On the Trail
TEXAS GOVERNOR TAKES AIM AT BUSH
AUSTIN, Tex., May 20 (AP) -- Gov.
Ann Richards of Texas is at it again.
The Governor, who still draws raves for the ribbing she gave George Bush four years ago with her keynote address at the Democratic National Convention, had a few one-liners for him Tuesday night at a $1,000-a-plate fund-raiser for Gov.
Bill Clinton.


AMR Eyes Route Cuts
American Airlines, which set the industry's rapid expansion pace during the 1980's, told shareholders today that it might have to pull out of money-losing markets as it grapples with financial troubles in the 1990's.
At the annual meeting of the AMR Corporation, the airline's parent, Robert L. Crandall, AMR's chairman, refused to say specifically where American might scale back.
But he pointed to short-haul markets where American has trouble competing with its low-cost rival, Southwest Airlines.


Accountant Plans Sale Of Auto Dealer's Assets
"This is not going to be a fire sale," said Dominic DiNapoli, the accountant appointed by a Federal judge to liquidate the assets of John McNamara, the Long Island developer and auto dealer accused of defrauding General Motors of $436 million.
"We're not looking for any bottom fish to come along and make low-ball offers," Mr.
DiNapoli said today as he juggled a previously scheduled appointment in Manhattan and his new role as day-to-day manager of the McNamara assets.
"We plan to do what's in the best interest of the creditors. And if that means continuing to manage and wait, then that's the path I'll take."
On Tuesday, Federal prosecutors announced that Mr.
McNamara had agreed to turn over to the Federal Government $400 million in assets, which represents one of the largest forfeitures of business holdings ever approved by a civil court.
And Judge Edward R. Korman of Federal District Court in Brooklyn appointed Mr.
DiNapoli, a 37-year-old partner in the accounting firm of Price Waterhouse, to oversee those assets, manage them and sell them to satisfy Mr.
McNamara's nervous creditors.


Mexico Moves to Overhaul Its Educational System
Having overcome the resistance of a teachers' union that has been one of the most powerful labor groups in Latin America, the Government has set out to overhaul public education by changing everything from textbooks to school holidays.
Officials said the new measures, which will come with big increases in government funding, are intended to cut bureaucracy and corruption, modernize old teaching methods, and make schools more efficient and more accountable to their communities.


Coors Tries A Canned Promotion
THE Coors Brewing Company is moving ahead with an elaborate summer promotion that features the distribution of prize cans of Coors Light infused with high-tech gadgetry.
Is it bothered by the fiasco that Coca-Cola suffered when its MagiCans proved more mischievous than magical?
Apparently not.
Coors insists that its Talkin' Can Sweepstakes, promoting its best-selling brand in beer's busy season, is different and improved enough to avoid the pitfalls that made MagiCans -- and Coca-Cola -- the laughing stock of the advertising and marketing industries two years ago.
In that ill-fated promotion, prizes replaced soda in selected cans, but just about everything went wrong from malfunctions to a wave of negative publicity.


Boston Acoustics reports earnings for Qtr to March 28


Stocks Higher in Tokyo
Prices were slightly higher here today in a lackluster session.
At the close of trading on the Tokyo Stock Exchange, the Nikkei index of 225 issues was up 16.36 points, or 0.09 percent, to 18,691.29.
Traders said that the market remained unfocused and without fresh buying incentives, but that there was no negative news.
It was a continuation of Wednesday's sentiment, when the Nikkei fell 79.18 points, or 0.42 percent, on light volume.
The Nikkei had jumped 679.84 points on Monday and Tuesday, so selling was expected, brokers said, especially as the index neared 19,000, the top of its recent range.


USMX Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Drivers' Vote on Contract With Times Is Postponed
A vote scheduled for today by newspaper delivery drivers to resolve a bitter two-week dispute with The New York Times and a newspaper wholesale distributor was unexpectedly postponed last night after a union meeting.
Douglas LaChance, the union president, said the vote on new contracts was "aborted" because of the lingering issue of the fate of nine union pickets arrested on various charges when the dispute began two weeks ago.
Labor leaders said a new vote could probably not be scheduled before next week.


Review/Music; Sine Nomine Singers Give Concert and Disband
The Sine Nomine Singers went out of business on Sunday afternoon.
Since 1968 they had represented the high end of New York's vast pool of amateur singers, the floating army of trained but unprofessional voices that have formed choruses big and small, bad and relatively good.
The Sine Nomine under Harry Saltzman kept things small, with about six singers on a part and a distinct leaning toward music before 1700.
One of the reasons Mr.
Saltzman is disbanding is the difficulty in financing a broader and later repertory.
He has also expressed a restlessness with the Renaissance literature with which the group has been identified.
Sunday's farewell program leaned in both directions and sent some mixed signals about what was and what might have been.


CHRONICLE
"SUSAN CROSLAND has been described as 'the thinking reader's Jackie Collins,' but to me she is the mirror image of BARBARA TAYLOR BRADFORD," HAROLD EVANS, the president and publisher of the Random House adult trade division, said Tuesday evening at the book party for Ms.
Crosland's novel "Dangerous Games" at Le Cirque.
Right now, Mr.
Evans is counting on Ms.
Crosland to resemble Ms.
Bradford as a mega-successful writer of steamy novels dealing with romance and chicanery in high places.
After she finishes one more book for Random House, Ms.
Bradford is jumping ship to HarperCollins, where she is said to have signed a contract worth more than $20 million.


Greystones Journal; Irishwomen, Just Talking: The Topic Is Abortion
In 1983, Maureen Casey and most of her friends, wives of professional men in this seaside town 18 miles south of Dublin, favored the constitutional amendment that was supposed to be a comprehensive ban on abortion in this predominantly Roman Catholic country.
The women felt that abortion was sinful and followed the church's urging for a yes vote, as did two-thirds of the country.
But abortion is again the center of an impassioned national debate and, like an increasing number of Irishwomen of all ages, Mrs.
Casey and her friends, now about 50 years old and mothers of four or five children each, are being introspective again.


Creative Technologies reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Abatix Environmental reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Backcourt for Blazers Is Something Special
Jerome Kersey refers to them as Batman and Robin -- "our Dynamic Duo" -- but the Portland guards, Clyde Drexler and Terry Porter, may be more Butch and Sundance: a sharpshooting duet that has silenced the Utah Jazz in the first two games of the Western Conference finals.
Drexler even sounded a bit like the cocky Butch Cassidy on Tuesday night after Portland's 119-102 victory over Utah, agreeing that he and Porter have become the best backcourt in the National Basketball Association


Gates Confesses Shock at Acquittal Of Officer Who Hit King Most Often
When a suburban jury acquitted four Los Angeles police officers on nearly all charges of beating Rodney G. King three weeks ago, Chief Daryl F. Gates says, he was just as shocked as most other people who had followed the case.
The Los Angeles police chief said that while he had thought the jury might acquit or deadlock on three of the officers he thought the officer who rained the most blows on the prone Mr.
King, Laurence M. Powell, was certain to be convicted.


Ceco Filters Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Seeking Strength in Independence, Abortion-Rights Unit Quits A.C.L.U.
Girding for what they deem to be the imminent end to constitutionally protected abortion rights, the legal staff of the American Civil Liberties Union's abortion-rights team announced yesterday that it had severed its ties to the A.C.L.U. and formed its own independent organization.
The founders of the new group, to be called the Center for Reproductive Law and Policy, said the move would enable them to set policies without the encumbrances of a large organization.
They said it would also enable them to keep whatever money they raised rather than have some of it go for other A.C.L.U. activities.


Wilson Brothers reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


General Microwave reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29


Congressional Panel Votes to Keep at Least One Seawolf Submarine
A House-Senate conference committee voted today to save one of two Seawolf submarines President Bush had hoped to cut from the budget and to set aside an additional $550 million toward building either a second Seawolf or a smaller submarine.
The decision was a victory for the New England Congressional delegations, which struggled for more than a year to keep the submarine program alive and guarantee the continued operations of the General Dynamics Electric Boat shipyard in Groton, Conn.
The shipyard provides more than 10,000 jobs.


Aloette Cosmetics Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


SDNB Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


3-D Systems reports earnings for Qtr to March 27


Care Enterprise Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Metalclad Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Philip Morris to Buy Control Of Czech Cigarette Maker
In one of the largest American investments in the former Soviet bloc, Philip Morris has agreed to pay $413 million for control of the Czechoslovak cigarette manufacturer Tabak, beating a rival offer from R. J. Reynolds in a fiercely contested bidding war.
The investment is the second largest made here by a foreign company; Volkswagen agreed last year to put $6.4 billion into the Skoda automobile factory.


Rada Electronic Industries Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Pistons Expected to Name Rothstein to Succeed Daly
The Detroit Pistons are expected to name RON ROTHSTEIN as their head coach today.
They might soon be in the market for a general manager as well.
General Manager JACK McCLOSKEY will announce the team's new coach at a news conference at the Palace of Auburn Hills.


Robert Mitchell reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Zurn Industries reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Cybertek Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Acxiom Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


In New York Harbor, a Carrier Fires Her Guns, but Not in Anger


Moira Dryer, 34, An Abstract Artist; Painted on Wood
Moira Dryer, an abstract artist known for working in glowing colors on sheets of plywood, died yesterday at her home in Manhattan.
She was 34 years old.
She died of cancer, said James McKinley, a friend.


Philadelphia Getting Credit For Reversing a Fiscal Fall
After more than a decade of political feuding and deepening fiscal problems that brought Philadelphia to the brink of insolvency in 1990, the city has taken the first steps toward balancing its budget and regaining access to credit markets.
A major rating agency today increased the city's credit rating by a notch and, more importantly, gave an investment-grade rating to a bond program developed by a state oversight agency.


Trade Gap Widened In March
The nation's foreign-trade deficit widened sharply to $5.8 billion in March as imports surged and exports eased off their record levels, the Commerce Department reported today.
The March figure compared with a $3.3 billion deficit in February, the best performance in nearly nine years.


Stoneridge Resources reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Pop and Jazz in Review
The Cure  Nassau Coliseum
Of all the teen idols in rock, Robert Smith of the Cure is the only one who spends most of his concerts in the dark.
His hair in a just-woke-up tangle, his clothes black and floppy, Mr.
Smith generally stood in one place and sang when the Cure performed on Friday night.
He showed no reaction to the fact that whenever one of the numerous rotating spotlights happened to illuminate his face, screams echoed through the arena.
Mr.
Smith isn't a flirt or a tease.
In his songs, he's the voice of hypersensitive, self-doubting adolescence, tearing himself apart before anyone else gets a chance.
Since the Cure released its first album in 1979, Mr.
Smith has been writing and singing about alienation, connecting the crises of adolescence with overheated Romanticism and nightmarish surrealism.
His fondness for minor keys and his voice, quivering and yelping and breaking with pain, haven't changed much, but the Cure's music has, adding layer upon conflicting layer.


CII Financial reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Painful, Yes, but It Could Have Been Worse
When Bret Saberhagen entered the Mets' clubhouse here Tuesday night, he couldn't have been faulted for feeling as if he had walked into a practical joke.
Manager Jeff Torborg shook Saberhagen's hand and offered his congratulations.
General Manager Al Harazin gave him a pat on the back and remarked how well everything had gone.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, a report in the Book Notes column yesterday referred incorrectly at one point to the company that the author Marianne Williamson is leaving.
As noted elsewhere in the report, she is leaving HarperCollins and has signed a contract with Random House.


2d Arts Panel Protests Cancellation of Awards
For the second time this month, members of a peer panel of the National Endowment for the Arts have suspended consideration of grant applications to protest the veto of two grants by Anne-Imelda Radice, the acting chairwoman of the agency.
The nine panel members on fellowships for solo theater artists released a copy of their letter to Ms.
Radice yesterday saying that "most of us do not have the reassurance or the confidence to continue" deliberations.
It said the panel would not resume work until Ms.
Radice took conciliatory actions, including declaring in writing that grant recommendations "will not be rejected without sufficient written artistic justification."


Moira Dryer, 34, An Abstract Artist; Painted on Wood
Moira Dryer, an abstract artist known for working in glowing colors on sheets of plywood, died yesterday at her home in Manhattan.
She was 34 years old.
She died of cancer, said James McKinley, a friend.


AmVestors Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Surgery for Phils' Murphy
Outfielder DALE MURPHY of the Philadelphia Phillies will undergo arthroscopic surgery today to determine the cause of continual fluid buildup in his left knee.
Murphy was placed on the 15-day disabled list Tuesday. (AP)


Pop and Jazz in Review
Swamp Dogg  Tramps
Toward the end of Swamp Dogg's set on Saturday night, he went into a long catalogue of America's ills, including drugs, violence and everything else.
The show could well have turned into a public service announcement as he sang "We got to help America," over and over, but Swamp Dogg (Jerry Williams) wandered into the audience without benefit of a microphone and kept embellishing the phrase with improvisations, changing the worlds until it became "God help America." Standing in the midst of the audience, head thrown back as he sang, Mr.
Williams seemed lost and vulnerable, like a blind man making his way thorugh a rush-hour crowd.
By the time he had finished the tune it was clear that he meant what he sang, and his sense of conviction overcame the maudlin aspects of the performance.


Waste Recovery Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Conceptronic Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Network Real Estate reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Roy Rogers Returns To Earle Palmer
Just two and a half months after changing agencies, the Roy Rogers fast-food chain has switched again, returning its $20 million account, effectively immediately, to Earle Palmer Brown Advertising in Bethesda, Md.
In March, Roy Rogers, part of Hardee's Food Systems, moved its account to Jordan, McGrath, Case &amp; Taylor Inc. in New York from Ogilvy &amp; Mather New York, which had won the account from Earle Palmer Brown in 1990 when Hardee's, an Ogilvy client, acquired Roy Rogers.


AT WORK WITH: Stan Mack; Walk Backward, Carry a Big Bic
YOU are somewhere in the South Bronx with Stan Mack, gonzo cartoonist, hunting for a band of urban homesteaders.
You are walking, very gingerly, up a scarred staircase and down a crumbly hallway of a derelict tenement.
He's just bopping along, close to the ground, looking like the cartoon of himself in "Stan Mack's Real Life Funnies."
Minus the mustache.
He had a mustache, a black, bushy one, in 1975 when the comic strip was born.
"Yeah," he says, "so did most guys around that time. The thing is I have no eyebrows to speak of. If you're going to carry off a mustache you'd better have eyebrows to balance it."


Reading Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Devran Petroleum reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Wasted Energy? Call In the Young Scientists
Of the more than 200 finalists in a research contest who came here today to display their solutions to the world's energy problems, none had ever waited in a gasoline line, except maybe while in a child safety seat.
But maybe science students are born with an interest in the subject.
Maybe they think an energy crisis will come back in a country that imports half its oil.
Or maybe they worry that global energy use may set off catastrophic climate change.


Rothmans Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Tom Brown Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Seizure of Dinosaur Fossil Opens Legal Battle That Could Affect Museums
The seizure of a priceless dinosaur fossil last week by Federal agents has set off a complex legal fight over who has the right to excavate on Indian land and whether anyone has the right to buy fossils found there.
The outcome could affect museum collections as well as fossil dealers and private fossil owners abroad as well as in the United States.
The issues also touch on ill-defined relations between Indian communities and the Federal Government.
Among the thorny questions to be decided will be whether a 65-million-year-old Tyrannosaurus rex named Sue should be considered part of the American Indian cultural tradition.


Review/Dance; Tribute to a Choreographer
Syvilla Fort, a Katherine Dunham dancer and a noted teacher in New York, was a small woman with big, luminous eyes that didn't seem to miss a thing.
She maintained a keen interest in dance and in life even in the months before she died, in 1975.
Fort was also, to judge from a lavish tribute presented on Sunday night at Symphony Space, a choreographer and dance theorist of imagination and taste.
The program opened with a 1987 group piece, "Sergio," by Joan Peters, a protegee of Fort's and artistic director of the tribute, which was inspired by and set partly to the music of Sergio Mendez.
The piece, performed by the Joan Peters Dance Company, mixed jazz and Afro-Caribbean dance in a lilting response to the music, which suggested the catholicity and tempering distance of Fort's perspective.
Dr.
Glory Van Scott, producer of the evening, provided a heartfelt spoken homage to Fort, who was represented by four of her own pieces.


Group Lags In Race Over TV Advance
In a blow to its hopes of developing the official transmission standard for broadcasting high-definition television, a consortium that includes NBC and North American Philips announced today that it had slipped behind schedule.
The group, one of the principal competitors in the race, said it would not show up on time for testing at a federally supervised laboratory scheduled to begin on June 3.


THAI ENEMIES AGREE AT URGING OF KING TO CEASE VIOLENCE
With the Prime Minister and the leader of the political opposition sitting at his feet, the King of Thailand obtained an agreement Wednesday to end clashes that have left scores of people dead on the streets of Bangkok.
King Bhumibol Adulyadej met in a gilded reception room at the Chitralada Palace with the contested Prime Minister, Suchinda Kraprayoon, and the leader of the democracy movement, Chamlong Srimuang, who had been released from custody for the meeting, and urged them to "prevent fighting in our own house." A Pledge to Free Detainees
Mr.
Suchinda and Mr.
Chamlong announced afterward that the thousands of jailed protesters would be freed and that the Government would seek quick passage of an amendment to the Constitution requiring that the Prime Minister be an elected official, which Mr.
Suchinda is not.


Polygram and Universal Set Joint Venture in Distribution
Universal Pictures and Polygram Filmed Entertainment said yesterday that they were forming a company to distribute films produced by each of the co-owners.
Polygram, which is most widely known for its record operations, has been building a film production business in the United States through several production affiliates.
Its releases include "A Midnight Clear," "Wish You Were Here" and "My Beautiful Laundrette."


METRO DIGEST
METRO DIGEST  MACY'S IS CLOSING 8 STORES
R.
H.
Macy &amp; Company announced that it would close eight department stores by Aug. 1 as it struggles to restore the financial health of its bankrupt business.
The decision will close stores that had been the centerpiece of once-thriving urban hubs like the Flatbush section of Brooklyn and downtown Newark.
Economic analysts said that the Macy's announcement, combined with the news last week that Alexander's Inc. was closing 11 stores, damaged New York's cachet as the capital of the global retail industry.
A1.
Newark Journal.
B4.
NEW YORK CITY  BUSES ARE BACK FOR THE DISABLED
A political fight that has kept thousands of disabled children away from preschool programs in New York City has ended as legislators in Albany reached agreement on who would pay for their buses.
While acknowledging that the solution involved "budget gimmickry," one senator said the legislature had resorted to gimmicks on far less important issues.
B3.
HOPE FOR WATERFRONT PLAN
Compared to earlier ideas, the agreement by Governor Cuomo and Mayor Dinkins to redevelop Manhattan's West Side waterfront may hold the greatest promise for success because it represents the broadest consensus of politicians and their constituents.
News analysis, B2.
A NEW ALLY FOR PEDDLERS
Nine months after their peddling stands were banned from midtown Manhattan, disabled veterans contend that they have not received the training or jobs they were promised by the upscale businesses that sought their ouster, and Governor Cuomo has taken their side.
B3.
A BOOST FOR BROOKLYN
From the moment the Dutch settled Nieuw Amsterdam on one side of the East River and Breukelen on the other, Brooklyn has had to endure its lesser status as the outer borough, across the river, out of the City.
Now City Hall, Borough Hall and several civic organizations are touting Brooklyn's tourist attractions with the intense fury of a used car salesman selling a clunker.
Only Brooklyn, this salesman insists, is no clunker.
It's a Caddy and it's loaded.
B5.
REGION  SETTING OUT TO SAVE MONEY
"This is not going to be a fire sale," said Dominic DiNapoli, the accountant chosen to liquidate the assets of the Long Island auto dealer accused of defrauding General Motors of $436 million.
Mr.
DiNapoli is no stranger to the work of trying to satisfy nervous creditors.
Among his current assignments is the management and sale of the United States assets of Robert Maxwell, the British publisher whose his empire crashed after his death last year.
B7.
SETTING OUT TO SAVE ENERGY
Of the 1,200 students who set out to solve the world's energy problems, none had ever waited in a gasoline line, except maybe while in a child safety seat.
That did not dampen their enthusiasm for a contest run by New York State to come up with energy-saving technology.
B7.
THE CASE AGAINST CAROLYN WARMUS
Too much evidence to be coincidence ties Carolyn Warmus to the shooting of her lover's wife, a prosecutor argued in his final statement.
B7.
Florio signs transportation bill.
B9.
Chronicle B14


Gamma International Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Alexander Energy Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Overpopulation Becomes Our Problem Too
To the Editor:
According to the latest projections of the United Nations Population Fund, the world population is expected to rise from 5.48 billion in mid-1992 to 10 billion in 2050, and 97 percent of the increase is expected to occur in developing countries (news article, April 30).
The report points to the distressing fact that food production lagged behind population growth in 69 out of 102 developing countries between 1978 and 1989 when the population growth per year was less than what lies ahead in the next four decades.


U.S. Reluctance to Reduce CO   Is Sharply Criticized in Germany
Chancellor Helmut Kohl and other German leaders called on the United States today to strengthen its environmental policies before the world environmental summit meeting in Rio de Janeiro next month.
Speaking to a special session of the German Parliament, Chancellor Kohl said Germany was willing to make substantial new contributions to the Global Environmental Facility, a fund established by the World Bank to support environmental programs in the developing world.


The Talk of Hollywood; It's Columbus Against Columbus, With a Fortune in Profits at Stake
The Nina, Pinta and Santa Maria are returning, in duplicate.
Two big, competing movies, commemorating the 500th anniversary of Columbus's first voyage to America, are noisily setting sail.
And, while tens of millions of dollars are at stake, the sparring between the two has taken such a funny turn it might make a good
third
movie, too, if directed by Mel Brooks and starring (if he were alive) Zero Mostel.
One of the films, "Christopher Columbus: The Discovery," includes Marlon Brando as Tomas de Torquemada, the chief Spanish inquisitor.
Mr.
Brando has already asked that his name be removed from the credits, partly because of its depiction of Indians. (It's not the first time Mr. Brando has collected a huge sum for a film, then attacked it before its release: he did the same thing with the 1990 comedy "The Freshman.").


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Political Memo; Anxious Days for Bush's Campaign As G.O.P. Heads Into a 3-Way Race
Few Republicans would trade their troubles for the Democrats', but these are anxious days in the President's party.
Most of the Republican scripts for this election have not been working.
The economy is recovering, but only sluggishly, and the President's job approval rating is moving even less.


Bill to Allow TV Cameras In Courtrooms
State legislators have reached an agreement that would again allow television cameras in New York State's courtrooms, but with new restrictions intended to protect witnesses in criminal trials.
An earlier four-year experiment with cameras in the courtroom, which gave greater latitude to news organizations, ended because the Legislature could not agree on how to extend it.
Under heavy lobbying from victims' rights and criminal lawyers' groups, the Republican-controlled Senate refused to agree to a bill unless it provided more protection to witnesses.


QVC Network Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


CHRONICLE
Let no one call Gov.
Bill Clinton a one-note candidate: tonight at Tatou in New York he will play the saxophone at a fund-raising party put on by the Clinton for President Committee.
"He made his debut in 1988 on the 'Tonight' show," PAUL CAREY, Mr.
Clinton's Northeast finance director, said yesterday.
His appearance on the Carson show was "a big hit," Mr.
Carey said.
"The Governor studied saxophone for a long time, and when he was in high school gave serious thought to being a professional musician."


Escagenetics Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Officer Kills Theft Suspect
A 21-year-old man who had helped two other men steal a car at gunpoint in Brooklyn late last night was shot to death by one of two detectives who happened upon the scene, the police said.
The suspect, who was not immediately identified, was shot in the neck and pronounced dead at the scene, at Knickerbocker Avenue and Troutman Street in Bushwick, said a police spokesman, Sgt.
Ed Burns.
A man who had been in the car at the time of the robbery, at about 11:50 P.M., was shot several times by one of the thieves, Sergeant Burns said.
The man was taken to Elmhurst General Hospital where he was in serious but stable condition, Sergeant Burns said.
The two other men fled in the car, he said.


Drivefone Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Mob Murder Is Recounted By Organizer
In a soft voice that showed no emotion, an admitted captain in the Lucchese crime family testified yesterday that he carried out orders to murder several men, including a construction union official.
The witness, Peter Chiodo, appeared in the racketeering-murder trial of Vittorio Amuso, who is charged with heading the Lucchese family and authorizing nine murders.
The trial began this week in Federal District Court in Brooklyn.


Olympia To Restrict Revenue Use
To placate its creditors, Olympia &amp; York Developments Ltd. said today that it would build financial walls around individual assets in Canada to prevent any diversion of revenues to subsidiaries in the United States and Britain that remain outside its bankruptcy protection.
The huge but now teetering commercial real estate concern made its surprise declaration at a hearing before Justice Robert Blair of Ontario General Court exactly a week after he granted it five months of protection against asset seizure to work out a debt reorganization.


Critics' Choices for Lovers of the Great Indoors; Dance
A gala benefit brings Mikhail Baryshnikov dancing into New York for the first time since his appearance with Martha Graham's company last October.
"Dancers and Friends: An Evening of Solos and Duets" tonight at the Joyce Theater assembles mostly dancers and modern-dance choreographers who have performed for Pilobolus or Paul Taylor (that includes Mr. Baryshnikov).
The cause is Friends in Deed, founded by Mike Nichols and Cynthia O'Neal, to help those with life-threatening illnesses.
Moses Pendleton and Christopher Gillis will present premieres; Mr.
Baryshnikov will dance "Ten Suggestions" by Mark Morris.
Others involved are David Parsons, Daniel Ezralow, Tom Evert, Jeff Wadlington, Margie Gillis, Elisa Monte, David Brown, Peter Pucci, Cynthia Quinn, Rob Besserer and Kate Johnson.


Angels Crash


CHRONICLE
The title of his autobiography, "Still Dancing," has it right: Lord LEW GRADE, the 85-year-old producer of such movies as "On Golden Pond," "Sophie's Choice," "The Muppet Movie" and "Jesus of Nazareth," is dancing.
Asked about the title of the book, which was published in the United States on Wednesday by HarperCollins -- it came out in England in 1987 -- Lord Grade broke into a Charleston at a party given by ARTHUR OCHS SULZBERGER and his wife, CAROL SULZBERGER, on Wednesday night.


Review/Film; Cruise and Kidman In Old-Fashioned Epic
"Far and Away" is being sold as a big, old-fashioned movie event, an epic shot on giant-sized 70-millimeter film, sweeping across two continents.
It even has a genuine movie star, Tom Cruise, as a 19th-century Irish tenant farmer named Joseph Donelly, who finds love and land in America.
Well, the film does have a lot of crowd scenes and wide shots of scenery, so it's big.
And the story is determinedly old-fashioned.
When Joseph runs off to Boston with Shannon Christie, a rich landowner's daughter (Nicole Kidman), they masquerade as and actually live like brother and sister.
You can't get more old-fashioned than that.
But this film is as much an epic event as sitting at home watching television, an activity that seeing "Far and Away" greatly resembles.


Quotation of the Day
"Let the Muslims go to their own areas of Bosnia. They can live peacefully there. But we are not going to live with them." -- DRAGO DJUKANOVIC, a Serb.  [ A12:6. ]


Military Rules on Reporting From Battlefield Are Honed
After more than eight months of talks with news organizations, the Pentagon today issued a set of principles intended to guarantee that journalists have greater access to military operations than they had in the Persian Gulf war.
But the Government and the news media could not agree on whether there should be any official "security review" of news reports before they are published or broadcast.


Currency Comptroller Is Nominated by Bush
President Bush announced today that he had nominated James E. Gilleran, the Superintendent of the California State Banking Department, to become the next comptroller of the currency.
Mr.
Gilleran's nomination had been expected but his confirmation to the post, which regulates many of the nation's largest banks, is quickly shaping into another bruising fight between the White House and Congress.


Canada's Leader Says Battle For Democracy Is Not Over
Prime Minister Brian Mulroney of Canada told graduates at Johns Hopkins University yesterday that "it is rare in history that there has been such a victory for an idea -- the idea of democracy."
"The defeat of Communism opened the door to democracy," Mr.
Mulroney said.
"But it also brought economic hardship to 425 million people throughout Central and Eastern Europe."


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: On the Trail
PRESIDENT'S POPULARITY ERODES IN CALIFORNIA
LOS ANGELES, May 21 (AP) -- President Bush's popularity in California has eroded significantly, according to a new poll.
In a survey of 1,469 voters taken May 16-19, The Los Angeles Times Poll found that 39 percent of those polled would vote for Ross Perot, the Texas billionaire who plans an independent Presidential candidacy.


Naha Journal; Where the Rising Sun Just Casts a Long Shadow
The Japanese Government spared no effort last week in celebrating the 20th anniversary of America's return of Okinawa, which many regard as the high point in Washington's postwar relations with Tokyo.
The Emperor and the Prime Minister greeted Vice President Dan Quayle warmly as both sides tried to rekindle the good will engendered between the onetime enemies by that act 20 years ago.


5th Avenue Group To Aid Ex-Vendors
A temporary truce was reached today in the battle over banning disabled veterans from peddling in mid-Manhattan after Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo said "good faith" efforts were under way to find other job opportunities for the veterans.
Mr.
Cuomo, who had threatened this week to work to overturn the ban, said he would hold off for now.


Critics' Choices for Lovers of the Great Indoors; Pop Music
In the forests of Madagascar live lemurs that are found nowhere else in the world.
Madagascar's music is equally distinctive, and a concert tonight at the Washington Square Church, 135 West Fourth Street in Greenwich Village, offers a chance to hear performers from two generations: Rakoto Frah, a flutist in his 70's, and Rossy, a young guitarist who leads a pop band but will perform solo.
Mr.
Frah is a revered public figure in Madagascar; his picture is on the 1,000-franc note.
He plays the sodina -- a wooden flute with a breathy tone that carries skipping, hopping, asymmetrical melodies -- and sings in a voice full of grit and experience.
Rossy, the stage name of Paul Bert Rahasimanana, plays guitars (acoustic and electric) and local stringed instruments.
He writes songs about current issues, and with his band, he brings the syncopations of Malagasy traditional music to arrangements that might remind American listeners of Celtic folk-rock.
The occasion of the concert is the release of an album, "A World Out of Time" (Shanachie), of music recorded in Madagascar by David Lindley and Henry Kaiser, two California guitarists.
Mr.
Kaiser has recorded with Fred Frith, Richard Thompson and others, and he is to accompany the Malagasy musicians at the concert.
With any luck, he'll let Rossy and Mr.
Frah seize the spotlight in this rare United States appearance.


Economic Watch; Then There Were 3? Don't Bet on It
It's war up there.
The bloodiest battle for mastery of the skies may be at hand.
Many industry experts say the steep cut in fares that American Airlines initiated last month could bury three competitors operating under the protection of the bankruptcy courts: Trans World Airlines, Continental and America West.
And the cuts could mortally wound two others, USAir and Northwest, that are struggling to stay ahead of their creditors.


On Stage, and Off
About 'Fires' Before It Got Hot
"Fires in the Mirror," the new one-woman show about racial unrest in Crown Heights, Brooklyn, is the toughest Off Broadway ticket in town.
The piece, written and performed by Anna Deavere Smith, has already extended its limited run at the New York Shakespeare Festival through June 28 and is expected to extend again through most of the summer.
Now that it is a hit, staff members at the theater are talking about how "Fires in the Mirror" almost didn't happen.
At the center of the story is a reported conflict between JoAnne Akalaitis, the artistic director of the festival, and George C. Wolfe, a resident director of the theater.
Mr.
Wolfe, who wrote and directed the Broadway musical "Jelly's Last Jam" this season, did not direct a show at the Public, as he had in years past.
Instead, last December, he produced a two-week program of performance artists called Moving Beyond the Madness: A Festival for New Voices.
It was a forum for minority performers, which included Ms.
Smith, the actress Danitra Vance and John Leguizamo, whose one-man show "Mambo Mouth" was a hit Off Broadway last season.
For the new-voices festival, Mr.
Leguizamo performed a piece called "Spic-O-Rama."


SENSORMATIC TO BUY OTHER SECURITY DEVICE MAKERS
The Sensormatic Electronics Corporation has announced plans to buy the theft prevention arm of a European competitor and an American closed-circuit television manufacturer for a total of $365 million.
Sensormatic, a maker of anti-theft products based in Deerfield Beach, Fla., said it would buy the theft control divisions of Automated Security P.L.C. for $265 million.


More Sunday Papers Deliver Shampoo as Well as News
AN intriguing new idea in newspaper advertising began with a friendly backyard chat between neighbors in Cincinnati.
Cincinnati is home to the nation's largest advertiser, the Procter &amp; Gamble Company, and one neighbor was Kevin Hall, the brand manager for P.&amp;G.'s Vidal Sassoon shampoo.
Mr.
Hall was musing about the company's growing interest in door-to-door sampling and the difficulty of finding an effective distribution system.
The other participant at the patio meeting was the production chief for The Cincinnati Enquirer, providing Mr.
Hall with an idea.
"Wait a second," he recalls saying.
"The paper goes door to door."
A few weeks later, when The Enquirer's 250,000 Sunday subscribers padded out to retrieve their papers, each one contained a one-ounce sample of Vidal Sassoon shampoo.
In their endless quest to get samples of their products into the hands, hair and mouths of consumers, packaged-goods giants are showing growing interest in using the distribution strength of newspapers.
Since the Sassoon test in Cincinnati last May, many Sunday newspapers subscribers have essentially received a free breakfast, courtesy of similar promotions.
Kellogg has used newspapers to send out six million samples of a new cereal, and Maxwell House has delivered small packets of coffee.
Last weekend, using a network of newspapers across the country, P.&amp;G. delivered 18 million small bottles of its Pantene SP shampoo.
Still, the programs are viewed largely as tests, and several marketing executives said that once the novelty wore off, the idea might seem less compelling.
But for now advertisers are looking closely at the approach.
"They are wonderful distribution alternatives," said Rick Hosfield, director of media, broadcast and shows for General Mills, which is reportedly studying the use of newspapers for sending out samples.
Mr.
Hosfield said the combination of a sample, coupon and full-page advertisements was a potent method to sell packaged goods.
"Newspapers have become a multifaceted marketing tool," he said.
Mr.
Hosfield and other marketing executives said newspapers were overdue in developing new ways to attract advertisers.
"They've been very difficult to do business with," said Mr.
Hosfield, who overseas all advertising spending for General Mills.
As a result, he said, "They are a terrific resource that has been under-utilized."
The innovation was born of one of the worst recessions in decades for the newspaper industry.
Publishers are desperately trying to find new ways to accommodate advertisers and make money.
"Adversity breeds changes," said Marcella Rosen, a managing director of the N. W. Ayer ad agency.
Ms.
Rosen said the sampling programs were a good idea.
"The distribution system is an untapped resource."
Newspapers have good reason to become attuned to the needs of the food and soap companies.
They are huge advertisers.
P.&amp;G. spent $2.28 billion on advertising in 1990, according to Advertising Age, with network television accounting for by far the largest share.
While the food companies use Sunday newspapers heavily to distribute coupons, they do little other newspaper advertising.
Newspapers are using the interest in sampling to sell more ads.
As part of a sampling promotion, a packaged-goods company buys a page and a half of advertising.
Also included is an advertisement for the product, which would be in the plastic bag covering the Sunday paper.
Such promotions cost about 20 cents a sample, including the advertising and plastic bag.
That price is similar to the cost of mailing a sample, the conventional way of distributing samples.
Last year, The Chicago Tribune developed a product sampling program called Newspac that allows samples to be inserted automatically into Sunday papers along with coupons.
Mr.
Hall of Procter &amp; Gamble said the chief benefit of using newspapers instead of mail for sampling was that all the samples would arrive on the same day.
That allows marketers to run advertisements in conjunction with the samples, and it lets retailers stock up on the product.
Mr.
Hall said the most successful products for such sampling promotions were those used in a morning routine, like shampoo or soap.
A network, the National Four-Color Newspaper Network, exists that allows consumer-goods companies to distribute samples in 28 million newspapers at once.
The sampling programs are still in their infancy.
The network has been involved in seven programs so far and is planning several more.


Money Fund Assets Up
The assets of the nation's 596 money market mutual funds increased by $5.76 billion, to $502.98 billion, in the week ended Wednesday, the Investment Company Institute said yesterday.
The assets of the 219 institutional funds increased by $4.91 billion, to $186.28 billion.
The assets of the 286 general-purpose funds were up by $122.7 million, to $175.07 billion.
The 91 broker-dealer funds increased by $723.8 million, to $141.63 billion.


Facing Down Malawi's Tyrant
Not much happens to catch the world's eye in Malawi, a sliver of a country 300 miles long, tucked deep in south-central Africa.
But a decision last week by Malawi's Western donors makes a large and useful point.
They, along with the World Bank, have suspended aid until Malawi demonstrates respect for human rights.
With the cold war over, there's no reason to indulge anti-Communist autocracies in the third world.
Since independence in 1964 Malawi, formerly Nyasaland, has known a single ruler: President-for-life Hastings Kamuzu Banda, known to his people as Ngwazi, meaning lion or protector.
Under Dr.
Banda, nine million Malawians have gained a good highway system and the illusion of stability.
But the price has been total subservience to the Ngwazi, now in his 90's, and to his overbearing ministers, who warn that dissenters will become "food for crocodiles."


COMPANY NEWS
ALCO STANDARD CORP., Wayne, Pa., a paper distributor, acquired Worcester Business Machines and Worcester Financial Services, Worcester, Mass.
Terms were not disclosed.
BOEING COMMERCIAL AIRPLANE GROUP, Seattle, said KLM Royal Dutch Airlines had acquired its 27th Boeing 737, a 400 series model.
The order, including spares, is valued at about $36 million.


Not Just Another Campaign Pitch


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Politics of Morality; Speech by Quayle on Family Values Raises Questions About Thrust of Bush Campaign
Vice President Dan Quayle and his staff were clearly delighted by the stir he caused with his gibe at Murphy Brown, but the underlying question is whether the ensuing debate on family values was good for the 1992 Republican Presidential ticket or just for Mr.
Quayle.
The Vice President's speech, delivered during a three-day political swing that was carefully planned to generate as much publicity as possible, clearly had aims beyond its stated purpose of sparking a national debate on marriage, child-rearing, poverty and other social issues.


Weekend Events From A (Astoria) to W (Westchester)
Here is a sampling of Memorial Day Weekend events in the New York metropolitan region.
NEW YORK CITY Tomorrow
WASHINGTON SQUARE OUTDOOR ART EXHIBITION, the streets surrounding Washington Square Park, Manhattan.
More than 300 artists and craftspeople displaying their work on the sidewalk.
Noon to dusk.
Also on Sunday and Monday and May 30 and 31.
BASEBALL: YANKEES VS.
BREWERS, Yankee Stadium, the Bronx.
Tomorrow and Sunday at 1:30 P.M.; Monday at 1 P.M.
Tickets: $9.50 to $14.50 for reserved seating.
Information: (212) 293-6000.
WOODEN BOATS, South Street Seaport, 14 Fulton Street, lower Manhattan.
A wooden-boat festival with displays of handcrafted full-size boats and demonstrations of steam-bending boards for hull construction, as well as exhibitions of model boats and crafts, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Outdoor concerts are planned: tomorrow at 6 P.M., featuring Marshall Crenshaw and Syd Straw; Sunday at 7:30 P.M. with Bela Fleck and the Flecktones; Monday at 5 P.M. with the Band, Memphis Soul Survivors and others.
The festival continues on Sunday and Monday, same times, with a fireworks display on Sunday at 9:30 P.M.
Information: (212) 669-9424.
ANTIQUES SHOW, Park Avenue Armory, Park Avenue and 67th Street, Manhattan.
One hundred antiques dealers from around the country.
Admission: $8.
Noon to 9 P.M.
Also Sunday, noon to 6 P.M.
Information: (212) 472-1180.
LIVABLE WEST SIDE FESTIVAL, Broadway from 72d to 86th Street, Manhattan.
Food, crafts, book stalls and entertainment. 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Free.
DANCE AFRICA BAZAAR, Brooklyn Academy of Music, 30 Lafayette Avenue, at Ashland Place, Fort Greene.
African food, art and crafts. 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Free.
Also on Sunday, same hours.
BEACHES, City beaches open today and remain so through Labor Day: BRIGHTON BEACH/CONEY ISLAND, from 15th Street to 37th Street, Brooklyn; MANHATTAN BEACH, Oriental Boulevard from Ocean Avenue to Mackenzie Street, Brooklyn; ORCHARD BEACH and Promenade, Pelham Bay Park, the Bronx; ROCKAWAY, Beach Ninth Street to Beach 149th Street, Neponsit, Queens; SOUTH BEACH and MIDLAND BEACH, from Fort Wadsworth to Miller Field, New Dorp, S.I.; WOLFE'S POND BEACH, Hylan Boulevard and Cornelia Avenue, Prince's Bay, S.I.
Sunday
GREENWICH VILLAGE FEST, Waverly Place from Broadway to University Place.
Arts, crafts and entertainment.
Proceeds benefit ACT-UP, a group formed to help people with AIDS. 10 A.M. to 7 P.M.
Rain date: May 30.
WALKING TOUR, lower Manhattan.
Joyce Gold, professor of Manhattan history at New York University, is the leader.
Noon.
Tickets: $12.
Reservations and meeting place: (212) 242-5762.
BROOKLYN BRIDGE TOUR, Brooklyn Bridge and Brooklyn Heights Esplanade.
A combination of history and folklore about the bridge's construction, led by Howard Goldberg of Adventure on a Shoestring. 1 P.M.
Reservations and meeting place: (212) 265-2663.
Monday
PARADE, MANHATTAN, starts at West End Avenue and 72d Street and moves uptown to Riverside Drive at 90th Street. 10 A.M.
PARADE, QUEENS, Northern Boulevard from Jason Street to Alameda and 245th Street, Little Neck. 2 P.M.
PARADE, BROOKLYN, Third Avenue at 80th Street to 101st Street at Fort Hamilton Field, Bay Ridge. 10 A.M.
PARADE, QUEENS, 91st Avenue and Cross Island Parkway to Jamaica Avenue and Springfield Boulevard, Queens Village. 9:30 A.M.
PARADE, QUEENS, Grand Avenue from 72d Street to 69th Lane, Maspeth. 11:30 A.M.
MEMORIAL DAY RUN, 10th Street and New Dorp Plaza to Clawson and Allison Streets, New Dorp, S.I. 8 A.M.
BASEBALL: METS VS.
REDS, Shea Stadium, Flushing, Queens, 7:40 P.M.
Tickets: $6.50 to $15.
Information: (718) 507-8499.
MILITARY-HISTORY TOUR, "New York in War and Peace," lower Manhattan.
Sponsored by Big Onion Walking Tours. 1 P.M.
Fee: $9 ($7 for students and the elderly).
Reservations and meeting place: (212) 439-1090.
TURTLE BAY FAIR, Second Avenue from 42d to 53d Street, Manhattan.
Food, antiques, crafts and entertainment. 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.
ASTORIA-BROADWAY FESTIVAL, Broadway, from Crescent to Steinway Streets, Astoria, Queens.
Crafts, food, entertainment, a petting zoo and hay rides. 10 A.M. to 7 P.M.
NEW JERSEY Tomorrow
RARITAN RIVER MUSIC FESTIVAL, Clinton Presbyterian Church, 91 Center Street, Clinton.
Works by Mozart, Shostakovich and others, performed by the Lark Quartet and Tom Gallant, oboist. 7:30 P.M.
Tickets: $12 ($9 for students and the elderly).
Information: (908) 213-1100.
SLAVIC MUSIC CONCERT, Passaic County Community College, Ellison Street, Patterson.
Traditional Slavic music performed by the Troika Balalaika Orchestra.
Sponsored by the North Jersey chapter of the Congress of Russian Americans. 2 P.M.
Tickets: $10 ($7 for students and the elderly).
Information: (2o1) 790-1377.
"ALADDIN AND THE MAGIC LAMP," Ritz Theater, 915 White Horse Pike, Oaklyn.
An improvisational performance for children, featuring actors and puppets. 10 A.M. and 1 P.M.
Tickets: $3.50.
Information and reservations: (609) 858-5230.
DOG SHOW, Wolf Hill Farm, Exit 105 of the Garden State Parkway, Oceanport.
The annual juried show, sponsored by the Monmouth County Kennel Club. 9 A.M. to 4 P.M.
Admission: $2 (50 cents for children).
Information: (908) 741-7710.
WESTCHESTER COUNTY Today
"CARTOONS: THE STATE OF THE ART," Museum of Cartoon Art, Comly Avenue, Rye Brook.
An exhibition of comics, editorial cartoons, animation and novels.
Hours: Tuesdays through Fridays, 10 A.M. to 4 P.M.; Sundays, 1 to 5 P.M.
Admission: $3 ($2 for students and the elderly).
Information: (914) 939-0234.
"SUGAR," Westchester Broadway Theater, 1 Broadway Plaza, Elmsford.
A musical by Arthur Laurents and Jule Styne, based on the movie "Some Like It Hot." Through July 12.
Performance times: Wednesdays and Thursdays, 1 and 8 P.M.; Fridays and Saturdays, 8 P.M.; Sundays, 1:30 and 8 P.M.
Tickets: $34 to $55.
Reservations: (914) 592-2222
WESTCHESTER COUNTY FAIR, Yonkers Raceway.
Through June 7.
Rides, games and entertainment, including vintage pop music concerts, bungee jumping, human cannonball demonstrations and a fireworks display.
Hours: Mondays through Fridays, 5 P.M. to midnight; Saturdays, Sundays and Memorial Day, noon to midnight.
Admission: $5.
Information: (914) 968-4200.
Tomorrow
BEACHES, Glen Island Park, New Rochelle and Playland Park, Rye.
Glen Island Park will be open tomorrow through Monday, 10 A.M. to 6 P.M.; fees: $3 ($1.25 for those 5 to 11; free for those under 5. Parking is $2.25 per car. Playland Park will be open tomorrow and Sunday 12:30 P.M. to midnight, Monday, noon to 11 P.M.; swimming fees are $3.25 ($1.50 for children 40 inches tall and above; free for those under 40 inches; parking is $5 tomorrow and Sunday and $6 on Monday. Information for both: (914) 285-7275.
ANIMALS AND ACROBATS, Van Cortlandt Manor, South Riverside Avenue, Croton-on-Hudson.
A celebration of the early American circus, with animals, musicians and other performers. 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Also Sunday and Monday, same times.
Admission: $6 ($5 for the elderly; $3 for ages 6 to 17; free for those under 6).
Information: (914) 631-8702.
WASHINGTON HEADQUARTERS MUSEUM, Virginia Road, North White Plains.
Demonstrations of colonial weaving, bread-baking, dyeing and other crafts.
Tomorrow and Sunday, 1 to 3:30 P.M.
Free.
Information: (914) 949-1236.
ULSTER COUNTY Tomorrow
ARTS AND CRAFTS FAIR, Ulster County Fairgrounds, Libertyville Road, Exit 18 of the Gov.
Thomas E. Dewey Thruway, New Paltz.
Exhibits by more than 250 artists and craftspeople from around the country. 10 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Also Sunday and Monday, same hours.
Admission: $5 ($4.50 for the elderly; $3 for children).
Information: (914) 679-8087.
LONG ISLAND Tomorrow
BEACHES, excursions to Jones Beach, Long Beach and Fire Island.
Round-trip excursions on the Long Island Rail Road, weekends starting tomorrow and running through Labor Day.
Round-trip fare: $10.50 to $12.
Information: (718) 217-5477.
LONG ISLAND MOZART FESTIVAL, Planting Fields Arboretum, Planting Fields Road, Oyster Bay.
Equestrian presentations, wine tasting, food and craft exhibits, and performances by the Sea Cliff Chamber Players.
Noon to 9 P.M.
Also Sunday and Monday, and May 30 and 31.
Tickets: $12 to $25.
Information: (516) 671-6263.
BLUEGRASS CONCERT, Guild Hall, Main Street, East Hampton.
A performance by the Nashville Bluegrass Band. 8 P.M.
Tickets: $16 ($14 for the elderly).
Information: (516) 324-4050.
"GO FLY A KITE," Environmental Learning Center, Cedar Beach Road, Southold.
A kite-making workshop. 1 P.M.
Fee: $7.50.
Information: (516) 852-4608.
Sunday
POTATOHAMPTON MINITHON, Bridgehampton Community House, Main Street, Bridgehampton.
A 10-kilometer foot race; proceeds benefit the East End Lyme Association. 9:30 A.M.
Cost: $15.
Information: (516) 537-0500.
Monday
MEMORIAL DAY FAIR, Cathedral of the Incarnation, 50 Cathedral Avenue, Garden City.
Bowling, water-dunking, crafts and a goldfish lottery.
Noon to 4 P.M.
Free.
Information: (516) 746-2955.
CONNECTICUT Today
"THE AMERICAN IMPRESSIONISTS AT LYME," Florence Griswold Museum, 96 Lyme Street, Old Lyme.
More than 50 paintings by Childe Hassam, Willard Metcalf, Walter Griffin, William Chadwick and others.
Through May 31.
Hours: Wednesdays through Sundays, 1 to 5 P.M.
Admission: $3.
Information: (203) 434-5542.
Tomorrow
LOBSTER FEST, Mystic Seaport Museum, 50 Greenmanville Avenue, Mystic.
An old-fashioned lobster bake on the banks of the Mystic River, sponsored by the Mystic Rotary Club. 11 A.M. to 3 P.M.
Also Sunday and Monday, same times.
Admission: $14.50 ($8.75 for ages 6 to 15; free for ages 5 and younger; food is an additional $12.50).
Information: (203) 572-5315.
HISTORIC-HOUSE TOUR, in Norwich.
Sponsored by the Eastern Connecticut Foundation for Public Giving.
A tour of residences and taverns that date from the late 17th and early 18th century.
Cost: $10.
Reservations and information: (203) 887-3303.


Critics' Choices for Lovers of the Great Indoors; Art
Andrea Mantegna, the early Italian Renaissance master, is not an artist whose work goes down easily.
And "Andrea Mantegna," the major exhibition devoted to him at the Metropolitan Museum of Art, is not all smooth sailing either.
But because of some stunning works in it, the show is an absolute must.
It requires that you wade through rooms of things possibly by him or not by him at all.
This may be simply in the nature of doing an exhibition about a 15th-century artist, particularly a show without many of the major paintings that are indisputably his but that aren't movable or are too fragile to lend.
Still, it can make for some rough going if you're unprepared.


COMPUTER GRAPHICS CONCERN MAKING ACQUISITION
The Raster Ops Corporation, a company based in Santa Clara, Calif., that specializes in graphics arts products for the Apple Macintosh computer, said it would acquire Truevision Inc. in a stock swap valued at $33 million.
Truevision, an Indianapolis-based maker of broadcast-quality video production equipment for I.B.M.-compatible personal computers, will become a wholly owned subsidiary of Raster Ops.


Bail Is Set for Defendants in Videotaped Riot Beating
A judge set bail today for four men who pleaded not guilty in the televised beating and robbing of a truck driver during the first minutes of the Los Angeles riots, and their supporters and family members said they expected the men would soon be home from jail.
The beating, which was videotaped from a helicopter by a television news team, has become the most enduring image of the violence that broke out on April 29 after a suburban jury acquitted four white Los Angeles police officers in the beating of a black motorist, Rodney G. King.


Kerner Report Said It All About Urban Unrest
To the Editor:
I had forgotten most of the details in the 1968 Kerner Commission report on civil disorders, but the Los Angeles rebellion sent me scurrying to find my old, dog-eared paperback copy.
It had been last used in 1972 when I was serving as Special Assistant for Minority Affairs to the Commandant of the Marine Corps and trying to develop recommendations and solutions to the racial strife plaguing the Marine Corps then.
What an extraordinary document!
If you were to read the Kerner Commission report today, you would probably think it was written, in many respects, in the aftermath of the Rodney King disturbances.
I have just finished reading some portions of it again, and it is startling how little attention has been paid to the conclusions and recommendations from this report during the intervening years.


Soccer Champions Hailed on Return
Tens of thousands of wildly cheering fans mobbed a motorcade as the Barcelona soccer team drove through the city today with its first European Champions Cup.


Review/Theater; The Uninvited Guest, It Turns Out, Is Homicidal
It is obvious that the characters in Todd Alcott's "One Neck" have not seen John Guare's "Six Degrees of Separation." If they had, they might have been less hospitable to the so-called friend of a friend who shows up, uninvited, for dinner.
Instead of simply being a con man, he is a homicidal maniac.
Before his identity is revealed, the play (at the Home for Contemporary Theater and Art) is a malevolent look at the emptiness of a cross-section of the thirtysomething generation.
Afterward, it veers perilously close to a horror movie.
Sitting around the host's elegant Long Island beachhouse, the characters compare notes on the fearfulness of contemporary society.
This is a world, they tell us, where one can be randomly mugged, raped or decapitated by falling masonry.
Standard liberal responses seem to have no effect.
The uninvited guest fits right in with this company, except that he seems more skeptical and is less successful, professionally.
He is, he says, an unlicensed psychologist, which, of course, might also be said about Hannibal Lecter.


Chinese Set Off Their Biggest Nuclear Explosion
China today set off the largest underground nuclear test it has ever conducted, the State Department said.
The explosion was thought to have a yield of about one megaton, equivalent to a million tons of TNT.
The blast, which took place about 1 A.M.
Eastern daylight time, had 70 times the explosive power of the atomic bomb dropped on Hiroshima, and exceeded the 150-kiloton limit observed by Washington and Moscow under a 1990 treaty, scientists said.


Rentz Adds Impressive Title to Job
Moving to Winged Foot, one of golf's nicest sanctuaries, has proved inspiring to Larry Rentz, one of the metropolitan area's premier professionals.
The 32-year-old Rentz, who this year became Tom Nieporte's assistant at the Mamaroneck, N.Y., club, outpaced the field today and won the $100,000 Dodge Classic by eight shots.


Irving J. Selikoff Is Dead at 77; TB Researcher Fought Asbestos
Dr.
Irving J. Selikoff, the co-discoverer of a treatment for tuberculosis who went on to prove the hazards of asbestos and lead a campaign against its use, died on Wednesday at Valley Hospital in Ridgewood, N.J.
He was 77 years old and lived in Ridgewood.
He died of cancer, said a spokeswoman for the Mount Sinai Medical Center and School of Medicine, where he was affiliated for 51 years.


'Hooray for Senor Dinkins!' And the Mayor Says, Well, Not Much
Before leaving the Caribbean for New York today, Mayor David N. Dinkins took some time away from the pomp and circumstance dominating his short visit here to concentrate on the problems plaguing a nation with strong ties to his city.
After receiving an honorary degree from the Universidad Autonoma de Santo Domingo for his work on the behalf of Dominicans, Mr.
Dinkins made an impromptu visit to Villa Juana, one of the poorest sections of Santo Domingo, where he was cheered by residents who ran out of their shacks to greet him.


Kidder-Smith Barney Talks On Merger Said to Collapse
Negotiations over a possible merger of Kidder, Peabody &amp; Company with Smith Barney, Harris Upham &amp; Company collapsed Wednesday night, executives close to the talks said yesterday.
Differences over price, as well as structural problems involved in a merger of part or all of the two firms, apparently prevented an agreement.
The executives added that the failure preceded a report published yesterday in The Wall Street Journal that General Electric, which owns Kidder, had decided to sell the brokerage and was holding talks with Smith Barney, which is owned by the Primerica Corporation.


For Allergy Sufferers, It's Crying Time Again
Residents of the New York area with pollen allergies are in the midst of a particularly miserable spell of sneezing and watery eyes.
This year's cool, wet spring has contributed to one of the highest pollen levels in years.
"It's been much worse than usual this year," said Michael Pignataro, a Queens accountant and longtime allergy sufferer.
"Over the weekend, my head almost exploded." Confirming the Obvious


Stars Stirring for Weekend Tripleheader at Belmont
The Belmont barns were bulging with stars yesterday as New York racing preened for its summer in the spotlight, which opens with three major races over the Memorial Day weekend and escalates to the Belmont Stakes two weeks later.
The stars include Pine Bluff, who won the Preakness, and A.P.
Indy, who missed the Kentucky Derby and the Preakness but figures to be the favorite in the Belmont, plus a herd of senior stars like In Excess and Twilight Agenda.
But the opening act tomorrow may be a tough act to follow: Twelve of the prime 3-year-old fillies in the country meet in the Acorn Stakes, the first race in the Triple Tiara series, dominated last year by Meadow Star and her archrival, Lite Light.


Review/Ballet; 'Coppelia' Shows Off Male Dancers
American Ballet Theater's production of "Coppelia," which will be performed through Monday (with time off on Sunday), has turned into perfect light entertainment and a showcase for the company's male bravura dancers this season.
On Wednesday afternoon, Gil Boggs stepped into the role of Franz, sweetheart to the heroine, Swanilda; Wes Chapman did the same in the evening.
But the focus at the Metropolitan Opera House was very rightly on Claudia Alfieri, who made a sparkling debut at the matinee in the ballerina role although still a corps member.
Twyla Tharp featured her prominently in "The Upper Room" two years ago, but her classical dancing has been put to the test only fleetingly in brief solos.


A Defrosted Caveman At the Prom
Here is a simple quiz to gauge whether you should even think about seeing "Encino Man." Do the phrases "He's dope" and "She's buff" seem like compliments or insults to you?
If they sound like insults, you might as well put on your reading glasses and curl up with a copy of "Modern Maturity" or a video of "Thirtysomething." This film isn't likely to play well with anyone who has strayed very far from the age of 15 or the vicinity of a high school.
It is the story of a Cro-Magnon guy who goes from frozen fossil to prom king in just a few days.
Dave (Sean Astin) is clean-cut and geeky, searching for popularity by digging a swimming pool in his backyard.
His best friend, Stoney, has a tangle of hair, a headband, neo-60's clothes, a hiccupy manner of speech and a chillin' vocabulary impenetrable to parents.
That is, he is played by Pauly Shore as a millimeter away from the comedian's persona on MTV's "Totally Pauly."


Market Place; Changing World Of Fund Investors
THE sweeping changes for the mutual fund industry that the Securities and Exchange Commission proposed yesterday may raise an important question in the mind of the individual investor: What about me?
Investor advocacy groups have raised no hue and cry about the suggested revisions of the Investment Company Act of 1940, which governs those who manage America's $1.5 trillion in mutual funds; many of these changes were expected.
Indeed, some revisions strike consumer groups as particularly friendly to investors.
Workers with a stake in a retirement fund, for example, would get prospectuses and semi-annual reports on their investments under the S.E.C. proposals -- a plus for investors.


Surviving Cancer
To the Editor:
Paul Tsongas, in "The Cancer Freed Me. It Freed Me" (Op-Ed, May 6), has done for cancer survivors what Magic Johnson has done for people with AIDS: shown us the key words are survival and living in the grace of the moment.
As a Hodgkins disease survivor in remission since 1988, I am grateful for their reminding us all of the preciousness of life, easily forgotten in the chaos of daily living, and for helping dispel myths about serious illness.
J.
H.
YOUNG  New York, May 7, 1992


Michael Jordan Stays on Top
For the second consecutive year, the basketball star Michael Jordan has been named first in a survey by The Sports Marketing Letter of "the 10 most wanted spokespersons."
The Westport, Conn., newsletter listed the Chicago Bulls player as the best-paid sports endorser for his work for companies like Nike, Hanes, General Mills and Quaker Oats, which will bring him an estimated $13 million this year.


Treasury Prices Decline Sharply
The credit markets were thrown into turmoil yesterday by an article in The Wall Street Journal suggesting that credit conditions would not be eased, and prices of Treasury securities fell sharply.
The article, which cited unidentified sources "familiar with the Fed's deliberations," said that at a meeting earlier this week, Fed policy makers voted not to ease monetary policy immediately and approved a policy directive that would seem to make it more difficult to ease in the weeks ahead.


Some Giants Requested H.I.V. Tests
General Manager George Young said yesterday that the Giants' decision to test players for H.I.V., the virus that causes AIDS, during this week's minicamp came at the urging of the team's medical staff and at the request of several players.
"We had the best medical interest of our players in mind," Young said.
"This is something that some of the players pleaded with us to do."


Corrections
Because of an editing error, a list in Business Day on Monday with an article about large book advances for authors omitted an agent for Kitty Kelley, and a correction in this space on Wednesday misspelled his name.
He is Wayne S. Kabak.


Open Short Sales Rise on Big Board and Amex
Goaded along by a stock market that seems determined to test new highs, the number of shares sold short and not yet covered rose for the second straight month, both the New York Stock Exchange and the American Stock Exchange said yesterday.
According to traders, the market's contribution was twofold: It appeared to embolden short-sellers -- traders who look to profit by borrowing stocks they believe are overvalued so that they can sell them.
As long as the shares can be bought back at a discount before they have to be replaced, the traders make money.
And many of them stepped up their bets in areas like airlines, banks, and brokerages.


Bringing Home the Vote


Drivers' Amnesty Becomes Focus for Union
Although the newspaper drivers' union rallied yesterday behind the unifying issue of amnesty for nine arrested union pickets, proposed new contracts continue to sharply divide many of the union's members from its leader.
The unexpected emergence of the amnesty issue has provoked a stalemate between the union and its adversaries, The New York Times and a wholesale newspaper distributor.


Needle Exchange Programs May Do More Harm Than Good; Support for Councilman
To the Editor:
"City Council's Poor Health" (editorial, May 2), concerning the Council's Health Committee chairman, Enoch Williams, was unfair to Mr.
Williams and to the Council.
The issue is not whether Councilman Williams or any chairman agrees with the entire agenda of an outside advocacy group or an editorial board.
The issue is whether he is fair and concerned about the range of serious health problems facing this city.
The Council's Black and Hispanic Caucus, of which I am chairman, supports Mr.
Williams because he fully meets that test.





New Campaigns
*
Lowenbrau beer is challenging German imports in a television commercial created by J. Walter Thompson Chicago, featuring a mock press conference at which photographers click away at the unveiling of a Lowenbrau bottle sculpture.
The tagline is: "Lowenbrau. The American import." Lowenbrau's brewer, the Miller Brewing Company, is also introducing campaigns for two other brands, Miller High Life ("The classic American beer," by Leo Burnett Co.) and Colders 29 ("What else do you need?" by Young &amp; Rubicam Chicago.)


Execution Stirs Up Troubling Questions
When Roger Keith Coleman was electrocuted Wednesday night, still proclaiming his innocence in the murder of his sister-in-law, a haunting question was left to follow him to his grave: Are innocent people sentenced to death and executed in America?
Critics of the public relations campaign that sought to cast doubts about Mr.
Coleman's guilt say that if innocent convicts die, he was not one of them.


Stevens's 4 Goals Put Bruins in a 3-0 Hole
Kevin Stevens grew up in the Boston area as a hockey fan.
He played as an amateur for Boston College and almost became a Bruins employee last summer.
Instead, the big left wing remained a Penguin, and he scored four goals tonight to help his Pittsburgh teammates beat the home team, 5-1, at Boston Garden.
The first three goals were on a natural hat trick in the first period, staking the Penguins to a 3-0 lead.
The defending Stanley Cup champions now hold a 3-0 lead in the four-of-seven-games Wales Conference final.
The winner of this series will play the winner of the Chicago-Edmonton series in the Stanley Cup finals.
Chicago leads that series, 3-0.


Critic's Choices for Lovers of the Great Indoors; Film
In five short tales set in Los Angeles, New York, Paris, Rome and Helsinki, Jim Jarmusch explores that fundamental urban relationship between passenger and taxi driver.
The result: the best American comedy of the year to date.
Though not everyone can afford to take cabs, "Night on Earth" is far from being elitist, being as much about the working stiffs at the wheel as it is about the people sitting in back, who are often blue-collar too.
"Stranger Than Paradise" (1984) clearly established Mr.
Jarmusch as a director of note.
"Night on Earth" also demonstrates his increasing command of screenwriting skills.
It's full of talk, much of it as hilarious as it is oblique, which is another way of saying off the wall.
Mr.
Jarmusch's characters express themselves without self-consciousness, like Robert Benigni's Roman taxi driver whose manic conversation, including a confession, forever changes the life of his passenger, an exhausted priest (Paolo Bonicelli).
Among the other fine performers are Gena Rowlands, Winona Ryder, Giancarlo Esposito, Armin Mueller-Stahl and Rosie Perez.
The concluding Helsinki episode is quintessential Jarmusch: funny, bleak and, without half trying, as perceptive a view of the human condition as you'll find anywhere.


OSCAR MAYER TO CLOSE A PLANT, ELIMINATING 675 JOBS
The Oscar Mayer Foods Corporation, a unit of the Philip Morris Companies, said it would close its Chicago processed meatpacking plant by Dec. 4, eliminating 675 jobs.
The plant, opened in 1888, is the oldest of Oscar Mayer's 16 production operations.
The Chicago plant turns out a wide variety of processed meats including sliced luncheon selections and hot dogs.


CHRONICLE
Awards are given for all sorts of lofty accomplishments -- aiding the cause of peace, combating disease, eradicating poverty -- but for sheer practicality, it would be hard to top the Green Star awards given last night for environmental leadership.


Critics' Choices for Lovers of the Great Indoors; Classical Music
One of the poems Benjamin Britten set in his "War Requiem" retells the story of Abraham's sacrifice of Isaac.
In this version, the killing is not stopped.
Abraham, we are told, slew his son along with "half the seed of Europe, one by one."
Britten meant his "War Requiem" to be an antiwar Requiem, intertwining the Latin text with poems by Wilfred Owen, who was killed in the First World War.
The choral work was written in 1961 for German, English and Russian soloists -- Dietrich Fischer-Dieskau, Peter Pears and Galina Vishnevskaya -- to dramatize the reconciliation of former enemies. (Ms. Vishnevskaya was not granted an exit visa for the first performance, but did make it to England for the recording.) The performance also marked the consecration of a newly built cathedral in Coventry, England, replacing one from the 14th century that had been destroyed by Nazi bombs in 1940.


Hostetler Wants a Change, Like a Nice, Quiet Season
When the Giants ended their veterans minicamp today, their starting quarterback, Jeff Hostetler, was a man of many moods.
He was encouraged that his ailing back was better.
He felt good that last season's quarterback controversy was past.
But he was unhappy thinking that unless the Giants became big winners this year, there could be a return to the situation of last year, when many in the public and the news media blamed him when the Giants' season went bad.


In Challenge to Bush, Senate Adds $1.4 Billion to Urban Aid Bill
The Senate today passed an urban aid measure that dared President Bush not to spend $1.45 billion more than he said was needed in the aftermath of the violence in Los Angeles.
Mr.
Bush supports a bill, passed by the House last week, that would have provided $822 million in loans and grants for disaster relief and small business loans for cities, since reserves for both were low even before the Los Angeles riot and the Chicago flood.


Alfred McClung Lee, Sociologist And Civil Rights Researcher, 85
Dr.
Alfred McClung Lee, a sociologist whose work explored critical areas of American life from race relations to journalism during a 50-year career, died on Tuesday at his home in Madison, N.J.
He was 85 years old.
Dr. Lee died of congestive heart failure, said his son, Alfred McClung Lee 3d.


Claims for Jobless Benefits Drop
New applications for state unemployment benefits fell 20,000 in the week ended May 9, the Labor Department said today in a report showing a stronger job market than economists had expected.
It said first-time jobless claims numbered 406,000 in the period, down from a revised 426,000 a week earlier.
The department had previously reported 424,000 new claims for the week ended May 2.


Cavaliers Plant Fear In Minds of the Bulls
If the Knicks were a wakeup call for the Chicago Bulls in the Eastern Conference semifinals, then the Cleveland Cavaliers sounded a fire alarm tonight at Chicago Stadium.
The Cavaliers trounced the Bulls in a manner the slowball Knicks could have only dreamed of.
Dispelling the silly notion that the only way to beat these Bulls is to wrestle them to the floor and take the air out of Michael Jordan as they never have before, the Cavs evened the Eastern Conference finals at one game apiece with a stunning 107-81 victory.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an obituary yesterday about Moira Dryer, an abstract artist, misidentified her father and stepmother in listing her survivors.
They are Douglas and Ellis Dryer.


Few in Coal Area Mourn Native Son Put to Death
Twisting mountain highways are the only way to reach this bustling town where men work hard in the coal mines, extended families live in lush hollows and people say they believe in the ultimate punishment: an eye for an eye.
"And a tooth for a tooth," says Adele Arms, a sales clerk whose immediate and unswerving opinion about capital punishment echoes what nearly everyone in town had to say this morning about the death penalty.


Swords Into High-Tech Plowshares
Three of Long Island's major research institutions joined forces today to form an institute to find commercial uses for highly technical research.
The goal is to help the Island's military industry, its largest private employer, convert to peacetime products.
The new institute, the Long Island Research Institute, was founded by the Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, the State University of New York at Stony Brook, and Associated Universities, the managing corporation of the Brookhaven National Laboratory.


Drunken Driving Lawsuit Settled
Nearly seven years after their daughter was run down by a drunken driver, a New York couple announced today that they have settled a lawsuit against the restaurant owners who served the driver alcohol before the accident.
At a news conference at the University of Vermont, Adam Clymer, the chief Congressional correspondent of The New York Times, and his wife, Ann, said the owners of the restaurant, the Rotisserie and Wesson's Family Diner, have agreed to pay $250,000 to settle the case.


Critics' Choices for Lovers of the Great Indoors; Dining
Citybound New Yorkers on Memorial Day weekend find their fresh air and flora in numerous ways.
One of the more pleasant, if sedentary, approaches is passing time in an outdoor cafe.
For obvious reasons, New York City is no Paris or Los Angeles in the al fresco dining department, but enough bosky retreats exist to satisfy those who yearn to dine under the stars.
One of the more unusual is Lion's Rock, an exuberant bar and restaurant at 316 East 77th Street in Manhattan.
As the story goes, the restaurant is on the site of the former Jones Wood, a favorite picnic spot of New Yorkers in the late 1800's.
Couples on bicycles often pedaled to picnics under a soaring outcropping of red granite.
That mini-Gibraltar now serves as the backdrop to a pretty outdoor cafe.
At sundown, the indoor lights are dimmed and the rock is illuminated, creating a dramatic backdrop.


Top Official To Leave Orion
The Orion Pictures Corporation said yesterday that an agreement had been concluded with its founding chairman, Arthur Krim, under which Mr.
Krim will be released from his contract on July 1.
The announcement followed yesterday's news that Eric Pleskow, Mr.
Krim's longtime associate, would leave.
The news came as little surprise, since Orion has filed for bankruptcy and is also in negotiations for a possible sale.


Art in Review
Jared French  Midtown Payson Galleries 745 Fifth Avenue (near 58th Street) Through May 30
The paintings of the American artist Jared French (1905-1988) are often more strange than beautiful, but they are rarely uninteresting.
French's early models were Italian Renaissance painters, from whom he acquired a taste for geometric composition, the nude and the intractable egg tempera medium.
Between World Wars I and II, he worked in a Social Realist style for the W.P.A.
He later became a friend of the artist Paul Cadmus and earned the label "magic realist" for creating emblematic narratives in a crisp, draftsmanly style.


Harris Leaves a Mystery as He Drops Out of New York Games
An impressive list of athletes competing in the New York Games on Sunday was diminished yesterday when Danny Harris, the second-leading 400-meter hurdler in the world last year, withdrew for reasons that were not disclosed, and Kenny Harrison, the world's top-ranked triple jumper, dropped out because of a knee injury.
While neither Harris nor his coach, Bob Kersee, returned telephone messages left for them, a source familiar with the situation confirmed that Harris had failed a drug test and was in the midst of a hearing.


Help Russia Create a Stable Legal System
To the Editor:
Re "Two Novelties in Russian Courts: Defense Lawyers and Jury Trials" (front page, May 11): Our experience in Russia and other former Soviet states confirms the conclusion that "for all the talk of constitutional and legal reform, there has not been very much of it."
Using as a model the way we and other human rights organizations function in the United States, the American Jewish Congress has tried to introduce Jewish members of the bar, both in the Soviet Union and later in its successor states, to the notion of aggressively using law and legislation to protect and promote individual rights.
These efforts were substantially impeded by structural obstacles in the various judicial and administrative systems in these countries, and even more by the lack of understanding and experience by both legal practitioner and the public with initiatives of this kind.


Ivan Allen 3d, 53, Dies; Civic Leader in Atlanta
Ivan Allen 3d, a prominent Atlanta civic leader and the son of a former Mayor of Atlanta, died on Sunday at his home in neighboring Franklin, Ga.
He was 53 years old.
The coroner's office of Heard County, Ga., where Mr.
Allen lived on his farm, said the cause of death was a self-inflicted gunshot wound.


Preparing for a Memorial Day Weekend With Fourth of July Weather


Executive Changes
BRISTOL-MYERS SQUIBB CO., New York, named Mervyn Weiner vice president for corporate development of the health-care group.
CROWN AMERICAN CORP., Johnstown, Pa., a shopping mall owner and developer, appointed Patrick M. Miniutti chief financial officer.


12 Reported Killed as Israelis Bombard Lebanon
Twelve people were reported killed today when Israeli aircraft and artillery bombarded pro-Iranian guerrillas in southern and eastern Lebanon.
The reported toll was the highest in any Israeli raids on Lebanese territory this year.
Lebanon's Foreign Minister, Faris Bouez, denounced the attacks as unjustified aggression, and he called in the United States Ambassador in Beirut to express his concern.


Critics' Choices for Lovers of the Great Indoors; Television
Memorial Day on television?
PBS is just about the only game in town.
The commercial networks, preoccupied with reruns, are ignoring the holiday altogether in prime time.
There will no doubt be the usual cursory acknowledgements on newscasts.
Over on cable, the most typical ploy is summed up in a publicity slogan: "It's War on TNT." Turner Network Television, taking the machismo track, is offering what it calls "two action-packed days of back-to-back war movies." The lineup this Sunday and Monday includes "The Dirty Dozen" (1967), "Destination Tokyo" (1943), "Hellcats of the Navy" (1957), starring Ronald Reagan and Nancy Davis, and three John Wayne movies, among them "Back to Bataan" (1945).


Review/Film; Satyajit Ray: A Work Of Closure
Satyajit Ray's last film, "The Stranger," opening today at the Walter Reade Theater, is a fitting grace note to the career of the great Indian film maker, who died last month, just short of his 71st birthday.
"The Stranger" is a small, gentle, exquisitely realized comedy about, among other things, family loyalties and trust in a world in which traditions have been devalued.
The film, written and directed by Ray, has the shapeliness and some of the mystery of a parable.
One morning a letter arrives at the perfectly ordered upper-middle-class household of Sudhindra Bose.
It is for his wife, Anila.
"Ah," says Sudhindra in English, "a massive missive."


WEINBERGER SEEKS TO BLUNT INQUIRY
Moving to blunt an investigation into his role in the Iran-contra affair, former Defense Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger has made public the results of a polygraph test he says he passed in which he denied lying to protect President Ronald Reagan.
According to a test administered at Mr.
Weinberger's behest on May 5 by the former chief polygraph examiner of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, Mr.
Weinberger gave "no indication of deception" to five questions about his knowledge of a secret arms shipment to Iran in 1985 and his diary entries about the transfer.


Paper Runs Afoul of Ireland's Abortion Law
The national abortion dispute flared again today when 2,000 copies of The Guardian, a British newspaper, were suppressed by the paper's Irish distributor because they contained an advertisement on where to get an abortion in Britain.
Distribution of such information is illegal in Ireland, but the Government of Prime Minister Albert Reynolds has indicated it wants to ease that ban.


RESULTS PLUS
GOLF  Love Beats Storm
Davis Love 3d got his five-under-par 65 under cover yesterday before thunderstorms halted first-round play in the Southwestern Bell Colonial tournament in Fort Worth.
Craig Stadler was not so fortunate.
He was 4 under par and playing the 18th hole at the Colonial Country Club when the sirens sounded halting play and stranded 25 players on the course.
They marked their positions and will complete their rounds today, with the second round to follow.
Love was tied with Billy Mayfair, who also shot 65.  (AP)


Miscellany
*
In the last five years, leading agencies experienced an average loss of 67 percent of their accounts, according to a study by the Sanders Consulting Group of Richmond and Brighton, England.
Of the 2,235 accounts at the 50 largest agencies in February 1987, the study reported, by February of this year, all but 773 had changed shops.
Account loss rates in the study ranged from 24 percent, at Leo Burnett, to 86 percent at Chiat/Day/Mojo and J. Walter Thompson . *
D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles, St.
Louis, will lay off 31 people, effective June 1, after a recent decision by Anheuser-Busch to consolidate media planning and buying in-house.


For Children
'Beauty Is the Beast'  Wings Theater 154 Christopher Street Manhattan (212) 627-2961 Recommended ages: 7 and up Through May 31
The Wings Theater Company likes provocative subjects, even for its children's plays.
In its winter children's production, the company focused on racism and prejudice.
"Beauty Is the Beast," by Bill Wheeler, has the answer, more or less, to the problem of being less than beautiful in a society that rewards physical perfection.
Roberta is a 10-year-old who has no illusions about her potential as a cover girl for Seventeen.
She also knows that what is counted as beautiful on television or in magazines is "stupid." So Roberta, who is considered plain because she wears thick-lensed glasses and has an awkward nose, crusades to change the way the world perceives good looks and herself.
As she asks, "Why aren't there stories about girls who look like me?"


Corrections
An article yesterday about television network ratings carried a misplaced subheading.
The subheading, which referred to Seville and Barcelona, should have appeared elsewhere on the page, with an article about cultural activities in Madrid.


Warmus Murder-Trial Jurors Begin Deliberations
The jury began deliberations today in the Carolyn Warmus murder trial after a last-minute flurry of activity among the lawyers over a common, but often unmentioned, courthouse problem:
One of the 12 jurors fell asleep in the jury box.


Quake Kills 36 in Pakistan
At least 36 people were killed and more than 100 injured in an earthquake that shook northern Pakistan on Wednesday, Government officials said today.


Where the Need to Know Meets the Need to Tell; At City Hall, the Press Secretary Sometimes Runs the Show, Sometimes Runs After It
On the morning that Newsday ran the front-page headline "No More Mr. Skinflint," heralding a report that Mayor David N. Dinkins gave more than $15,000 to charity last year, Leland T. Jones, the Mayor's press secretary, registered an objection to the backhanded reference to the Mayor's less substantial donations the year before.
Before the reporters checked in for the day, Mr.
Jones scurried down the hall from the Mayor's press office to Room 9, the cluttered quarters for the bulk of the city's press corps, and tacked a mock front page above the Newsday desk: "One More Cheap Shot," the headline read.
A few days later, Mr.
Jones, who served in the press office under Mayor Edward I. Koch, made the trip down the hall again, unprovoked this time.
He was just keeping an eye on things.
On his way into Room 9, he was spotted by Paul Schwartzman, a reporter for The New York Post.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.25-6.5
6.25-6.5
8.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.81
3.75
5.69
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.67
3.57
5.39
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.78
3.67
5.62
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.07
6.92
7.93
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.86
7.80
8.29
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.81
8.73
9.30
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.61
6.60
7.22
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Voters; Indifference and Disgust Are Leading in California
When The Milpitas Post sent its inquiring photographer into the streets this week, asking "Are you going to vote?" people hemmed and hawed, more reluctant to commit themselves than they had been the week before, when the question was "What's so special about your mom?"
Fifty percent of them finally owned up that they doubted they would go to the polls on June 2, primary day in the nation's most populous state -- a highly unscientific tabulation, but one that the editor of the weekly newspaper, Tom Gilsenan, found noteworthy compared to years past.


INSIDE
Senate Votes Urban Aid
The Senate approved a bill that would provide $1.45 billion more in assistance to cities than the President had said was needed.
Page A16.
Quayle vs.
Murphy Brown
The Vice President was delighted by the stir that his talk on family values created.
But did it help the Bush campaign?
News analysis, page A19.
Warning to Thai Premier
Calm returned to Bangkok, but a protest leader warned that demonstrators would risk more bloodshed if the Premier broke his pledges.
Page A3.
Weinberger Counterattacks
Caspar W. Weinberger made public a polygraph test in which he denied lying to protect Ronald Reagan from Iran-contra investigators.
Page A14.
An Especially Wheezy Spring
For New Yorkers with allergies, this year's cool, wet spring has contributed to one of the highest pollen levels in years.
Page B1.


CHRONICLE
Common wisdom seems to dictate that the Friday evening leading into Memorial Day weekend is no time to hold a benefit party, but that didn't dissuade the Friends in Deed organization from planning a dance performance titled "An Evening of Solos and Duets" for tonight.
"This was the single available night at the Joyce Theater in the year 1992," CYNTHIA O'NEAL, executive director of Friends in Deed, explained.
"And it was the only night that the 16 best dancers in the modern-dance world could get together," she added, invoking the names of such choreographers and dancers as Mikhail Baryshnikov, Lar Lubovitch, David Parsons, Daniel Ezralow, Elisa Monte and Kevin O'Day.


S.E.C. Asks for Sweeping Changes In Rules Governing Mutual Funds
The Securities and Exchange Commission unveiled a broad and varied package of regulatory and legislative proposals today for the mutual fund industry.
If all are adopted, they would represent the most sweeping changes in the fund marketplace since the laws governing the industry were enacted 52 years ago.
But some industry executives contended that many of the changes could also increase risk, uncertainty and complexity for investors in an industry that for decades has provided millions of Americans with a simple, straightforward way to own stocks and bonds.
More Competition Sought
The staff proposals, outlined at a mutual fund industry conference here by the S.E.C.'s chairman, Richard C. Breeden, would free the growing industry to create novel kinds of funds, undertake broader and more creative advertising, and develop products to attract more participation by corporate pension funds, money management firms and other similar institutions.


Japan Sees Chip Pact as Success; U.S. Disagrees
Japanese semiconductor makers said yesterday that as part of a semicondutor trade agreement with the United States, Japan had significantly improved foreign companies' access to the home market of the world's largest chip makers.
But American chip producers and industry analysts responded that the Japanese were simply trying to put the best face on troubled high-tech trade relations between the United States and Japan.


After 16 Years, Wolf Goes Out With a 'Boom!'
On his final night at WCBS, Ch. 2, Warner Wolf emitted two last "Booms!" one closing "Swish!" one concluding "Mr. G. was at the game," three final "Let's go to the videotapes" but not one valedictory "Gimme a break."
The Wolf Epoch in New York ended Wednesday.
Sixteen years after arriving from Washington, he's headed back to Washington, back to his old station (which underwent a name change, from WTOP to WUSA), back to his hometown, back to where he honed the act that he brought to New York and never changed.


The Art Market
Movable Show
Apparently, a handshake doesn't mean what it used to in the art world, at least not to the New York artist Peter Halley.
It's no news that Mr.
Halley recently left the Sonnabend Gallery, where he had been represented for six years, and moved to the Gagosian Gallery.
A show of the artist's latest paintings has been on view in SoHo at Gagosian's Wooster Street space since Saturday.
And herein lies the problem.
The show was originally scheduled to open at Sonnabend in May.
According to documents filed on May 13 in State Supreme Court in Manhattan, although Sonnabend had no written agreement, it had already pre-sold all 11 of the works in the show.
As of Feb. 27, the day Mr.
Halley sent a letter to Sonnabend formally announcing his decision to leave the gallery, Antonio Homem, Sonnabend's director, had committed buyers for the show's works, and had paid Mr.
Halley advances on the sales.


How Does Her Garden Club Grow? With Publicity
WATCH out, weeds!
Suburbia's garden clubs are under full mobilization now.
Their kneeling legions have been ordered to support properly placed plants and to repulse the annual spring offensive of impolite intruders with the garden gall to root in the wrong place.


Bosnian Strife Cuts Old Bridges of Trust
When Serbian gunmen go door to door, pulling Muslim Slavs from their homes at gunpoint and herding them aboard cattle trucks, they call it "ethnic purification."
But another name for what the Serbs are doing in this deserted, bullet- and shell-scarred town in the Alpine hills of eastern Bosnia, and in communities elsewhere in this disintegrating republic, is the revision of history.


Review/Art; Landscape Interpreted By British Hand and Eye
Landscape painting is one of the great British art forms, even though exhibitions outside England have been infrequent and many of its practitioners -- Turner and Constable apart -- are little known.
In offering more than 100 works by 53 artists, the Pierpont Morgan Library's "Sketching at Home and Abroad: British Landscape Drawings, 1750-1850" goes some way toward redressing this neglect.
But the show is more than just a historical corrective.
Thanks to a careful selection and ordering of material, much of it from the Morgan's own holdings, it also has a quietly dramatic story to tell.
The exhibition is arranged chronologically and gets off to a somewhat prosaic start.
Landscape wasn't a subject for art in England before the mid-18th century; it was merely filler in countless topographical drawings of rural monuments and Samuel Buck's "East View of Arundel Castle" at the Morgan is typical of the kind.
A fastidious little ink rendering of a building and its site, Buck's drawing abounds in details, including bands of trees as flat as a fabric pattern, but it doesn't have a jot of poetry.


CBS Additions for Fall: 4 Comedies, 4 Dramas
Looking to expand the strength it has built on Sunday and Monday to other nights of the week, CBS will break up its powerhouse lineup of Monday comedies next fall and add eight new series to its prime-time schedule.
Among the four comedies and four dramas are a new comedy from Diane English, creator of "Murphy Brown," the show Vice President Dan Quayle selected this week as the symbol of moral degeneration in America.
Also on the schedule is a new comedy from Linda Bloodworth-Thomason, the creator of "Evening Shade" and "Designing Women."


Europeans Agree on Farm Cuts
After 18 months of intense and often bitter negotiations, the European Community today cleared the way for early resumption of stalled global trade talks by reaching broad agreement on a new European farm policy.
The crucial trade-liberalization talks have been stalled for two years by disagreements between the United States and the European Community on the broad question of farming subsidies, with Washington repeatedly rebuffed in its demand that the 12 community nations reduce their agricultural protectionism.


BUSH AIDES ATTACK DEMOCRATS ON IRAQ
After months of ignoring Democratic criticism of its support for President Saddam Hussein before the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait in August 1990, the Bush Administration took the offensive today, accusing Democratic lawmakers of lying and distorting the record.
Senior Administration officials denied charges by Representative Henry Gonzalez, the Texas Democrat who heads the House Banking Committee, that the Administration deceived Congress, obstructed justice and illegally used public money to pursue a policy of incentives in the hope of moderating Iraq's behavior.


Needle Exchange Programs May Do More Harm Than Good
To the Editor:
In "City Council's Poor Health," your May 2 editorial on New York City's AIDS policy, you berate Councilman Enoch Williams for opposing clean-needle programs.
You argue that "leading health professionals" support this notion.
You also imply that a needle exchange initiative will decrease the spread of AIDS among intravenous drug abusers.
This assertion, however, has several flaws.
First, many of the studies that proponents of needle exchange rely on are methodologically flawed.
In a major effort in Amsterdam, an oft-cited example of the success of needle exchange programs, researchers failed to collect data from more than 50 percent of the study population.
This seriously undermines the ability of analysts to assess the true impact of the program.
Similar studies have lacked appropriate control groups.


Glories of a Memorial Weekend
You can throw burgers on the grill, of course, or head out -- again -- to that country place.
Or you can make the holiday memorable.
Ten New York Times critics tell you how, C26.


Sports of The Times; Bad Night For Angels And Bussie
THE BUS was sitting outside Yankee Stadium on Wednesday night, waiting for the California Angels.
Everybody else had to hack their own way home through the tangled highways and erratic drivers of the Bronx.
That sleek, modern bus looked pretty convenient.
There are always buses outside the ball parks, waiting to take the players to the hotel, to the airport, to the next town.
It is the only way teams can fulfill those crisp appointments in the season schedule:


Forget About Joneses, Andrettis Just Want to Keep Up with Buicks
An old joke here asks: What are the four most famous words at the Indianapolis 500?
The answer: "Mario is slowing down."
Those words haven't yet replaced "Gentlemen, start your engines," but the Andretti jinx at the Indianapolis Motor Speedway is now almost an institution.


Direct Marketers Honor Humanitarian
Dr.
Philip Johnston, president and chief executive of CARE, has won a special humanitarian award from a direct-marketing organization.
The award was presented yesterday at a luncheon in Manhattan, as part of Direct Marketing Day in New York, a two-day conference and exhibition.
It is awarded to executives of nonprofit organizations that raise a significant portion of their funds through direct-marketing means like mailings.
CARE, which helps improvished people around the world, anticipates raising about $18 million this year in that fashion.


A Death on a Dance Floor Brings Questions for the Police
Gabino Figueroa, in his three years in New York, had won himself a string of friends in his mostly Jamaican Brooklyn neighborhood.
The dance hall he rented out above his Dominican fast food restaurant was a favorite local party place, where reggae rhythms blasted into the early morning hours.
Mr.
Figueroa loved the music but worried about illegal guns at the parties.
Before dawn Sunday, as more than 200 people danced at the club, in the Brownsville section, an argument over a woman turned into a fight and then to shooting.


BRIEFS
Debt *
J.
Baker Inc. filed a registration statement with the Securities and Exchange Commission for its previously announced public offering of up to $74.8 million principal amount of convertible subordinated notes through Smith Barney, Harris Upham &amp; Co.
*
Cleveland Electric Illuminating Co., a unit of Centerior Energy Corp., filed a shelf registration for up to $125 million of secured medium-term notes through Morgan Stanley &amp; Co.


Kerner Report Said It All About Urban Unrest; Insure Access to Justice
To the Editor:
This week the House of Representatives overwhelmingly approved legislation to reauthorize the Legal Services Corporation, the one federally financed program that insures access to justice to the country's poorest and most disaffected citizens.
As your May 9 editorial, "What's Radical About Legal Rights?" points out, "There has probably never been a moment, following the Los Angeles verdict and riot, of greater anxiety and pain over equal justice in America." Yet the fate of this legislation remains uncertain because the Administration threatens to veto it.
A quarter-century ago, the Kerner Commission warned that "our nation is moving toward two societies, one black, one white -- separate and unequal." Its report identified as the "most intense grievances underlying the riots of the summer of 1967" disputes that could have been resolved through the legal process -- a process, the report notes, that is seldom available to the poor.
The report suggested that "resourceful and imaginative use of available legal processes could contribute significantly to the alleviation of tensions" by providing the poor a "meaningful opportunity to influence events which affect them and their community."


The Plans No One Wants to Use
Although there has never been a tragedy in major league sports that caused a league to implement a so-called disaster plan, such contingencies do exist.
The bus accident early yesterday morning involving the California Angels brought these contingency plans into focus.
Major league baseball has had a disaster plan in place since 1965.
Other leagues were spurred to develop their own plans after a plane crash in 1970 that killed 38 members of the Marshall University football team along with a number of the squad's coaches.


Accounts
*
New England Development, Newton, Mass., to Houston Effler &amp; Partners, Boston, for the mall developer's $4.5 million account, previously at Saffer Advertising, Toronto.
Houston Effler beat Cunco Sullivan Dolabany Wilgus, Boston, in a review. *
Shaw Ross International Importers Inc., Miami, to Ketchum Advertising, New York, for Raynall, a French brandy.
The advertising account was previously handled by the Harris Co., Miami.
Although the billings were not disclosed, the Advertising Agency Register estimated the budget at $3 million to $5 million.


Adirondack Park's 100th Anniversary Is Marked


Diner's Journal
2 Trends Together
Combining two trends, multi-cultural menus and tapas, is a restaurant called Pastis, on Third Avenue at 79th Street.
This is sort of like trying to pull off a Hungarian sushi bar, no small feat.
My first visits three months ago were as bewildering as they were disappointing.
Seasonings were off, juxtapositions were jarring and the whole effort seemed about as likely to succeed as a slasher film is to win the top prize at Cannes.
In February, a new chef, Roger Powell, arrived.
The menu was honed, service was tightened and the whole operation seemed to come together.


F.A.A. Returns La Guardia Flight Path to Queens
At a news conference here with many of the trappings of a campaign event, Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato led Federal officials today in announcing that they had restored flight paths over Queens because an experimental diversion to more affluent areas of Long Island had failed to reduce noise pollution.
Officials from the Federal Aviation Administration said that the results from the experiment was clear, but that they would not release the data for several days because their analysis was incomplete and they did not want the data misinterpreted.


New Jersey Sales Tax Cut 1 Cent As G.O.P. Overrides Florio Veto
The Republican majority in the New Jersey Legislature overrode Gov.
Jim Florio's veto today and made good on their promise to cut the penny from the state sales tax that the Democrats put there two years ago.
The Republicans said they were acting to protect the taxpayers and spur the economy in reducing the sales tax to 6 cents a dollar from 7 and producing the largest tax cut in New Jersey history, $608 million in next year's budget.


COMPANY NEWS: Less Is Less; Diapers That Are Softer (On Consciences, That Is)
For a time, diapers were the litmus test of environmentalism.
Disposable diapers were scorned by environmental advocates as a prime example of the evils of a throwaway society and major contributors to the landfill crisis.
But the alternative, re-usable cloth diapers, required parents to endure the hassles of collecting, storing and laundering them.
Most did not bother.


Tongues New to English, Eyes Fresh to the Capital
America has not been all that she had hoped, but as she got off the bus on Pennsylvania Avenue in Washington, Ewa Lis, a Polish immigrant, was not disappointed.
The building before her was big and white, "exactly as I imagined it," she said.
Smiling, Ms.
Lis handed her camera to her friend Joseph Veninger, who is from Czechoslovakia.
"Take a picture of me and my White House."


Workers Ask Judge To Stop the Closing Of a Queens Bakery
In an 11th-hour effort to keep the Taystee bakery in Flushing, Queens, operating, a group of workers and community groups has asked a state judge to stop the company from dismantling the factory, which is to close in July.
A class-action suit brought on behalf of 510 workers and three community groups contends that Stroehmann Bakeries has violated a 20-year agreement with the city that, according to the plaintiffs, bars the company from closing the factory or removing equipment while the lease is in effect.


Analyst Pleads Guilty In a Junk Bond Scheme
A former bond analyst for the Keystone group of mutual funds admitted yesterday that he had taken hundreds of thousands of dollars in return for tipping off an officer of the Cooper Companies about plans for junk bond purchases last year and this year.
C.
Albert Griggs Jr., who was discharged by Keystone in February after a Federal investigation began, pleaded guilty to two felony charges, which said he had taken more than $250,000 as part of a scheme to enable Cooper to profit from selling bonds to Keystone's two junk bond funds.


Storehouse Names Chief
David L. Dworkin, an American retail executive who has headed Neiman Marcus and Bonwit Teller, has been named group chief executive of Storehouse P.L.C., the British retailer.
Mr.
Dworkin, 48 years old, has been chairman and chief executive since November 1989 of a Storehouse subsidiary, BHS P.L.C., formerly known as British Home Stores.
Storehouse also operates Habitat, Mothercare and Richards.


Sounds Around Town
Spotlight on Stride
Fats Waller Festival, Cajun, 129 Eighth Avenue, at 18th Street, Manhattan, (212) 691-6174.
Cajun, the Louisiana-flavored restaurant in Chelsea, is putting on a home-grown Fats Waller Festival this week showcasing the stride pianists in the eight bands that regularly play traditional jazz and Dixieland there every night and Sunday afternoons.
Tonight from 9 to midnight the pianist is John Halsey, a graduate of Williams College, where, he says, he majored in Dixieland.
He plays with the Canal Street Dixieland Jazz and Blues Band.
Tomorrow night at 8:30, Bob Greene, a renowned specialist in the music of Jelly Roll Morton, will show off his Waller style with the New Atlantic Jazz Band.
On Sunday two groups will play: for brunch, the Ernie Lumer Dixieland Quartet -- featuring the pianist Bobby Pratt, who alternated between trombone and piano for many years at Jimmy Ryan's on 52d Street -- will play from noon to 4 P.M., followed at 7 P.M. by the Three Notes with Jon Seiger, a pianist who also sings and plays a Roy Eldridge-inspired trumpet.
There is no cover charge or minimum at any of these events.
The Owner Sings
Judy Barnett, J's, 2581 Broadway, between 97th and 98th Streets, Manhattan, (212) 666-3600.
After winning the Manhattan Association of Cabarets award a few weeks ago as the outstanding female vocalist for the second successive year, Judy Barnett is celebrating again tonight as her own cabaret, J's, marks its seventh anniversary.
During those seven years, she has emerged as one of the most individual of the current crop of jazz singers: versatile, inventive, with an ability to swing at any tempo.
She is backed by a superb quartet: Andy Tuck on piano, Bill Miller on bass, Bob Paterson on drums, Marshal Rosenberg on percussion, all of whom are important contributors to her songs.
When the music starts tonight at 9, there is a $12 minimum at the tables and $7 at the bar, but never a cover charge.


We Found Role Model In 'Murphy Brown'
To the Editor:
I too am a "single mom" and proud of it!
In 1985 I determined that my biological clock was ticking and that before it was too late I wanted to share in the experience of motherhood.
For these last six years I have known more love, contentment and joy than at any other time in my life.
My decision to have a child was not accidental and required as much if not more planning than a Presidential campaign.


Auction Record Set in Decorative Arts
French furniture and European silver from the collection of Jaime Ortiz-Patino, an heir to a Bolivian tin fortune, were auctioned Wednesday and yesterday for a total of $23.7 million.
The sale at Sotheby's in New York established a record for any decorative arts auction.
The collection, bought over the last 25 years to furnish his home in Geneva, was sold by Mr.
Ortiz-Patino after he was refused permission to build a golf course on his property and sold his home there.
"He wants to spend more time at his London flat and at his home in Sotogrande, Spain, where a Masters tournament is held," said Ian Irving, a Sotheby's silver specialist.


A Spira-Steinbrenner Penalty Pas de Deux
When Howard Spira learned the other day that the appeal of his extortion conviction had been rejected, he was distraught.
"How can this happen to me?" he said, sobbing.
"Now I have to sit here for another 21 months. I never did anything to deserve this."
A jury thought otherwise.
So did the judge, who in passing sentence recomended psychiatric treatment for Spira as a possible way of curing him of his penchant for making angry threats to people when he doesn't get what he wants.
One of the targets of Spira's threats was George Steinbrenner, and the two will be forever linked in the annals of judicial and sports-world irony.


The Road To Rio -- Setting an Agenda for the Earth; Homesteaders Gnaw at Brazil Rain Forest
Bright green manioc plants sprouting among charred tree trunks and a constant hammering and sawing on house frames are signs that a new colony of homesteaders has arrived in this remote corner of the Amazon, an area covered only a year ago by tropical rain forest.
"I worked all my life as a sharecropper," explained Antonio Rodrigues dos Santos, a 38-year-old migrant from Brazil's impoverished northeast.
"Now I have my own land," he added with satisfaction.
With bulldozers standing by to resume road work when the dry season begins in June, the number of houses in this new town is expected to jump this year from 5 to 120.


The Spoken Word
POETRY READING, Nuyorican Poets Cafe, 236 East Third Street, Manhattan.
Sharon Mesmer will read from her poetry.
Today at 10 P.M.
Admission: $5.
Information: (212) 505-8183.
YOUNG PEOPLE'S READING, Poetry Project at St.
Mark's Church, Second Avenue and 10th Street, Manhattan.
Jerome Annum, Matt Blades, Joy Kaplan, Tim, Morrison, Marta Weiss and Bess Wohl will read from their work.
Today at 10:30 P.M.
Admission: $5.Information: (212) 674-0910.


Ramos Seeks Wider Manila Lead
Ten days after a national election, only half the ballots have been counted, most of the leading candidates are claiming fraud, and Fidel V. Ramos, a former general, is battling to widen a precarious lead that seems likely to make him the country's next president.
In unofficial results announced tonight, Mr.
Ramos, 64 years old, was ahead by 800,000 votes out of 11 million counted so far.
But he has not yet claimed victory, and some lawmakers said today that they feared that disputes over the election results may still be raging when President Corazon C. Aquino leaves office on June 30.


One Just Enough To Subdue Pirates
Giants 1, Pirates 0
SAN FRANCISCO, May 21 (AP) -- John Burkett didn't have his normal support from the San Francisco Giants.
Luckily, he didn't require a lot.


EXAMINER TESTIFIES IN CASCADE BANKRUPTCY CASE
A court-appointed examiner testified that the president of Cascade International Inc., John Sirmans, had played an active role in a scheme to defraud shareholders and creditors.
The examiner, James Feltman, also said Aaron Karp, chairman of the retailer, "had indirect knowledge of the fraud." The two executives attended the hearing in Federal Bankruptcy Court in Miami but did not testify.
Both have previously said they were unaware of fraud until the disappearance of the former chief executive, Victor Incendy, in November.
The company, which sells women's apparel and cosmetics, is under Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection.
Mr.
Feltman urged the court to oust the two executives. (Bloomberg Business News)


Dan Quayle's Fictitious World
First, let's get past the silliness.
For all the mirth he has provoked among TV comedians, Vice President Quayle did not blame the Los Angeles riots on Murphy Brown, the sitcom character.
He only used her fictional out-of-wedlock baby to illustrate a much larger, grimmer accusation, one that cannot simply be laughed off.
What so much troubles America today, he said in San Francisco on Tuesday, arises predominantly from "a poverty of values" in our inner cities, where "young men father children whom they have no intention of caring for, by women whose welfare checks support them. Teen-age girls, mired in the same hopelessness, lack sufficient motive to say no to this trap."


Dinkins to Put Councilman In AIDS Role
Over the objections of gay-rights groups, Mayor David N. Dinkins intends to appoint Enoch Williams, the chairman of the City Council's Health Committee, to a 45-member mayoral committee that parcels out $35 million in Federal money to AIDS clinics, the Mayor's press secretary said yesterday.
The secretary, Leland T. Jones, said that by making the appointment, Mr.
Dinkins was not taking a position on whether Mr.
Williams was the best person for the job, rather he was simply acceding to the wishes of Council Speaker Peter F. Vallone, who nominated Mr.
Williams.
"If people have concerns, they should speak to the Speaker," Mr.
Jones said.
"One has to respect the wishes of the Council, without necessarily agreeing with them."


Thai Pro-Democracy Leader Threatens New Protests if Premier Fails to Act
A fragile calm returned to Bangkok today after three days of clashes between troops and anti-Government protesters, but the leader of Thailand's pro-democracy movement said his supporters would return to the streets if the Government failed to amend the Constitution as promised.
The threat by the pro-democracy leader, Chamlong Srimuang, to resume mass street demonstrations came only a day after he had asked his followers to suspend their protests, in which scores of Thais have been killed, under terms of an agreement reached with Prime Minister Suchinda Kraprayoon during a meeting Wednesday with King Bhumibol Adulyadej.


Broadcaster Group's Dissent
The National Association of Broadcasters has joined the consumer groups and Congressional Democrats who have criticized the Federal Communications Commission's recent decision to more than double the number of radio stations a company can own.
In a petition that will be filed next week, the association says the agency should impose stricter ownership limits, reflecting a fear among many station owners that a few big companies will be able to buy up several big stations in the same market and squeeze out competition.


A Frightening Jolt Interrupts the Angels' Season
Some passengers were sleeping, some were trying to doze off and some were watching a Chuck Norris movie.
But all were shaken and 12 were injured early this morning when one of the two buses carrying the California Angels from the Bronx to Baltimore for a weekend series crashed on the New Jersey Turnpike.
Manager Buck Rodgers, sitting in the front right seat of the bus, suffered the most serious injuries.
He broke his right elbow in six places, broke one of the ribs on his right side and injured his left knee.
He was taken to Thomas Jefferson University Hospital in Philadelphia and will be flown to a hospital in Inglewood, Calif., in the next 24 hours for elbow surgery.


SUPERMARKET CHAIN TO SELL A STORE TO SETTLE CHARGES
The Vons Companies agreed to sell one supermarket in San Luis Obispo, Calif., to settle Government charges that it had tried to lessen competition in the retail grocery market in that area.
The Federal Trade Commission charges stem from the Vons purchase in January of three supermarkets in the San Luis Obispo area from Williams Brothers Markets Inc.


Critics' Choices for Lovers of the Great Indoors; Books
As the school year ends and summer rolls around again, it's not a bad time to reassess the state of literature, within the academy and in the larger world.
Two books, now available in paperback, do just this: "The Death of Literature" by Alvin Kernan (Yale University Press) and "Signs of the Times" by David Lehman (Poseidon Press).
Though neither one is exactly light beach fare, both volumes make for absorbing reading -- as lucid and compelling as they are provocative.
Mr.
Kernan's book takes the broader view of the situation.
As he sees it, serious literature today has "almost no presence in the world" outside the university: literacy rates are declining, libraries are threatened by financial cutbacks, and books have become commercial commodities overshadowed by television and movies.
Within academia, he adds, literature faces equally fearsome threats: in the last decade or so, feminists have denounced it as a tool of male domination, Marxists have assailed it as a capitalist institution, and deconstructionists have devalued it as a relativistic collection of signs.


Times Makes Appointments To Senior Editing Positions
Senior editing assignments at The New York Times were announced yesterday by Max Frankel, the paper's executive editor, to take effect next month.
Frederick Andrews, business and financial editor since 1985, will be an assistant to the managing editor, Joseph Lelyveld.
Mr.
Andrews will oversee a variety of journalistic and administrative projects in preparation for a move to a major position on another news desk at The Times within a year, Mr.
Frankel said.


On My Mind; Lessons For Americans
Every day now, the new Europe shows it can be strong, united and independent of the United States -- but only until a real crisis comes along that it has to handle itself.
Then Europe becomes a vivid lesson for Americans in the value and strengths of their own country and its special system of government.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Democrats; Clinton Sees Bush Engaging In Empty Talk on Families
Adding his voice to the theme of family values that has occupied President Bush and Vice President Quayle this week, Gov.
Bill Clinton said the White House had engaged in "cynical election-year politics" designed to avoid taking a leadership role in resolving the problems of families.
Mr.
Clinton called a speech the Vice President gave on Tuesday a symptom of the Bush Administration's inability to take actions on the problems that affect cities and those living in poverty.


Kickback Plan Is Described at Trial
A prosecution witness testified yesterday that Michael R. Milken had forced him into a kickback scheme involving a junk-bond mutual fund Mr.
Milken had created at Drexel Burnham Lambert.
The witness, David B. Solomon, said Mr.
Milken had threatened to dismiss him as the manager of the fund if he refused to comply with his demand to pay what amounted to a 1 percent kickback on all trades involving the fund's assets.


At the Movies
Margaret Again
Here's the news about Emma Thompson: She can't seem to escape playing women named Margaret.
She's just made a new movie.
She's going to write her first screenplay.
Miss Thompson, of course, is starring as Margaret Schlegel in the current hit "Howards End," produced by Ismail Merchant, directed by James Ivory and adapted by Ruth Prawer Jhabvala from the 1910 E. M. Forster novel about a woman whose inheritance of a country house lies at the center of a web of relationships that cut across class lines in England.


Reliving Riot Flash Point, Los Angeles Lieutenant Fights Chief
The police lieutenant accused by his chief of failing to contain one of the first outbreaks of the Los Angeles rioting is defending himself angrily, saying there was nothing he could do to quell the uprising because no plans or preparations had been made.
In an interview at his home, Lieut.
Michael Moulin said that during the first confusing and frightening moments on April 29, he and his precinct captain had sat together in their stationhouse and said, "They're going to burn the city down, and there's nothing we can do about it."


Adopter of 35 Is Exploring Plea on Sex-Abuse Charges
A former social-services official who gained national prominence as "Father of the Year" in 1983 for adopting at least 35 handicapped or troubled children said yesterday that he was trying to negotiate a plea bargain in his sexual-abuse case.
Gregory Watts, a lawyer for the defendant, Kodzo Dobosu, told Justice Frederic S. Berman of State Supreme Court in Manhattan that he and Assistant District Attorney Nancy Patterson were "exploring discussions aimed at a possible disposition of this case."


Kurds' Vote Results Delayed; Irregularities Are Reported
The results of elections in northern Iraq were delayed today as Kurdish leaders consulted a British electoral expert on whether reports of voting irregularities justified new balloting in some areas.
Some smaller Iraqi Kurdish parties inseveral areas have complained that people had removed supposedly indelible silver nitrate from their fingers after casting ballots and voted a second time.


At the Bar; On lawyerly lasciviousness and new efforts to deal with a 'dirty little secret.'
The State of Indiana bars plumbers from engaging "in lewd or immoral conduct" while on house calls.
But the lawyer-legislators who drafted that statute have not applied the same standard to themselves.
Indeed, what is sauce for doctors, psychotherapists and at least some pipefitters is not necessarily sauce for lawyers -- in Indianapolis or anywhere else.
Perhaps, one state bar disciplinary official speculated, this is because lawyers are asexual.
More likely it is because until very recently lawyers have been reluctant to acknowledge, much less discuss, what one judge has called the bar's "dirty little secret": that however sex between lawyers and clients complicates and compromises zealous representation, it is hardly extraordinary.


Sounds Around Town
Mod, With Emotion
Marcia Ball, Tramps, 45 West 21st Street, Manhattan, (212) 727-7788.
In Austin, where roots music is treated as a living, thriving force rather than a quaint, traditional idiom, Marcia Ball is something of a local hero.
Like many of her Austin peers, she melds various roots influences -- blues, soul, rhythm-and-blues, zydeco -- in a way that's contemporary, yet without sacrificing the emotional impact of any individual style.
Whether her heart's being broken or she's breaking someone else's, she possesses a cool, even intensity, and she belts each note as though she means to knock it out.
Tonight at 8:30 and 11:30; tickets are $15.


Books of The Times; That Spalding Gray Novel Isn't a Monster, After All
Impossible Vacation  By Spalding Gray 228 pages. Alfred A. Knopf. $22.
"Impossible Vacation" is Spalding Gray's long-unfinished novel, referred to repeatedly in his entertaining 1990 monologue, "Monster in a Box."
As that monologue suggested, "Impossible Vacation" is about a man who can't take a vacation -- or rather a man who finds "it very difficult to take pleasure when in very pleasurable places." It's about a character named Brewster North -- who used to be called Spalding Gray, until Mr.
Gray "changed the names to protect the guilty" -- and his efforts to learn "how to hang out like a guy hanging out alone." It's about Brewster's attempts to come to terms with his mother's suicide, and his subsequent wanderings across the globe in search of peace of mind.


Art in Review
Carroll Dunham  David Nolan Gallery 560 Broadway (at Prince Street) SoHo Through today
Carroll Dunham's drawings, done during the last four years, are a bit arch, but they have a goofy energy that's fairly irresistible.
They are related to the brightly colored, biomorphically inclined abstract paintings that have won Mr.
Dunham a sizable following in the last decade.
Imagine erotic doodles by Philip Guston and you can begin to envision these fantastical drawings suggesting weird, spiky buglike creatures or hairy, lumpy, lopsided mountains, or torpid otherwordly landscapes.
Mr.
Dunham evokes the no-holds-barred wildness of children's drawings filtered through an adult sensibility, so that a group of nine yellow crayon sketches of soupy shapes, for example, becomes a sequence of images resembling crashing waves, the vigorous back and forth of the crayon strokes underscoring the force of the water.


Review/Film: Alien 3; HAL, If You're Still Out There, Here's a Computer-Friendly Sequel
IT'S apparent during the opening credits of "Alien 3" that this is going to be a movie for the generation that finds the computer friendly.
Those of us born before 1975 can't possibly comprehend all of the introductory information that goes clicking across the on-screen television monitor, spelling out time, place and imminent crises with the relentlessness of a speed-reading exam.
The information is also so understated that only someone who speaks computer language realizes that life, as we know it, is about to crash.
Yet again.
What the computer generation knows, and the rest of us don't, is that this information isn't really necessary or especially relevant.
Logic is out.
Visceral sensation is the point.


Stocks Off in Tokyo
Japanese stocks slumped in midafternoon trading today.
Less than an hour before the close, the Nikkei index of 225 issues was down 414.09 points, or 2.22 percent, to 18,277.20.
Brokers said that news that the Ministry of Finance would make an announcement concerning securities law violations sparked heavy selling.
On Thursday, the Nikkei rose 16.36 points in quiet trading.


A Changing Asia; Economic Growth, Especially, Fosters Demands for Political Liberalization
The turmoil in Thailand this week has been about politics, but more fundamentally it is rooted in demographic, economic and social changes that have caused unrest elsewhere in Asia -- and that are likely to continue to do so through the 1990's.
For many years now, Asia has experienced the highest economic growth rates in the world, and the result has been a surge in the numbers of politically impatient and self-confident professionals, students and members of the middle class.
Probably nowhere in the world, at any time, has the middle class grown so rapidly as in Asia in the last dozen years.


Critics' Choices for Lovers of the Great Indoors; Theater
In this abundant Broadway season, there are exciting musicals for every taste.
"Jelly's Last Jam," the musical at the Virginia Theater, is in its own orbit, and not quite like any other musical Broadway has seen in this or any season.
This show offers plenty of entertainment, as any show starring the incomparable tap artist, singer and actor Gregory Hines at the peak of his powers would have to.
But George C. Wolfe, the musical's director and the author of its book, has used the biography of the jazz great Jelly Roll Morton as an occasion to dramatize larger issues of African-American identity and culture with passion and even rage, yet without ever forsaking the swift pacing, visual inventiveness and high theatrical style of musical theater at its American best.
The choreography, by Hope Clarke, Ted L. Levy and Mr.
Hines, is no less sizzling for making larger points about how black artists were betrayed by a variety of demons, not all of them white.
The songs, which wed the music of Morton to additional music by Luther Henderson and the tough, bluesy lyrics of Susan Birkenhead, manage both to recapitulate the history of jazz and explain just what jazz meant and expressed to those who invented it.
And the cast is overflowing with performers who act as ferociously as they sing and dance, among them Keith David, Tonya Pinkins, Stanley Wayne Mathis, Savion Glover, Mary Bond Davis and Ann Duquesnay.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-13  U.S.
HALTS HAITIAN OPERATION  With refugee centers at an American naval base filled to capacity, the Bush Administration decided that the Coast Guard would no longer pick up all the Haitians fleeing their country in rickety boats.
A1  SERBS ERASE A TOWN'S HISTORY  When Serbian gunmen go door to door in a Bosnian town, pulling Muslim Slavs from their homes at gunpoint and herding them aboard cattle trucks, they call it "ethnic purification." The militiamen are erasing the history of Zvornik, where Serbs, Coats and Muslim Slavs have lived side by side for centuries.
A1  Serbs let many refugees leave Sarajevo after holding them hostage.
A13  PRESSURE ON AMAZON FOREST  Brazil is expected to cite statistics at a world conference next month charting a steady fall in Amazon deforestation rates.
But the problem endures, fueled by commercial logging, a regional yearning for economic development and a land hunger among refugees.
A1  BIG NUCLEAR TEST IN CHINA  China set off the biggest underground nuclear test it has ever conducted, the State Department said.
The explosion was thought to have a yield of about one megaton, equal to a million tons of TNT.
A1  THAI PROTESTER WARNS PREMIER  A fragile calm returned to Bangkok after several days of clashes.
But the leader of anti-Government demonstrators said they were prepared to flood back onto the streets if Thailand's Prime Minister failed to amend the Constitution and free thousands of prisoners.A3  Thai upheaval is rooted partly in Asia's swift economic changes.
A2  RUSSIA LAYS CLAIM TO CRIMEA  The Russian Parliament voted to declare Khrushchev's 1954 decision to award the Crimean peninsula to Ukraine unconstitutional and void.
But it added that the issue should be resolved through negotiations.
A8  After months of ignoring criticism of its support for Saddam Hussein before Iraq's invasion of Kuwait in August 1990, the Bush Administration accused Democratic lawmakers of distorting the record.
A6  MANILA'S MUDDLED VOTE COUNT  Ten days after a Philippine national election, only half the ballots have been counted, most of the candidates are claiming fraud and Fidel V. Ramos, a former general, is battling to widen a lead that seems likely to make him the next President.
A10  British lawmakers approved a treaty on European union.
A9  Okinawa Journal: Long treated as booty, but gaining confidence.
A4  Lech Walesa embarks on a visit to Moscow, his old adversary.
A13  Twelve die as Israel bombards pro-Iranian guerrillas in Lebanon.
A5  National A14-21  THE CAMPAIGN-LESS CAMPAIGN  The Presidential candidates square off in the California primary in less than two weeks, and so do 11 major candidates for the United States Senate.
But you'd never know it from the dearth of stump appearances and local news coverage.
What is left?
Ads, ads, ads.
A1  In one California town, the disgruntlement is evident.
A18  News analysis: Did the Quayle stir enrich the Bush campaign?
A19  Clinton assailed the White House on the family-values issue.
A18  VAST CHANGES FOR MUTUAL FUNDS  The S.E.C. proposed a broad and varied regulatory and legislative package that, if fully implemented, would make the most sweeping changes in the mutual-fund marketplace since laws governing the industry were first adopted 50 years ago.
A1  SENATE VOTES URBAN-AID PACKAGE  The Senate approved a bill that would provide $1.45 billion more in aid to cities than President Bush had said was needed in the aftermath of the Los Angeles riots.
The White House stopped short of threatening a veto.
A16  Four suspects in a Los Angeles riot beating were permitted bail.
A20  A legal battle has developed over videotapes of the riots.
A20  A criticized police lieutenant defended his performance.
A20  WEINBERGER COUNTERATTACKS  Former Defense Secretary Weinberger made public the results of a polygraph test in which he denied lying to protect President Reagan from investigators looking into the Iran-contra affair.
A14  HOW TO COVER A WAR  After more than eight months of talks with news organizations, the Pentagon issued a set of principles intended to guarantee that journalists have greater access to military operations than they had during the Persian Gulf war.
A15  IS AMERICA FAIR?
In what has become a rite of spring, Congress published 1,888 pages of social-welfare statistics and immediately set off a political brawl about fairness, or growing lack of it, in American society.
A16  RENEWED DEATH-PENALTY DEBATE  When Roger Keith Coleman was electrocuted by Virginia on Wednesday night, still saying he had not murdered his sister-in-law, a haunting question echoed: Does America execute innocent people?
A14  In his hometown, Coleman gets little sympathy.
A14  DROP IN CIGARETTE SMOKING  Health officials said smoking in the United States had reached its lowest level in 37 years because of health concerns, public restrictions and the increasing cost of cigarettes.
A17  A chemical was found to be a strong anti-cancer agent.
A17  Law Page B18  The tensions on the Ninth Circuit.
Metropolitan Digest, B1 FLORIO TAX VETO OVERRIDDEN  The Republican majority in the New Jersey Legislature overrode Gov.
Jim Florio's veto and cut the penny from the sales tax that the Democrats put there two years ago.
A1  Business Digest, D1 Weekend C1-29  Critics' choices for Memorial Day Weekend.
C26  For Children C6  Film: "Alien 3." C1  Music: Cowboys in the sky.
C3  Restaurants C20  Art: British landscapes.
C17  Sports B9-15  Baseball: Angels' team bus overturns in New Jersey.
B9  Mets pound Padres.
B11  Basketball: Cavaliers romp over Bulls.
B13  Column: Vecsey on the perils of team travel.
B9  Track and Field: Two bow out of New York Games.
B9  Obituaries B8  Irving J. Selikoff; TB researcher who fought asbestos.
Editorials/Op-Ed A28-29  Editorials A28  Dan Quayle's fictitious world.
Rescuing dropouts.
Facing down Malawi's tyrant.
Topics: Rough justice.
Letters A28  A. M. Rosenthal: Lessons for Americans.
A29  Leslie H. Gelb: War in Nakhichevan.
A29  Norbert Walter: The wages of German success.
A29  Paul Muolo: Deregulator II.
A29


Irving J. Selikoff Is Dead at 77; TB Researcher Fought Asbestos
Dr.
Irving J. Selikoff, the co-discoverer of a treatment for tuberculosis who went on to prove the hazards of asbestos and lead a campaign against its use, died on Wednesday at Valley Hospital in Ridgewood, N.J.
He was 77 years old and lived in Ridgewood.
He died of cancer, said a spokeswoman for the Mount Sinai Medical Center and School of Medicine, where he was affiliated for 51 years.


House Data on U.S. Income Sets Off Debate on Fairness
In what has become a rite of spring, Congress today published 1,888 pages of eye-straining social welfare statistics and set off a brawl about the fairness of American society.
The statistics are featured in a bound volume called the Green Book, which has been published annually by the House Ways and Means Committee since 1981.
The book has drawn the ire of some conservatives in recent years for data that show widening differences in American incomes.


Alvin M. Greenbaum, Interior Designer, 66
Alvin M. Greenbaum, an award-winning interior designer and co-founder of Greenbaum Interiors of Paterson and Morristown, N.J., died on Tuesday at his home in Wyckoff, N.J.
He was 66 years old.
Mr. Greenbaum died of cancer, said his brother and business partner, Joseph.


Olympia Tax To Be Paid On Property
Olympia &amp; York, the giant real-estate concern whose Canadian parent filed for bankruptcy protection last week, will still pay New York City more than $60 million in property taxes due July 1, but under a stretched-out plan that City Hall hopes can help the company avoid bankruptcy here, senior city officials said last night.
Under agreements with many of its lenders, Olympia's New York arm would automatically be thrown into default if it became delinquent on its taxes.
City officials and company executives said they hoped the new payment plan would reduce that risk for a landlord that pays about 2 percent of all the property taxes in the city.


TV Weekend; Going Gentle Into That 'Tonight'
For anyone who may have been supping with Venusians for the past month or so, a reminder is in order that at 11:35 this evening Johnny Carson begins his final appearance as host of NBC's "Tonight" show.
It all began on Oct. 1, 1962, and, according to the statisticians, that adds up to 4,351 monologues, give or take a gag.


Foreign Affairs; War in Nakhichevan
As Armenian irregulars bear down on Nakhichevan (an Azerbaijani enclave in Armenia) and gain control of Nagorno-Karabakh (an Armenian enclave in Azerbaijan), and as Turkey debates intervening to protect its Turkic and Muslim brethren, Bush Administration policy dances on the point of a needle.
U.S. political imperatives -- influential Armenians, mainly in the pivotal state of California -- strongly favor Armenia.
Policy considerations -- plans to develop Ankara as a strategic counterweight to Iran and Russia in Central Asia -- all tug toward Turkey.


Pop/Jazz; Cowboy Revue in the Sky At Rainbow and Stars
Rainbow and Stars, the elegant cabaret adjacent to the Rainbow Room atop Rockefeller Center, is not the sort of place where one might expect to find three cowboys swapping songs and stories as though they were sharing a campfire in the Arizona wilderness.
But in a striking change of pace from its typical fare, the club is playing host to "Cowboy Logic," an informal revue of songs and poems dealing with western lore.
In a show that changes nightly, the veteran country-pop singer Michael Martin Murphey; Don Edwards, a Texan troubadour and archivist of western music, and Waddie Mitchell, a cowboy poet from Elko, Nev., perform round-robin style, trading songs, verses and yarns, accompanied by a trio playing fiddle, bass and keyboard.


Holiday Weekend
Memorial Day will be observed on Monday. Here are holiday schedules. NEW YORK


U.S., IN NEW POLICY, WILL NOT PICK UP ALL HAITI REFUGEES
With refugee centers at Guantanamo Bay Naval Base filled to capacity, the Administration announced today that the Coast Guard would no longer pick up all the Haitians fleeing their country in rickety boats for the United States.
The Coast Guard said that people in boats bobbing in Caribbean waters would be asked first to return to Haiti.
But it acknowledged the possibility that more Haitians might sail to Florida, risking drowning and posing new problems for United States officials who worry that a tide of refugees will overwhelm the state's social services.
Embargo Is Questioned
The new policy, described as part of a re-examination of the Administration's procedures for Haitian refugees, reflects a growing feeling among officials that the embargo against Haiti is doing little more than ruining the country's economy and motivating masses of poor people to emigrate.
Officials say they fear that in picking up the refugees just off the Haitian coast, the United States is encouraging more and more Haitians to flee.


Yonkers Police End Slowdown and Garbage Pickups Resume
Police officers ended a work slowdown and sanitation workers resumed garbage collection here today after receiving assurances that the city had enough money to give them raises.
Mayor Terence M. Zaleski attributed the apparent resolution of the first major challenge to his new administration to two factors.
He said the city "made it clear that we would not hesitate to invoke the Taylor Law," which fines municipal workers two days' pay for every day of work stoppage.
He also said the city convinced its workers "that we were not trying to balance the new budget on their backs."


Russia Votes to Void Cession of Crimea to Ukraine
The Russian Parliament voted today to declare the 1954 grant of Crimea to Ukraine unconstitutional and void, adding that the issue should be resolved through negotiations.
The resolution, which passed 136 to 18, with 20 abstentions, in effect annulled the decision by Nikita S. Khrushchev, the Soviet leader at the time, to give the strategic peninsula to Ukraine as a "gift" marking the 300th anniversary of Russian-Ukrainian union.


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows, performances and art exhibitions in the New York metropolitan region that will be closing soon.
Closing This Weekend  "THE END OF THE DAY," Playwrights Horizons, 416 West 42d Street, Manhattan.
Jon Robin Baitz's comedy about an English expatriate in Los Angeles and his ex-wife's family.
Closes Sunday.
Performance times: Today, 8 P.M.; tomorrow, 3 and 8 P.M.; Sunday, 3 and 7 P.M.
Tickets: $30.
Reservations: (212) 279-4200.
"FAIRY BONES," Pan Asian Repertory Theater at Playhouse 46, 423 West 46th Street, Manhattan.
Two one-act plays by Laurence Yep about Chinese immigrants in the 1890's.
Closes tomorrow.
Performance times: Today, 8 P.M.; tomorrow, 2 and 8 P.M.
Tickets: $22.
Information: (212) 245-2660.
"TWELFTH NIGHT," Hudson Guild Theater, 441 West 26th Street, Manhattan.
Shakespeare's comedy, performed by the Actors' Company Theater and directed by David Perry.
Closes Sunday.
Performance times: Today, 8 P.M.; tomorrow, 2 and 8 P.M.; Sunday, 3 P.M.
Tickets: $12.
Information: (212) 228-0900.
"IPHIGENIA IN TAURIS," La Mama, 74A East Fourth Street, Manhattan.
Euripides's drama, directed by Yannis Houvardas.
Closes Sunday.
Performance times: Today, 7:30 P.M.; tomorrow, 2 and 7:30 P.M.; Sunday, 3 P.M.
Tickets: $15.
Information: (212) 475-7710.
SALLY APFELBAUM, Nicole Klagsbrun Gallery, 51 Greene Street, SoHo.
Large, multiple-exposure color prints.
Through tomorrow.
Hours: Today and tomorrow, 10 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 925-5157.


Bank Curbs Seen Having Little Effect Right Away
The new Federal rules setting limits on the interest rates that weak banks can pay depositors will have little immediate effect on the bulk of the industry or on customers, analysts said today.
This is primarily because loan demand has been so weak that it has discouraged banks from offering higher rates.
What is more, although the new rules restrict interest rates and deposit-gathering by weaker banks, Federal regulators said today that they expected to grant most requests for waivers.
The rules follow Congressional intent by trying to prevent another episode like that in the 1980's in which high-interest-rate deposits caused huge losses -- and an expensive Government bailout.
But they do so in form, not substance, some experts said.
Some Banks on List
The banks that will have to apply for permission to accept deposits from money brokers and to offer higher rates include the Chase Manhattan Bank, First National Bank of Chicago, First USA Bank, Bankers Trust, Imperial Bank and First Union, all of which did not qualify for the top tier of institutions based on their financial health at the end of last year, according to an analysis today by Sheshunoff Information Services.


White House Is Ready for a Rosier Outlook
President Bush's chief economist said today that because of recent signs of an economic pickup, the White House would soon raise its forecast for economic growth for this year.
Michael J. Boskin, chairman of the President's Council of Economic Advisers, said that lower interest rates and increases in business and consumer confidence were among the reasons that the Administration would revise upward the growth forecast of 2.2 percent it made in January.


Apple Forms A New Unit
Apple Computer Inc. said today that it had formed a new business unit to develop the small, hand-held devices sometimes known as personal digital assistants.
The new unit, Personal Interactive Electronics -- or Apple Pie -- is based at Apple headquarters here and has 200 employees.


Finally, Mets Make It Easy for Fernandez
Bobby Bonilla swung and then froze in full knowledge of the baseball's destination.
Eddie Murray swung and then remained upright, not needing to wonder or rush.
The two shots, Bonilla's in the third inning and Murray's in the fourth, were home runs.
And with them, a game that was stamped as a contest was no longer in doubt.


People
*
Richard K. Blatt was named to the new title of executive director at the Point-of-Purchase Advertising Institute, Englewood, N.J.
He succeeds John Kawula, formerly president, who became vice president at Gold ring Display Group, Paramus, N.J.
Mr.
Blatt was previously vice president of corporate development at the American Advertising Federation, Washington.


Art in Review
Mike and Doug Starn  Leo Castelli Gallery 420 West Broadway (near Spring Street) SoHo Through tomorrow 55 Crosby Street SoHo Through June 27
Mike and Doug Starn, the twins who burst onto the photo scene in the late 1980's with works marked by extravagantly sloppy technique, grandiose scale and romantic subjects, here turn their attention to landscapes of various sorts.
In the West Broadway Castelli gallery, the two are showing large photo constructions of subjects like billowing clouds, rippling sand dunes and the surface of the moon.
These large wall reliefs are made with the Starns' trademark techniques: the two copy pictures onto translucent graphic-arts film, which they then roughly tape, paste and staple together into huge sheets.
They distort these pictures further by mounting them in woodworking clamps and strips of metal.


Corrections
An article on Tuesday about the Alabama Democratic race for the Senate referred incorrectly in some editions to the toll in the 1963 bombing of the 16th Street Baptist Church in Birmingham.
Four black girls died in the bombing, not three.


BUSINESS DIGEST
STALEMATE ON DRIVERS' CONTRACTS
Although the newspaper drivers' union rallied behind the issue of amnesty for nine arrested union pickets, proposed new contracts continue to sharply divide many of the union's members from its leader.
The emergence of the amnesty issue has provoked a stalemate between the union and its adversaries, The New York Times and a wholesale newspaper distributor.
B5.
WHERE THE NOISE IS


Art in Review
David Bates  Charles Cowles Gallery 420 West Broadway (near Spring Street) SoHo Through May 30
The cheerful cast of characters in David Bates's latest paintings include broad-shouldered fishermen in sunglasses and shorts and a dubious mustachioed rug salesman in thin tie and plaid jacket.
The landscape surveyed takes in confectionary churches flanked by tall palms and a hard-bitten light tower rising against the skyscrapers of Galveston, Tex.


Review/Film; The Explosive Life of Frida Kahlo
An hour is hardly enough time to do justice to the passionate life and art of Frida Kahlo, the Mexican painter who seems about to jump off the canvases of her vibrant, fantastic self-portraits.
Even more than her accessible art, Kahlo's explosive existence has made her something of a pop icon in recent years.
That well-documented life is the subject of "Frida Kahlo: A Ribbon Around a Bomb," a part-documentary, part-performance film that opens today at Le Cinematographe.
When Kahlo was 18 years old, her abdomen was pierced by a piece of metal in a trolley accident, causing her to suffer endless pain and many operations until her death in 1954 at the age of 47.
She married the painter Diego Rivera twice, and endured endless betrayals by him, including an affair with her sister.
She retaliated with love affairs of her own, with both men and women.
Throughout all this she painted a stream of self-portraits that splashed her psychology and emotions across the canvas in blunt symbols that are both primitive and surreal: a naked Kahlo bleeds profusely in a hospital bed that seems to float in space; several portraits show Rivera's face painted on Kahlo's forehead.


Corrections
A picture caption yesterday about Serbian prisoners of war being forced to salute at a camp at Capljina, in Bosnia and Herzegovina, misstated the nationality of the commander shown.
He is a Serbian, not a Croatian.


Commons Backs Major on Europe Unity Pact
The House of Commons tonight approved the treaty on European union that was negotiated in December in Maastricht, the Netherlands.
The vote was 336 to 92.
More than 20 members of Prime Minister John Major's Conservative Party were among those who voted against the bill to ratify the treaty, a process that will now be completed within a few weeks.


5,000 Refugees Are Allowed to Leave Sarajevo
Thousands of refugee women, children and elderly people were allowed to leave the Sarajevo area today, ending a standoff in which the refugees were held hostage by Serbian gunmen, after the Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina agreed to supply food to besieged Yugoslav Army barracks in the Bosnian capital.
The refugees, estimated to number 5,000 to 7,000, left the Sarajevo suburb of Ilidza in a column of vehicles headed for the Croatian port city of Split.


PACT WITH RUSSIA ANGERS SOME POLES
President Lech Walesa, the man credited with helping vanquish Communism in Poland, left for his first official visit to Moscow today amid a firestorm over the draft of a Russian-Polish friendship treaty.
Mr.
Walesa and President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia are expected to sign the treaty on Friday morning, during Mr.
Walesa's three-day trip to Russia.
The treaty is significant because it formalizes the withdrawal of the 40,000 troops still on Polish soil.
All but 6,000 noncombat troops are scheduled to leave Poland by November.


Art in Review
Philip Smith  Jason McCoy Gallery 41 East 57th Street Through June 12
It is understandable that Philip Smith's paintings did not stand out at last year's Whitney Biennial.
They're quiet works that do not try to compete for attention.
The considerable pleasure of them comes from the painstakingly constructed oil and wax surfaces into which are incised myriad images, like hieroglyphs.
Mr.
Smith builds layer upon layer, first painting abstractions on linen and then covering them up, often with subtle stripes of color, and on top of these laying down the final soft surface.
The incisions reveal the painting underneath, so that the result is a multiple image of swirls of color beneath geometric designs beneath loopy drawn pictographs of matchbooks, corncobs, skyscrapers, grapefruits, clocks, fingerprints, African carvings and much else.
Mr.
Smith's inspiration seems to have come from many directions, from Brice Marden and Mark Tobey and Jackson Pollock and also from Egyptian art and even from the graffiti carved in antique monuments.
But there's a combination of slowness in his surfaces and patterns, and speed in the rush of cacophonous imagery, that is distinctive to him.


Review/Film; Technique! Allusion! Leitmotif!
"Zentropa" may well be the first feature film that literally attempts to hypnotize the audience into appreciation.
During its opening sequence, a narrator (Max von Sydow) whose voice is as soothing as it is authoritative, suggests that viewers sink "still deeper into Europa" as he slowly counts from 1 to 10 while railroad tracks flash by on the screen.
Periodically during the film, which opens today at the Angelika Film Center, Mr. von Sydow returns like the voice of God (and of Lars von Trier, the Danish film maker who directed and, with Niels Vorsel, co-wrote "Zentropa") to push the narrative forward.
Sometimes he even directly addresses the film's improbable main character, Leopold Kessler (Jean-Marc Barr).
It is 1945, and Leopold, a German-American pacifist, has traveled to Germany to help the country rebuild from the ashes of World War II.
Or as he puts it, "It's time to show the country a little kindness."


VENEZUELAN PHONE SYSTEM PLANS IMPROVEMENTS
The Venezuelan national phone company, owned in part by a consortium led by GTE, plans to spend more than $4 billion over the next eight years to improve the country's phone service.
The national phone company, Cantv, will spend "between $500 million and $700 million" a year on phone system improvements, its president, Bruce Haddad, said.


Review/Art; Raw Darwinian Visions Of Violence and Survival
It's startling when a famous artist turns out to be a late bloomer, displaying sudden improvement after more than a decade of producing mostly overrated work.
This is the case with the Neo-Expressionist painter Susan Rothenberg: her impressive exhibition now at Sperone Westwater in SoHo suggests that after years in the art-world spotlight, she is only now beginning to fulfill her artistic potential.
Ms.
Rothenberg's new works, which feature energetically painted, often violent encounters between animals, mark no radical departure in style for the artist.
Rather, they liberate that style, both technically and thematically, bringing it to maturity.


Acting Police Commissioner Nominated to Nassau Post
Donald F. Kane, who over the last 32 years has served in almost every unit of the Nassau County Police Department, was nominated today by County Executive Thomas S. Gulotta to be police commissioner.
Mr.
Kane, who is 56 years old and a lifelong resident of Nassau County, has served as acting commissioner since the retirement of Samuel J. Rozzi four months ago.
Before that, Mr.
Kane was first deputy commissioner.


Topics of The Times; Keep Peddlers Off Fifth Avenue
Gov.
Mario Cuomo has wisely lifted his threat to seek repeal of a New York State law that bars disabled veterans from peddling in crowded commercial areas.
For almost a century, disabled veterans had the right to peddle goods on any city street, without regard to municipal restrictions.
But in 1991 the law was rightly amended to drive them from prime commercial zones.
Disabled veterans now complain that they have not received the training or jobs they were promised in exchange for the ban.
But there's no evidence of bad faith.


Tapes and Photos of Riot Prompt Legal Struggle
Three weeks into its investigation of crimes committed in the Los Angeles riots, the Justice Department has conducted what experts call the most sweeping effort ever by prosecutors to obtain news tape and still photographs that have not been broadcast or published.
The legal battle over the tapes could become an important factor in the efforts by courts to draw the line between the rights of a free press and the ability of prosecutors to investigate crimes.


John Luchsinger Sr., L.I. Businessman, 71
John F. Luchsinger Sr., a Suffolk County civic leader and businessman, died on May 18 at his home in Patchogue, L.I.
He was 71 years old.
He died of natural causes, a son, John F. Jr., said.


Katherine Whelan Reynal; Volunteer, 84
Katherine Whelan Reynal, a vice chairwoman and a member of the board of directors of the New York Chapter of the American Red Cross in the 1950's, died on Monday in her apartment on the East Side of Manhattan.
She was 84 years old.
She died of a lung infection, her family said.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Media; Campaign in California: Little but Commercials
From the state that brought you Jane Fonda, water bars and brown rice risotto comes a new, potentially alarming trend: the stump-free campaign.
California has a primary election coming up in less than two weeks, and a historic one at that, with two open United States Senate seats.
But you wouldn't know it from following many of the candidates around.
They don't hold campaign rallies or make speeches or attend Kiwanis club luncheons.
In fact, some of them don't even bother to put out campaign schedules.


Economic Scene; Is There Really A Business Cycle?
WHERE are we in the business cycle?
Stock prices have soared to a high on expectations that the Federal Reserve will cut interest rates again.
Bond prices have surged, reportedly on flight-to-safety buying and, contradictorily, on the belief that inflationary fears are unwarranted.
But housing starts plunged 17 percent in April, the biggest decline in eight years, after three months of sharp gains.
The dollar slid to a three-month low against the German mark.
Japanese stock prices and land prices plummeted.
Olympia &amp; York, the world's biggest real estate corporation, filed for bankruptcy.
Alexander's, the retail chain, went bust.
R.
H.
Macy &amp; Company, operating under the bankruptcy law, said it would close eight department stores, including four in the New York region.
Economists, on average, grew more optimistic, but economists are a lagging indicator.
Business sentiment improved.
Consumer sentiment zigged and zagged.


Woodson Is Freed After Being Jailed
Rod Woodson, a cornerback for the Pittsburgh Steelers, has been released from jail after being charged following a fight with his brother over whether to remove life support systems from their terminally ill father.
Woodson and his brother, Jamie, were both jailed on Tuesday after the police tried to break up the fight.
Both were charged with battery and resisting arrest.


CHEVROLET GIVES THE CAPRICE A REPRIEVE THROUGH 1995
Chevrolet will keep six-passenger family-size cars like the Caprice in its lineup through the 1990's even as the General Motors Corporation focuses on fewer nameplates, a GM executive said.
The Caprice, whose future was placed in doubt by the consolidation of all of G.M.'s production of large rear-wheel-drive cars in Arlington, Tex., was given a reprieve through at least 1995.
Chevrolet's chief engineer, Dave Hansen, declined to name other surviving cars.
But he said that beginning in 1994, the division would focus its marketing dollars on one car a year in each market segment.


Critics' Choices for Lovers of the Great Indoors; Video
"RAMBLING ROSE": Dusted with 1930's nostalgia and superbly acted, "Rambling Rose" is the movie equivalent of a country-pop ballad that looks back at a more innocent time through contemporary eyes.
Laura Dern plays Rose, a free-spirited farm girl who works for a middle-class Georgia family during the Depression.
Rose falls briefly in love with the head of the household (Robert Duvall), partly initiates his 13-year-old son, Buddy (Lukas Haas), into sex, and stirs things up among the men in town.
Martha Coolidge, who directed, brings a sympathetic feminist perspective to the story. (1991. $92.98. Live Home Video. 1 hour 55 minutes. Rated R.)
BOYZ N THE HOOD: In the wake of the Los Angeles riots, the kitchen-sink realism of John Singleton's first feature about life in a black Los Angeles neighborhood seems almost too cozy.
But it is still the first mainstream Hollywood movie to begin to capture the texture of daily life in an environment whose ills are usually sensationalized by the movies.
Cuba Gooding Jr. plays a teen-ager who under the guidance of his father (Larry Fishburne) barely escapes the violence and despair that swallow the lives of many of his friends. (1991. $92.86. Columbia Tri-Star. 1 hour 52 minutes. Rated R.)


Restaurants
Another Italian place?
Yes, but one with a flair for clean flavors and appetizing presentation.
Does the Upper West Side -- or New York City, for that matter -- need another pastel-splashed pasta playroom?
Heavens, no.
What it
does
need is a tightly run, resourceful Italian restaurant where classic recipes are prepared with reverence, and inventive dishes spring from competence, not caprice.
That's what you get at the five-month-old Gabriel's on West 60th Street.


AIRCRAFT LEASING COMPANY IN CHAPTER 11 FILING
UAS Holdings Inc. and eight of its airplane leasing affiliates filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection in Brooklyn.
The company, a leading player in the aircraft leasing business, said the downturn in the airline industry had forced it to seek bankruptcy protection.
The company is involved in purchasing, owning, leasing and selling aircraft and related equipment.
UAS Holdings is trying to recapitalize its operations and said it expected to be successful in the near future. (Bloomberg Business News)


Rescued -- Before They Drop Out
Finally, there's some consistent good news about New York City school dropouts.
For the second year in a row, the rate has declined; it's now down to 17 percent -- a dramatic drop from the early 1980's, when the rate reached 42 percent.
The change may be partly due to New York's faltering economy as students stay in school because there are no jobs.
A surer reason is Schools Chancellor Joseph Fernandez and his initiatives to rescue students before they disappear.
These efforts deserve more state and city financial help than Mr.
Fernandez is now getting.


BUSINESS DIGEST
THE ECONOMY
Broad changes for the mutual fund industry, both regulatory and legislative, were proposed by the S.E.C.
If fully adopted, they would represent the most sweeping changes in the fund marketplace in more than 50 years.  [ Page A1. ]
The White House will soon raise its forecast for economic growth as a result of recent signs of an economic pickup, said Michael Boskin, Bush's chief economist.  [ D1. ]


CHRONICLE
Last October, just after CLARENCE THOMAS was confirmed as a Supreme Court Justice, SHERYL SIEGEL suggested that her fourth-grade class write to him.
The youngsters at Public School 116 at 210 East 33d Street in Manhattan took up the idea and sent a batch of letters, "totally unedited by me either for grammar or content," Mrs.
Siegel said.
"We expected to get a thank-you form letter in return."
Instead, six months later, they received a note from the justice suggesting that if they were ever in Washington they should come to visit.


U.S. Administrator Seeks Funds to Stay At Fulton Market
Warning that his office is running out of money, a Federal administrator yesterday appealed to a judge for funds to continue supervising the rackets-troubled Fulton Fish Market until New York City can take on the task.
The administrator, Frank H. Wohl, asked Thomas P. Griesa, a Federal District Court judge in Manhattan, to order the Justice Department to pay his office's bills and to extend his term beyond next Thursday.
Otherwise, Mr.
Wohl said, his office would be out of business early in June.


Classical Music in Review
Carolyn Sebron Mezzo-soprano Weill Recital Hall


Wilder Accuses Robb and Aides Of Smear Effort
Escalating an already nasty feud between Virginia's two leading Democratic elected officials, Gov.
L.
Douglas Wilder today accused Senator Charles S. Robb of using subordinates to "smear and discredit" him.
Moreover, Mr. Wilder suggested that the effort was racially motivated.


And Try Not to Get Caught for Speeding
Most people would love to be a race driver for no other reason than never having to worry about speed limits.
But during the Indianapolis 500 on Sunday, even the racers at the Indianapolis Motor Speedway will have to worry about speeding tickets, of a sort.
Under rules adopted for this year's Indy 500, each time the yellow caution light comes on, the pits will be closed until all the cars have bunched up behind the pace car.
When that happens, the pits will reopen, but drivers can go no faster than 100 miles per hour on pit lane.
The speed limit doesn't apply on stops made under the green light.


Edouard Roditi, 81, A Poet and Essayist
Edouard Roditi, a poet, essayist and translator associated with the Surrealists in the 1930's, died on May 10 at his home in Paris.
He was 81 years old.
He died from injuries suffered in an accident in Spain, where he was vacationing, said Garrett White, his literary executor.


METRO DIGEST
EXPLAINING A $100 MILLION ERROR
The head of the Port Authority has charged his predecessors with a series of miscalculations that wasted $100 million on a program to rebuild Kennedy International Airport that eventually had to be scrapped.
In a report to Governor Cuomo, Stanley Brezenoff, the authority's executive director, offered a picture of an airport-planning staff in the grip of the blue-sky business optimism of the 1980's.
Page 1.
NEW YORK CITY A TRADITION FADES AWAY


Older People Can Be Helped to Keep Driving; In the Slow Lane
To the Editor:
Re your front-page article of May 4: Older drivers usually drive inside the speed limit, while many younger motorists do not.
The law-abiding, mostly older driver thus becomes a nuisance for the speeding younger one.
I have seen the latter physically bump the slower car in the rear, even causing damage to both vehicles.
Is there a practical solution to this problem?
FREDERIC HAUPTMAN Forest Hills, Queens, May 4, 1992


A Failed Robbery Leads to Hostage Siege


Givebacks By Chevron In Oil Deal
As new details come to light, it appears that the Chevron Corporation's oil venture in Kazakhastan, hailed as a breakthrough for foreign investment in the former Soviet Union, will be much less lucrative for Chevron than the deal that the company had negotiated with the Soviet Union before Mikhail S. Gorbachev's Government disintegrated.
Government officials from Kazakhstan, in interviews since the agreement was signed in Washington on Monday, have credited two investment advisers hired last fall -- the Morgan Guaranty Trust Company and the Government of Oman -- with guiding them in negotiating a much tougher agreement than they could have managed on their own, given their inexperience in making commercial deals.
Evaluating the Property
"Our advisers valued the fields and set up satisfactory terms last February," Kalyk Abdulayev, Kazakhstan's Deputy Prime Minister and chief negotiator in the Chevron talks, said in New York yesterday.
"It was only after February that we could have serious talks."


China Releases 3 Catholic Priests Who Spent Decades in Detention
The Government said today that it had released three elderly Roman Catholic clerics from detention, including a priest who may have spent more time in prison for his beliefs than any other Chinese citizen now alive.
The authorities apparently released two priests and a bishop under a regulation that allows clemency for prisoners over 70 years of age, said John T. Kamm, an American businessman who has been lobbying for their release.


No Fast Action in Congress Seen on Mutual Fund Plans
Executives in the mutual fund industry said yesterday that investors should not hold their breath waiting for Congress to act on sweeping changes for funds proposed on Thursday by the Securities and Exchange Commission.
They include deregulation of mutual fund commissions and a beefing up of the quality of investment information sent to retirement plan participants.
But there were also suggestions that stand a far better chance of becoming reality soon, executives said, because the S.E.C. itself can make these changes to the Investment Company Act of 1940 without involving Congress.
A number of the changes suggested by the S.E.C. could be adopted by the agency by the end of the year after deliberation with its constituents.


Center Valley Journal; Partly Wolf, Partly Dog and Wholly Controversial
They resemble German shepherds as they pace in their pen in this rural township just south of Allentown, but the wildness in their eyes and the wariness in their movements say wolf.
The five animals, which are part timber wolf and part shepherd, are called wolf hybrids and are the subject of a dispute between their owners and neighbors, a dispute that goes beyond complaints of sleepless nights because of the hybrids' howling.
Some neighbors worry that the animals will escape from their pen and attack someone.
Local officials, hoping to oust the hybrids, have taken the matter to court.


Review/Dance; With Balanchine in a Mozartean Garden
The New York City Ballet offered representative fare on Thursday night at the New York State Theater: "Apollo" and "Divertimento No. 15," both by George Balanchine, and "Glass Pieces" by Jerome Robbins.
The Mozart "Divertimento No. 15," conducted by Hugo Fiorato, came off best.
Unlike modern-dance choreographers, Balanchine was never afraid of symmetry, and the dancers here frequently mirror each other in pairs or groups.
This kind of formalism is never cold, and the human warmth of Mozart's music is reflected in the constantly changing patterns.


ADVANCED MICRO IS UPHELD IN INTEL AWARD
A California Superior Court judge confirmed an arbitrator's award giving Advanced Micro Devices Inc. the right to continue producing its version of the Intel Corporation's 386 microprocessor.
Intel said it would appeal the court's ruling.
In February, a retired Superior Court judge, J. Barton Phelps, acting as arbitrator, found that Intel had breached a 1982 contract between the two companies, and awarded Advanced Micro $15.3 million in damages.
Judge Phelps also awarded Advanced Micro permanent, worldwide, royalty-free rights to manufacture and sell its Am386 line of microprocessors without continued threat of legal harassment from Intel.


Review/Pop; Machines and Mysticism
Long and gluey tones were the basic material for Robert Fripp's show at the World Financial Center on Tuesday.
Mr.
Fripp, long a cult guitar figure, came to town with a lot of electronics and some collaborators, and performed meditative pieces that explored the line where technology and new-age mysticism meet.
With his machines, and with Trey Gunn on stick, a string instrument tapped with both hands, Mr.
Fripp produced lengthy pieces in which notes blurred into one another, rising out of some primal muck, only to fall back again.
Notes came without definition, wide smudges of sound that washed over the audience the way an evening fog envelops the countryside.
Mr.
Fripp broke up the show by having Patricia Leavitt, a singer, come out to perform nonsequitorial songs with a tone that occasionally had a country cleanliness to it.
Where Mr.
Fripp's music had been thick and static, Ms.
Leavitt's was sprightly; cerebral as well, but with more wit.


Retest Elderly Drivers
Are older drivers a menace?
That question has cropped up tragically this spring when out-of-control cars resulted in mass deaths and injuries.
In New York, a 74-year-old woman plunged her car into Washington Square Park, killing five people.
At Chicago's O'Hare Airport, an 87-year-old man plowed into a group of grade-school children, killing 1 and injuring 76.
Experts say that denying licenses solely on the basis of advanced age would be unfair, unwise and unnecessary.
As Americans grow older, they do not do so uniformly.
But there is a clear need to keep track of their changing reflexes.
Some drivers should be bumped off the road at 65, if their competence fails; others retain it at 90.


After Weeks of Seeming Inaction, U.S. Decides to Punish Belgrade
The Bush Administration, trying to take the initiative after weeks of apparent inaction in the face of Serbian aggression in Bosnia, today announced new sanctions against Belgrade.
The measures, while limited, put the United States ahead of Europe in efforts to deter the Serbian leadership of Yugoslavia.
The Administration ordered Yugoslav consulates in New York and San Francisco closed and their diplomats expelled.
The Government also expelled Belgrade's military attaches in Washington, Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d announced here tonight.
The third consulate, in Chicago, will remain open.


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Tuesday about a settlement of charges between Shearson Lehman Brothers and the New York Stock Exchange referred incorrectly to an Equities magazine article's description of a former Shearson executive's trading.
The article did not state that the former executive, Peter J. DaPuzzo, had manipulated stock prices on repeated occasions.


17-Year-Old Is Charged In Shooting
A 17-year-old high school senior was charged today with shooting a Long Island woman in the head on the steps of her home, in what the police said was a jealous rage after a lengthy affair with the victim's husband.
In a case that a homicide detective, Daniel Severin, called one of the "most bizarre in years" and that he said resembled the 1987 movie thriller "Fatal Attraction," the victim, who was listed in extremely critical condition and thought to be near death after the shooting Tuesday morning, abruptly recovered and gave the police a detailed description of her assailant.


The Yankees' 9-3 Lead Turns Into a Pumpkin
A 14th-inning home run by Milwaukee's Greg Vaughn, landing softly against the screen attached to the left-field bullpen, completed a Brewer comeback from a six-run deficit in a 10-9 victory over the Yankees last night at Yankee Stadium.
Vaughn's eighth home run of the season, against Rich Monteleone (2-1), ended 4 hours 39 minutes of frustration for the Yankees, who had won seven of their previous eight games.


Holiday Weekend
Memorial Day will be observed on Monday.
Here are holiday schedules.
NEW YORK  GOVERNMENT OFFICES: Closed.
POST OFFICE: Express Mail and special delivery only; main post office open at 33d Street and Eighth Avenue.
BANKS: Closed.
PARKING: Sunday rules in effect.
SANITATION: No pickups or street cleanings.
SCHOOLS: Closed.
FINANCIAL MARKETS: Closed.
TRANSPORTATION: Buses and subways on Sunday schedule.
Long Island Rail Road on weekend schedule.
Metro-North on holiday schedule.
NEW JERSEY  GOVERNMENT OFFICES: Closed.
POST OFFICES: Express Mail and special delivery only.
BANKS: Closed.
SCHOOLS: Local option.
TRANSPORTATION: N.J.
Transit on Sunday schedule.
CONNECTICUT  GOVERNMENT OFFICES: Closed.
POST OFFICES: Express Mail and special delivery only.
BANKS: Closed.
SCHOOLS: Closed.
TRANSPORTATION: Metro-North on holiday schedule.
Traffic Alert
TODAY  LIVABLE WEST SIDE FAIR: The west side of Broadway will be closed between 72d and 86th streets from 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.
MONDAY  SECOND AVENUE FAIR: Second Avenue between 42d and 53d streets will be closed from 10 A.M. to 6 P.M.


Germany Discovers a Tormented Artist
The paintings and drawings of Jochen Seidel, an artist from eastern Germany whose tormented life ended in suicide in a Broadway loft in 1971, are now on display at a major retrospective that is touring his homeland.
In Berlin, the retrospective opened in a respected city-supported gallery, according Seidel a measure of the recognition that escaped him almost completely in his lifetime.
It opened last Saturday at the Stadtmuseum in Halle, where Seidel once lived, and will be on view in Cologne from Sept. 14 to Nov. 2.


Judge Sets Los Angeles for Retrial Of Officer in Rodney King Beating
Rejecting arguments that the defendant cannot get a fair trial here because of the recent rioting, the judge who presided over the first trial of Laurence M. Powell and three other police officers in the beating of Rodney G. King ordered today that Officer Powell be retried in Los Angeles County.
The judge, Stanley M. Weisberg of Superior Court, said he believed that the publicity had spread so thoroughly throughout the state that it would be no easier to find an impartial jury in another county.


Long-Term Financing Assured, State Parks Open This Weekend
New York's 150 state parks and 34 historic sites open for the summer this weekend, with new long-range financing -- $300 million in the next 10 years -- that will let them make needed repairs.
The money will come from a Parks Infrastructure Fund authorized by the Legislature this session in an effort to free the parks from the uncertainties of the yearly budget battles in Albany.


Sports of The Times; Can Women Call Fouls On Men?
SANDRA ORTIZ-DEL VALLE sat in her office in the gym at the Manhattan School for the Humanities and eagerly read a story in the morning's paper about Lloyd Daniels's secret tryout with the New York Knicks.
Daniels, of course, is the former New York City high school star who has become as famous for his failed attempts at reaching the pros as for the skills that should have gotten him there.
This summer he'll play for the Long Island Surf of the United States Basketball League.


Town &amp; Country Editor Dismissed After 6 Months on Job
Ron Javers, editor in chief of Town &amp; Country, was dismissed on Thursday, six months after he had been appointed by D. Claeys Bahrenburg, president of Hearst Magazines, as "the ideal editor to lead Town &amp; Country into the 21st century," Hearst employees said.
They also said that the executive editor, John Cantrell, was expected to be named acting editor in chief.


Haitians at Guantanamo Base Say Nothing Will Stop Flight
In a nearly two-mile stretch of green Army tents pitched on an abandoned runway, more than 12,000 Haitians continued their dreary wait here today.
The routine of the families crowded into Camp McCalla, the refugee city built on the airstrip, seems largely unaffected by the Bush Administration's decision on Thursday that the Coast Guard will no longer pick up all Haitians fleeing their country by boat.
The new policy is intended to discourage Haitians from embarking on their journeys in the first place, but few refugees interviewed today thought it would work.


If Pactel Split, It Might Offer Big Stakes
Pacific Telesis, as part of its continuing study of whether to split its huge traditional telephone business from its smaller cellular telephone and other businesses, said yesterday that it might sell a large amount of stock and debt to a few institutional and other investors if it decided to go ahead with the split.
The San Francisco-based company's board said a special committee had decided that if there was a split, there would be a recapitalization of the cellular and other businesses, which include lucrative cellular properties in the United States, Europe and Japan.


Herbert Sharfman; Judge who presided At F.C.C. Was 82
Herbert Sharfman, who as an administrative law judge for the Federal Communications Commission issued a number of notable decisions, died Tuesday at his home in Orlando, Fla.
He was 82 years old.
His family said the cause of death was complications from Parkinson's disease.


Mincing No Words, Ex-Pilot Drops a Bomb on Would-Be Dropouts
It has been years since Drew Timothy Brown 3d regularly hurled himself supersonic in the cockpit of an Intruder attack jet, yet this lieutenant in the United States Naval Reserve says he is still a full-time warrior.
Now, however, the war he wages is fought with books, not bombs.
His target is New York City and as much of the United States as he can cover.


The Last Monologue: Noistalgia and a Few Poltical Digs
After almost three decades of jokes and pantomimed golf strokes, Johnny Carson delivered his final monologue last night as host of "The Tonight Show." This is what he said.


Humphrey? Or Maybe Walker?
While the Miami Dolphins are considering a trade for Denver's BOBBY HUMPHREY, another running back has expressed interest in joining the team: HERSCHEL WALKER.
The 30-year-old Walker becomes an unrestricted free agent June 1, meaning he can be taken from the Vikings with no compensation required.
"I'm from down South and I'd like to play back down in that area," Walker told The Miami Herald for a story published yesterday.
"I respect DON SHULA a great deal, and I think he'd be one of the best coaches in the league to play for."


Ashdod Journal; Land of Milk, Honey and Discontent
White sands and Mediterranean breezes are only a few miles away, but from a huddle of trailers on the edge of this coastal city they sometimes seem as far off to Eva Gorelik as her native Belarus.
Not that she is complaining, Mrs.
Gorelik says.
Her 300 square feet of trailer may not amount to much, but at least her family of four has a roof over its head.


The Latest Sneaker Is a Sandal
A new type of athletic footwear known as a "sports sandal" has become one of the biggest selling outdoor products in recent years.
The sandal is a souped-up version of the traditional thong or flip-flop, which has a tendency to twist or slip off the foot.
But these have thick rubber or foam soles that are held to the feet by wide, sturdy straps; some also have contoured bottoms to give them better grip.


French Law Presumes Accused Innocent
To the Editor:
William Safire's parochial reaction to the surprise of President Francois Mitterrand of France at the police officers' acquittal in the Rodney King beating incorrectly repeats the old canard that French law "does not give the accused the presumption of innocence" ("Trashing Our Justice," May 4).


Flames Name King as Their Coach
The Calgary Flames, who recently missed the playoffs for the first time in 12 years, are hoping the shine from DAVE KING's Olympic silver medal for Canada will restore some gleam to a National Hockey League franchise that has become tarnished since the team won a Stanley Cup in 1989.
King, 44 years old, was introduced yesterday in Alberta as the eighth head coach in the franchise's 20-year history, and the fourth in three years.


Kurdish Parliament Is Split Between Two Parties


Review/Pop; Defiance and Dark Comedy
Shannon Selberg, the singer for the Cows, walked onstage at Wetlands on Sunday with a battered cowboy hat on his head and two mousetraps dangling from his earlobes.
His fashion statement, merging defiance, pain and dark comedy, offered a visual match to the Cows' music.
The Minneapolis-based band has broadened the tantrums of post-punk, hard-core rock into music for unrepentant outcasts.
Like the band's current album, "Cunning Stunts" (Amphetamine Reptile), the set began with the song "Heave Ho," which opens, "Once I was an embryo, till I got the old heave-ho."
For a four-piece band, the Cows can make a huge, sludgy noise.
Thor Eisentrager thickens his guitar's power chords with distortion, while Kevin Rutmanis plucks, pummels and strums his bass.
Norm Rogers, on drums, carries on the eruptive style of Keith Moon.
Shannon Selberg growls and snarls lyrics, often about violence and betrayal, with sex as a dangerous catalyst.
When he's not singing, Mr.
Selberg sometimes sputters out more sound on a battered bugle.


Time to Breach the Firewall
Weeks after the fires of Los Angeles, the firewall remains in place.
The firewall is the barrier imposed by the Budget Enforcement Act of 1990 that, perversely, prevents any money saved from a bloated defense budget being spent on urgent domestic needs.
That's one reason Congress seems to have so little incentive to cut defense further.
Earlier this month the Senate voted to sustain all but $1 billion of the Pentagon's proposed $281 billion budget for fiscal 1993.


INSIDE
Thai Premier Abandoned
The coalition that appointed Thailand's unpopular Prime Minister effectively asked him to resign.
Page 3.
Violence in Delivery Dispute
A replacement driver in the newspaper delivery dispute has been critically injured, the police said.
Page 25.
Audit Stymied at Columbia
Records detailing more than $60 million in Federal research at Columbia have been destroyed.
Page 25.


Corrections
An article on Thursday about the editing of fiction referred incorrectly to an editor at G. P. Putnam's.
She is Faith Sale.


As Venues Are Changed, Many Ask How Important a Role Race Should Play
With the perception widespread that the site of the California police-brutality trial ordained its outcome, lawyers and legislators are vigorously debating how big a factor race ought to be in preparing and conducting trials.
The issue arose again yesterday when a judge decided that the retrial of Officer Laurence Powell would take place in Los Angeles County.
The first trial of Officer Powell and three other white police officers in the beating of a black motorist, Rodney G. King, was moved from Los Angeles to Ventura County, which is predominantly white.


Germany Discovers a Tormented Artist
The paintings and drawings of Jochen Seidel, an artist from eastern Germany whose tormented life ended in suicide in a Broadway loft in 1971, are now on display at a major retrospective that is touring his homeland.
In Berlin, the retrospective opened in a respected city-supported gallery, according Seidel a measure of the recognition that escaped him almost completely in his lifetime.
It opened last Saturday at the Stadtmuseum in Halle, where Seidel once lived, and will be on view in Cologne from Sept. 14 to Nov. 2.


COMPANY BRIEFS
AMC ENTERTAINMENT INC., Kansas City, Mo., said its American Multi-Cinema Inc. unit had completed the sale of five theaters to Carmike Cinemas Inc., Columbus, Ga.
Terms were not disclosed.
CSX CORP., Richmond, a transportation holding company; American Commercial Lines Inc., Jeffersonville, Ind., and Sequa Corp., completed sale of the assets of the Valley Line Company, Sequa's barge unit, to CSX.


Thai Premier Loses Coalition's Support
Thailand's Prime Minister was abandoned on Friday by the political coalition that appointed him, and presented with what amounted to a demand that he resign for his part in the most violent political unrest in the nation's recent history.
There was no immediate response from the Prime Minister, Suchinda Kraprayoon, to the announcement by officials of the five-party coalition that they had drafted constitutional amendments that would force him to step down.
The amendments would require the Prime Minister to be an elected official, which Mr.
Suchinda is not.


Law Graduates Applaud Dinkins's Call for New War on Poverty
In a commencement address to the seventh class to graduate from the City University of New York Law School, Mayor David N. Dinkins yesterday defended the social programs of the Great Society and called for a renewed Federal war on poverty.
"When this country tried -- when our government cared -- the lives of our people improved and society became more decent, more humane," Mr.
Dinkins said.


Corrections
Three entries in the Financial Briefs listing of Business Day on Thursday referred to debt offerings that were not new.
The $150 million note offering by Burlington Resources Inc. occurred on Oct. 9, 1991; the $150 million offering of collateral trust bonds by the National Rural Utilities Cooperative Finance Corporation took place on Aug. 29, 1991, and the Texaco Capital Inc. $150 million debt issue occurred on Aug. 30, 1991.


The President Starts His Holiday


Taking Advantage of a Picture Perfect Day in Washington


Jews Who Fled Libya Still Uncompensated
To the Editor:
In "Light for the Jews of Syria," (editorial, May 2) on the encouraging news that the 4,500-member Syrian Jewish community may finally be permitted to travel abroad, you also refer to the "widespread population exchange" of Palestinian Arabs and Jews from Arab countries that resulted from Israel's birth in 1948.


P.L.O. Backers Win Nablus Vote
Rebounding from a string of defeats in other West Bank towns, nationalist supporters of the Palestine Liberation Organization won a decisive victory over Islamic fundamentalists today in Chamber of Commerce elections in Nablus.
Since Israel banned municipal elections in the occupied territories in 1976, votes for unions leaders and local chambers of commerce have served as gauges of the popularity of various Palestinian political groups.


Rivals Run in Opposite Directions
It has long been the bane of track and field that leading athletes avoid one another as much as possible outside of major competitions like the Olympics and world championships and the qualifying meets to make those events.
A generation ago, the British milers Sebastian Coe and Steve Ovett almost never ran against each other.
Steve Cram, the British world-record holder in the mile, seldom entered the same race as Said Aouita of Morocco.
During his 11-year, 122-victory streak in the 400-meter hurdles that ended in 1988, Edwin Moses seldom took on major challengers.


Older People Can Be Helped to Keep Driving; '55 Alive'
To the Editor:
In 1979 the American Association of Retired Persons recognized the need for a program to refresh the skills of older drivers.
Almost two million American drivers have benefited from taking "55 Alive." Thirty-one states have recognized its worth by providing an insurance discount for completion of this course.


Why Gag the Victim?
"When our son was killed, we were given a life sentence of pain and emptiness," Sandy Kane, a New Yorker, recently said in a hushed hearing room as he described how his teen-age son was murdered in 1986 by another teen-ager while both were on a camp outing in Arizona.
Still, Mr.
Kane said he was lucky he was not forced to confront New York State's criminal justice system.
Compared to New York, Arizona has a revolutionary victims' rights system that gives victims an opportunity to speak out at a criminal's sentencing.


French and Germans Plan an Army Corps Despite NATO Fears
Ignoring concern being voiced in Washington and London that they may be undermining NATO, the leaders of France and Germany today approved formation of a 35,000-member joint army corps with the aim of turning it into the nucleus of a future European army.
Meeting in the western French port of La Rochelle, President Francois Mitterrand and Chancellor Helmut Kohl said the so-called European Corps would become operational on Oct. 1, 1995, and would have European defense, peacekeeping outside Europe and humanitarian actions as its main missions.
They argued that it would help give the European Community its "own military capability."


Youth Symphony
The New York Youth Symphony will end its season of free concerts at Carnegie Hall tomorrow with a program of Brahms's Second Symphony, the Bruch Violin Concerto No. 1 and the world premiere of Michael Rusz czynski's "Midnight Scherzo." Samuel Wong, the group's music director, and his assistant, Anthony Aibel, will share the conducting; Jessica Guideri, a 16-year-old violinist who won this year's Youth Symphony concerto competition, will be the soloist in the Bruch.
Admission is free, but tickets are required.
Information: (212) 581-5933.


French Law Presumes Accused Innocent; Petain's Rise to Power
To the Editor:
"Rulings Jar France Into Reliving Its Anti-Jewish Role in Nazi Era" (front page, May 10) omits the sad fact that Marshal Philippe Petain's rise to power was not the handiwork of some "conservatives." He was chosen to replace Paul Reynaud by the same Popular Front parliament that Leon Blum led to victory in May 1936.
On July 9, 1940, this parliament, Socialists included, voted overwhelmingly to grant Petain dictatorial powers.
There were only three dissenters in the lower house.
JOHN P. ROCHE Medford, Mass., May 10, 1992 The writer is John M. Olin Distinguished Prof. of American Civilization and Foreign Affairs, Tufts U.


Flames Name King as Their Coach
The Calgary Flames, who recently missed the playoffs for the first time in 12 years, are hoping the shine from DAVE KING's Olympic silver medal for Canada will restore some gleam to a National Hockey League franchise that has become tarnished since the team won a Stanley Cup in 1989.
King, 44 years old, was introduced yesterday in Alberta as the eighth head coach in the franchise's 20-year history, and the fourth in three years.


King Case on Home Video
In a fitting follow-up to a case where an 81-second snippet of home videotape was the central evidence, MPI Home Video and Court TV have dashed into the home video market with "The Rodney King Case: What the Jury Saw in California v. Powell."
The one-hour-and-56-minute video, which went on sale yesterday for $24.98, recaps the trial of the Los Angeles police officers accused in the beating of Mr.
King.
It uses footage from Court TV's coverage of the trial, supplemented by the narration of Fred Graham, legal explanations and panel discussions.
The home video is nearly identical to a program on the trial shown last night on Court TV's "Prime Time Trial Story Series."


Humphrey? Or Maybe Walker?
While the Miami Dolphins are considering a trade for Denver's BOBBY HUMPHREY, another running back has expressed interest in joining the team: HERSCHEL WALKER.
The 30-year-old Walker becomes an unrestricted free agent June 1, meaning he can be taken from the Vikings with no compensation required.
"I'm from down South and I'd like to play back down in that area," Walker told The Miami Herald for a story published yesterday.
"I respect DON SHULA a great deal, and I think he'd be one of the best coaches in the league to play for."


3 Die as Korean Foes Battle in DMZ
In their first serious military clash in recent years, three North Korean soldiers were killed and two South Korean soldiers wounded today after the North Koreans crossed into the southern part of the Demilitarized Zone, United Nations and South Korean officials said.
The gun battle disturbed a climate of calm and improving relations at the place where cold-war hostilities remain the sharpest.


Financial Planners Debate How They Charge Clients
As more and more Americans find the complexity of planning for the future a job for experts, they are turning to financial planners.
No longer just a luxury for the wealthy, financial planning has become a need for many people in middle- to upper-income brackets.
But now the planners are squabbling among themselves.
A small but vocal group who call themselves fee-only planners say the public is best served by people who work on a fee-for-service basis and have no financial stake in purchases they recommend.
They say that financial planners who receive commissions, referral fees or other compensation from providers of investment and insurance products are subject to a significant conflict of interest because of those sales incentives.


Washington Memo; A Year for Repackaging Volatile Census Reports
Concern is growing among Census Bureau employees that the Bush Administration, with its eye on the election, may be impeding access to economic statistics that tell the country about itself.
While the bureau has dispensed demographic data from the 1990 census with uncommon speed, the openness has been less evident in the handling of economic news that could be politically volatile in this election year.
Economic reports have been delayed, retitled and repackaged in recent months.
Discouraging statistics have been presented to the public through rose-colored news releases, and some numbers have been made public without notice.
In the last three months, two reports that at best gave a mixed picture of jobs and poverty were delayed during long negotiations between the authors and the public information office over the wording of the accompanying news releases.
The practice of putting experts' names and telephone numbers on news releases was abandoned, and restrictions were placed on public relations employees in the bureau.


Review/Television; A Collage of Memories in the Farewell Broadcast
Taking his farewell bow on NBC's "Tonight Show" this evening, Johnny Carson looked back with fondness on his 30-year run and announced that "I'd like to do the whole thing over -- it's been a hell of a lot of fun." Not many in the doubtlessly record audience for the show would disagree.
The final hour, played in a studio packed with family and friends, turned out to be an old-fashioned affair, complete with electronic scrapbooks and a filmed backstage glimpse of how a typical show was put together.
There was no golf swing.
In fact, for the first half-hour, there wasn't even a desk.
Mr.
Carson, looking boyishly trim and dapper as usual, simply sat on a stool and introduced collages of familiar faces who had appeared with him over the years.


Tax Vote Was Easy Part for G.O.P.
Having vanquished Gov.
Jim Florio in their first major faceoff by easily overriding his veto of the sales-tax cut, the Republicans, who hold a majority in the Legislature, clearly gained an important victory for their public image and self-confidence.
Whether the overriding marked a shift in power is not as clear.


Dr. Alexandra Symonds, 73, Psychiatrist and Psychoanalyst
Dr.
Alexandra Symonds, a psychiatrist and psychoanalyst who was deeply involved in broadening the consideration of women's issues in her field, died on May 20 at her home in Dobbs Ferry, N.Y.
She was 73 years old.
Dr. Symonds died of pancreatic cancer, said Lily Harmon, her sister-in-law.
This month Dr.
Symonds, a Fellow and former Trustee of the American Academy of Psychoanalysis, received the organization's Presidential Award for Distinguished Service and Scientific Contributions.


Corrections
An article in The Living Section on Wednesday about the Don't Bungle the Jungle II party misidentified a principal of the Coviello-Erickson fashion company.
She is Karen Erickson.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 2-5 PACT TO PROTECT SPECIES
After nearly two weeks of negotiations, 98 countries adopted a treaty on preserving the world's plant, animal and microbial species at a meeting in Nairobi.
But it was not immediately clear if the United States, Japan and other industrialized countries would sign it.  1  U.S.
ACTS AGAINST SERBIA
Assailing Serbian aggression in Bosnia, the Bush Administration ordered two of Yugoslavia's consulates closed and expelled some military attaches.
The decision follows weeks of inaction against Yugoslavia's Serbian-led leadership.  1 Bosnia and Herzegovina joins the U.N. and pleads for help.  4  A NASCENT EUROPEAN ARMY
Ignoring concern in Washington and London, the leaders of France and Germany approved the formation of a 35,000-member joint army corps with the aim of turning it into the nucleus of a European army.  1  NEAR-CHAOS IN NIGERIA
Bitter clashes between Christians and Muslims are pushing Nigeria toward chaos.
At least 500 have been killed in the fighting, which may threaten the military's plan to hand over power to a civilian government next year.  1  NO END TO HAITIAN EXODUS
Haitian refugees at an American naval base said their compatriots would probably keep fleeing Haiti in boats, despite the Coast Guard's decision to stop picking all of them up.
Meanwhile, demand outstrips space at the Guantanamo Bay base.  1  Washington gropes for solutions in dealing with fleeing Haitians.  2  THAI PREMIER SEEMS ISOLATED
Thailand's Prime Minister was abandoned by the political coalition that appointed him and presented with what amounted to a demand that he resign for his part in the violent unrest this week.  3  2 KOREAS CLASH AT BORDER
In their first serious military clash in years, three North Korean soldiers were killed and two South Koreans were wounded after the North Koreans crossed into the southern part of the Demilitarized Zone.  3  CHINA SAYS IT FREED 3 CLERICS
The Chinese Government said it had released three elderly Roman Catholic clerics from detention, including a priest who may have spent 35 years in prison for his beliefs.  3  A SOLZHENITSYN VISITS RUSSIA
Seventeen years after she and her husband, Aleksandr I. Solzhenitsyn, were expelled from the Soviet Union, Natalya Solzhenitsyn returned to Russia.
She made it clear that her main mission is to set the stage for her husband's own dramatic homecoming from the United States.  2  VICTORY FOR P.L.O.
BACKERS
Rebounding from defeats in other West Bank towns, nationalist supporters of the Palestine Liberation Organization won a decisive victory over Islamic fundamentalists in an election in Nablus.  5  Ashrod Journal: Immigrants long to teach Likud a lesson.  4  National 6-9  RETRIAL IN LOS ANGELES
A judge decided that Los Angeles County would be the site of the trial resolving the only remaining charge in the police beating of Rodney G. King.  1  How big a factor should race be in the conduct of a trial?  7  WILDER-ROBB DISCORD GROWS
Escalating an already nasty feud between Virginia's two leading Democrats, Governor Wilder accused Senator Robb and his aides of a smear campaign and suggested that the effort was racially motivated.  6  BEFORE MURPHY BROWN
William J. Bennett once took a swipe at Bart Simpson, and Ronald Reagan parroted Dirty Harry and on occasion embraced Rambo.
So Dan Quayle was following in a still blossoming political tradition this week when he invoked a Hollywood character to make a point.
The question: What does that say about the level of political discourse?  8  Clinton gave some backing to Florio's welfare approach.  8  In Alabama, a political and racial milestone is approaching.  8  POLITICS AND ECONOMIC DATA
Concern is growing among Census Bureau employees that the Administration, with its eye on the election, may be impeding access to economic statistics that tell the country about itself.  6  UNDERCOUNT OF SCHOLARS
The Administration said it had underestimated the number of college students eligible for a major Federal aid program but that despite the resulting budget shortfall, all who qualified for grants this year would receive them.  6  NO ACTION ON HARVARD PARODY
Harvard Law School's administrative board decided not to punish the students who wrote a parody that mocked the work of a murdered feminist legal scholar.  9  ETHICS PANEL FORGOES SEX INQUIRY
The Senate Ethics Committee said it would not investigate sexual misconduct accusations against Senator Brock Adams.  9  EXECUTION IN MAGAZINE-AD CASE
A man who hired his wife's killer through a classified advertisement in Soldier of Fortune magazine was put to death in Texas.  9  Center Valley Journal: Hey, isn't that dog a wolf?  6  Metropolitan Digest, 25  OFFICIAL CITES $100 MILLION WASTE
A plan to rebuild Kennedy International Airport ended up wasting at least $100 million and had to be scrapped, the head of the Port Authority acknowledged.  1  END OF A TRADITION
The latest sneaker is a sandal.
Obituaries 11  William Gellman, a psychologist.
Editorials/Op-Ed 22-23  Editorials 22  What Los Angeles needs.
Too slow for the homeless.
Time to breach the firewall.
Retest elderly drivers.
Letters 22  Russell Baker: To cloud men's minds.  23  Flora Lewis: The end of sovereignty.  23  David K. Dunaway: Save our stations.  23  Andrew Stein: Why gag the victim?  23  Thomas B. Stoddard: Now you're insured, now you're not.  23


Carson's Last Tonight


Ruiz Challenges Dinkins Over Hispanic Programs
What Mayor David N. Dinkins intended as a debriefing on his trip to the Caribbean turned into a political fencing match yesterday, when a City Councilman who accompanied him questioned the Mayor's standing with the Hispanic community.
Surrounded at a news conference at City Hall by much of the entourage that had traveled with him to Puerto Rico and the Dominican Republic, Mr.
Dinkins tried to focus on the substance of the trip, but Councilman Israel Ruiz Jr., Democrat of the Bronx, stole the show.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League


From Syria to Brooklyn


Blazers Get Defensive Too Late
The Utah Jazz spent the late night talking about its defense and its new momentum, but it was Rick Adelman, the coach of the Portland Trail Blazers, who seemed to set a small brush fire tonight after Game 3 of the Western Conference final.
Adelman introduced a new term to the series, which now appears far from finished: the Karl Malone Rules.


Treasury Issues Higher in Light Trading
Prices of Treasury securities rose in light trading yesterday, as some investors and traders stepped up and bought notes and bonds after two days of fairly sharp price declines.
Most of the gains were recorded during overnight trading in Asia and later in European financial markets.
Analysts said participants in the United States seemed to be more interested in the start of a long holiday weekend than in taking on new positions.
In preparation for the Memorial Day holiday, trading was suspended at 1 P.M.


Germany Discovers a Tormented Artist
The paintings and drawings of Jochen Seidel, an artist from eastern Germany whose tormented life ended in suicide in a Broadway loft in 1971, are now on display at a major retrospective that is touring his homeland.
In Berlin, the retrospective opened in a respected city-supported gallery, according Seidel a measure of the recognition that escaped him almost completely in his lifetime.
It opened last Saturday at the Stadtmuseum in Halle, where Seidel once lived, and will be on view in Cologne from Sept. 14 to Nov. 2.


On the Trail
PEROT GAVE $850,000 LAST MONTH TO BALLOTS COMMITTEE
WASHINGTON, May 22 (Special to The New York Times) -- Ross Perot donated $850,000 last month to the committee trying to put his name on state November election ballots, a Federal report shows.
The report and other Federal Election Commission papers show that Mr.
Perot has now given more than $1.25 million.


Princeton Coach Is Retiring
LARRY ELLIS, the Princeton cross-country coach and assistant track coach, who coached the 1984 Olympics track team, announced his retirement yesterday.
The 63-year-old coach, who was the school's head track coach from 1970-90, is the executive vice president of The Athletics Congress, the governing body of track and field in the United States.
In 22 years as cross-country coach, Ellis led the Tigers to a 161-62 record. (AP)


U.S. Uncertain on How to Deal With Haitian Exodus
Searching for a new policy to stem the tide of people fleeing Haiti, senior Administration officials met today to consider a wide range of options, from expanding the overcrowded tent camps at the Guantanamo Bay naval base in Cuba to speeding the forcible return of new refugees.
That such differing alternatives were under consideration suggested uncertainty among Bush aides about how to deal with the continued exodus of Haitian refugees.


New York's Parks Department Can't See Either Forest or Trees; Bronx Revival
To the Editor:
While it is true that New York's 1,146-acre Van Cortlandt Park will suffer this year because of drastic budget cuts at the Department of Parks and Recreation, the nonprofit City Parks Foundation was set up precisely to offer individuals, corporations and foundations a way to help community parks ("New Friends Wanted for a Bronx Park," news article, May 11).


Casting Off From Fiberglass: A Boat Made From a New Plastic
The traditional method of building boats -- out of wood, and by hand -- gave way 30 years ago to boats made of fiberglass in manufacturing plants.
Now, the marine industry is building boats with sophisticated plastics intended to make watercraft stronger but lighter in weight.
Pelican International in Laval, Quebec, recently introduced a small motor skiff made of a new plastic material from the Monsanto Company of St.
Louis.


Wilder Accuses Robb and Aides Of Smear Effort
Escalating an already nasty feud between Virginia's two leading Democratic elected officials, Gov.
L.
Douglas Wilder today accused Senator Charles S. Robb of using subordinates to "smear and discredit" him.
Moreover, Mr. Wilder suggested that the effort was racially motivated.


Hurt Man Is Charged
An 18-year-old Bronx man who was in critical condition last night at Lincoln Hospital with gunshot wounds was arrested last night in the shooting deaths of three teen-age boys found in a neighbor's apartment on Monday night, the police said.
The suspect, Cory Jackson, of 685 East 140th Street in Mott Haven, was among a group of people who were involved in the killing, the police said.
Mr.
Jackson was charged with three counts of second-degree murder It was not known how he had been wounded, the police said.


Harvard Will Not Punish Students Who Mocked Slain Law Professor
Despite faculty and student calls for disciplinary action, Harvard Law School's administrative board has decided not to punish the students who wrote a parody that mocked the work of a slain feminist legal scholar.
In a letter on Thursday to David Kennedy, a law school professor who called for disciplinary action, the board explained that it would not take any action against the authors of the Harvard Law Review parody because there are no school rules limiting the content of the publication.


Wife Is Preparing Solzhenitsyn's Return
Natalya Solzhenitsyn returned to Russia today, 17 years after she and her husband, Aleksandr I. Solzhenitsyn, the writer, dissident and Nobel laureate, were forcibly expelled from the Soviet Union.
Now, the Soviet Union is gone but Mr.
Solzhenitsyn, a man of towering stature both here and abroad, has yet to come home.
But when Mrs.
Solzhenitsyn arrived today at Sheremetyevo Airport, with two of the couple's three sons, made clear that her main mission was to set the stage for her husband's own dramatic homecoming from the United States.


Man Is Killed by F Train
A man in his 50's was struck and killed by a northbound F train early this morning in a tunnel just south of the Delancey Street subway station on the Lower East Side of Manhattan, the transit police said.
The man, who was not immediately identified, was hit at 12:10 A.M., said Lieut.
Michael McCaw of the transit police.
It had not been determined early this morning why the man was in the tunnel, the lieutenant said.
Train service on the line was suspended for about an hour after the accident.


BUSINESS DIGEST
International
Chevron's oil venture in Kazakhstan, hailed as a breakthrough for foreign investment in the former Soviet Union, now appears much less lucrative for the company than the deal it had negotiated before Mikhail S. Gorbachev's Government failed.  [ 35. ]
OPEC ministers decided to raise oil output only slightly during the peak-demand summer season to keep prices firm.  [ 35. ] The Economy
Sweeping changes in the mutual fund industry proposed by the S.E.C. are not likely to be acted on by Congress any time soon, industry executives said, citing deregulation of fund commissions and a beefing up of the quality of investment information sent to retirement plan participants.  [ 35. ]
Interest rates could be pushed lower, if necessary, to counter a weakening economy, the Federal Reserve's chief policy-making committee decided in March.  [ 47. ]
The Energy Department can override the state of Nevada and go ahead with preliminary work at a proposed high-level nuclear waste site, the House decided.  [ 39. ] Markets
The stock market turned upward in slow preholiday trading, with encouragement from lower interest rates.
The Dow Jones industrial average rose 8.06, to close at 3,386.77.  [ 38. ]
Prices of Treasury securities rose in light trading, with most of the gains recorded during overnight trading abroad.  [ 38. ]
The dollar turned mixed in light domestic dealings after gaining ground overseas.
Gold prices advanced.  [ 45. ]
Livestock and meat futures prices moved higher, as did grains, soybeans, precious metals and energy futures.  [ 45. ] Companies
Pacific Telesis said it might sell stock and debt to investors if it decides to go ahead with a split between its huge traditional telephone business and its smaller cellular operations.  [ 37. ]
Questions from angry General Motors shareholders about the suspected $436 million fraud by a Long Island car dealer dominated the auto maker's annual meeting.  [ 37. ]
John Kluge is willing to put $25 million more into Orion Pictures, of which he is the largest shareholder, and to forgive debts of $29 million to move the company out of bankruptcy.  [ 37. ]
Nike will sponsor a commercial promoting racial harmony.
It willfeature the film maker Spike Lee.  [ 37. ]
Town &amp; Country's editor in chief has been dismissed after six months on the job, Hearst employees said, adding that Ron Javers was likely to be succeeded by John Cantrell.  [ 42. ]
I.B.M. is discussing links with the nation's largest cable-television operator, Tele-Communications, as well as Time Warner Inc., the second-largest, and others, as part of a plan to provide two-way television services, executives said.  [ 37. ]
An arbitrator's award giving Advanced Micro Devices the right to continue producing its version of the Intel Corporation's 386 microprocessor was confirmed in California Superior Court.  [ 37. ] Today's Columns
Some upper-income people are saving too much in tax-deferred retirement savings plans, and could face heavy taxes and penalties as a result.
Jan M. Rosen: Your Money.  [ 36. ]
The Federal Government is still placing gag orders on 6,000 inventions that it says could threaten national security, despite the collapse of the Soviet Union.
Edmund L. Andrews: Patents.  [ 35. ]


Bids Accepted to Develop 4 Chelsea Piers
The newly revived plan to overhaul the decaying waterfront on the West Side of Manhattan took a small step forward yesterday as state officials accepted bids to develop the Chelsea piers into a bustling conglomeration of businesses, from skating rinks to marinas to film studios.
The four piers, between West 18th and West 22d Streets, are the first of three riverfront sites that will be leased to private developers as part of the sweeping plan to redevelop the Hudson River shoreline from Battery Park City to 59th Street with parkland, commercial buildings and a new highway.


Bridge
In a one-session pair competition with a large field the chance of scoring consecutive victories is very slight indeed.
But that feat was achieved Wednesday night in the annual United Jewish Appeal-Federation Charity Game at the Harmonie Club, 4 East 60th Street in Manhattan.
Repeating their 1991 victory, in a field of 104 pairs that included 48 experts, were David Berkowitz of Old Tappan, N.J., and Ruth Stober of Great Neck, L.I.
Runners-up were Jim Becker and Vivian Shalom, both of Manhattan.
The event raised about $52,000 for various Jewish charities.


Giants Latest to Benefit As Mets Get No Relief
Is any lead safe for the Mets?
It has become a question more realistic than rhetorical, and so what was once a personal crisis of confidence for Manager Jeff Torborg has clearly become an organizational dilemma.
The Mets tonight withstood another poor performance by their bullpen in a 7-6 loss to the Giants at Candlestick Park.


Rise of 'Saturday Afternoon Specials'
The international arms race may be slowing, but a major weapons buildup is under way in the nation's toy stores this summer.
On beaches, in backyards and even in a few executive offices, high-powered water guns are the weapons of choice.
A far cry from the little squirt guns of old, the latest water guns are hefty in size and price, around $30 for the most macho ones.
Using air pumped into a chamber, most of the guns can blast a forceful, though small, stream of water 50 feet with considerable accuracy.


Your Money; Saving Too Much For Retirement
Unlike the majority of Americans who need to save more for retirement, some people -- notably upper-income professionals and business owners -- may be putting away too much in tax-deferred retirement savings plans.
Sam Radin, a lawyer and president of the National Madison Group Inc. in New York, said, "Tax-qualified wealth can be illusory." Once a person's assets in an individual retirement account, Keogh or similar plan reach $1 million, he recommends doing an individual analysis to determine how much is likely to be there at retirement age and whether the owner and his or her estate are likely to be liable for penalties, as well as income and estate taxes.
There is no one limit for everyone; it must be calculated under complex requirements of the 1987 tax law.


So Who's Being Called A Pushover?
They were called wimps and cream puffs and marshmallows.
They were told they didn't have what it takes to win at their current level of the National Basketball Association playoffs, another way of saying they didn't have enough heart.
"People are quick to judge, but they can all eat crow," said the Cleveland Cavaliers' Mark Price.


Mincing No Words, Ex-Pilot Drops a Bomb on Would-Be Dropouts
It has been years since Drew Timothy Brown 3d regularly hurled himself supersonic in the cockpit of an Intruder attack jet, yet this lieutenant in the United States Naval Reserve says he is still a full-time warrior.
Now, however, the war he wages is fought with books, not bombs.
His target is New York City and as much of the United States as he can cover.


Spain's Insiders in Insider Scandal
The two men who dictated monetarist economic policies are among Spain's best and brightest.
One is governor of the central bank.
The other was Finance Minister in the Socialist Government.
Now the collapse of a small investment bank, following accusations of fraud and phony bookkeeping, has engulfed Mariano Rubio, the governor of the Bank of Spain, and Miguel Boyer, a former Finance Minister, in a deepening stock and regulatory scandal that reached a symbolic climax this week.


Survey Finds High Cancer Rate In 2 Neighborhoods in Brooklyn
A New York City Health Department survey has found that the residents of the Greenpoint and Williamsburg areas of Brooklyn face a greater risk of stomach cancer and some kinds of leukemia than other New Yorkers.
The survey was prompted by concern over sewage odors, radioactive wastes and smoke-belching factories.
However, the survey drew no causal connections between the higher incidence of the diseases and the extraordinary concentration of environmental hazards in the two heavily industrialized East River waterfront neighborhoods.
The 150,000 residents have complained for years that their health is endangered by pollutants.
Pollution Violations
The survey had been mandated by the state under an order to the city to clean up pollution violations.
It was expected to provide more ammunition to residents seeking to block city plans to build a $1 billion garbage incinerator at the nearby Brooklyn Navy Yard in 1996.


St. Jean Is Kings' New Coach
GARRY ST.
JEAN, who spent the last four seasons as an assistant with Golden State, was named head coach of the Sacramento Kings yesterday.
St.
Jean replaces REX HUGHES, who finished the season as interim coach after DICK MOTTA was dismissed.
The Kings finished last in the Pacific Division with a 29-53 record and failed to make the playoffs for a sixth straight year.


Quotation of the Day
"We've camped out here for 30 hours. We grew up with Johnny. He's tucked us into bed every night." -- RAINA BOWSHER, a fan from Colorado, waiting for a chance to get into the last Johnny Carson show.  [ 48:5. ]


Fade Out for Johnny Carson, His Dignity and Privacy Intact
"Heeere's Johnny!"
In his timbrous voice, Ed McMahon gave his final, patented introduction to Johnny Carson tonight in a melancholy farewell to the man who has dominated late-night television for almost 30 years.


Budget Gap And Tax Talk Are Growing In Suffolk
Just one month after the Suffolk County Legislature adopted a plan to fill a $70 million budget gap, the gap has grown by $21 million, and county officials say a tax increase may be unavoidable.
County Executive Robert J. Gaffney is talking of the "growing possibility" of a tax increase, and legislative leaders are forecasting cuts in county salaries and services.


Review/Music; Britten's Symbolic Requiem, Symbolically Played
At the very close of Benjamin Britten's "War Requiem," two singers representing opposing soldiers in battle finally find reconciliation: "I am the enemy you killed, my friend," reads one of the texts Britten set.
"Let us sleep," the voices finally resolve.
Such is the peaceful conclusion of this tortured work, which Kurt Masur conducted on Thursday night in Avery Fisher Hall in the final subscription programs of his first season as music director of the New York Philharmonic.
Mr.
Masur did not lightly choose the 85-minute "War Requiem" for these concerts.
It was commissioned for the consecration of a new cathedral at Coventry, built alongside the ruins of the 14th-century building destroyed by the Nazis in 1940.
At the premiere in 1962, English and German soloists, Peter Pears and Dietrich Fischer-Dieskau, were meant to represent the nations that fought during that war.
And Britten meant to construct a dramatic argument for pacifism, intertwining the Latin Mass for the Dead with the bitterly ironic antiwar poetry of Wilfred Owen, who was killed in the final days of World War I.


Too Slow for the Homeless
Earlier this year, Mayor David Dinkins and others concerned with housing New York City's homeless reached a useful consensus: Close up the huge, squalid, inefficient armory shelters and replace them with smaller social service programs run by nonprofit groups.
Yet now the Mayor displays a regrettable lack of urgency in advancing that idea.
The city's Human Resources Administration last year wisely proposed spending $200 million to replace the huge armory shelters, where the homeless bed down on open drill floors, with smaller shelters offering drug treatment, job training and other structured social programs.
But strong local opposition to sites proposed for the smaller programs forced the Mayor to delay.


U.S. MAY NOT SIGN
After nearly two weeks of intense and often acrimonious negotiations, 98 countries adopted a treaty today on preserving the world's plant, animal and microbial species.
But it was not immediately clear if the United States, Japan and other industrialized countries would sign it.
The treaty is one of two binding agreements that will be presented for signing at the Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro next month.


Grant to Smithsonian For Performance of Jazz
The Lila Wallace-Reader's Digest Fund announced a $7 million grant to the Smithsonian Institution on Thursday for the performance of jazz and related activities over the next 10 years.
The project will have as its centerpiece performances by the new Smithsonian Jazz Masterworks Orchestra, which will travel to 12 cities after its debut next year at the Smithsonian.


Observer; To Cloud Men's Minds
Like Richard Nixon in his prime, Dan Quayle has the power to make his opponents charge blindly off the highest cliff in the territory.
Take the curious uproar created by his speech in California the other day.
How explain it except as another instance of Quayle's power to fan the suicidal impulse in those who don't take to him?
Here was a speech containing ample material to alarm all civilization, most especially in its disclosure that we are now being governed by people who watch TV sitcoms.
I would have expected sobs of despair from all sensible people on this score alone.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on Thursday about Congressional action on the Seawolf submarine program quoted Senator John McCain incompletely.
The Senator said, "You can never justify defense spending to create jobs because it's the most inefficient way to spend money."


G.M. Holders Question Officials on Fraud Report
Questions from angry General Motors Corporation shareholders about the suspected $436 million fraud by a Long Island car dealer dominated the auto maker's annual meeting today.
The controversy over G.M.'s internal financial controls came as Robert C. Stempel, G.M.'s chairman and chief executive, sought to reassure shareholders that last month's shake-up of top management was intended to speed G.M.'s troubled North American operations back to profitability.


Cold War Secrecy Still Shrouds Inventions
Despite the collapse of the Soviet Union, the Federal Government is still placing gag orders on nearly 6,000 inventions that it believes could threaten national security, according to recent data obtained by a public interest group.
Imposed by the Patent and Trademark Office under a 1951 law called the Invention Secrecy Act, these secrecy orders block patents from being issued and in many cases prohibit the inventors from selling or licensing their technology to anybody except the Government -- regardless of whether the technology was developed with private or Government money.


U.S. Says It Misjudged Numbers on Student Aid
The Bush Administration said today that it had underestimated the number of college students eligible for a major Federal scholarship aid program, but that all students who qualified for the grant this year would receive it.
In testimony before a Senate appropriations committee earlier this week, Education Secretary Lamar Alexander said his department had predicted that 3.7 million students would receive Pell grants, the main Federal higher education aid program to college students.
But he said more than four million students actually qualified for the next school year, producing a $1.1 billion shortfall in the budget.


Joyner Stops Training for Olympics
AL JOYNER, a gold medalist at the 1984 Summer Olympics, said yesterday that stress from a May 8 confrontation with the police in Los Angeles had made it impossible to train for next month's Olympic trials.
Joyner, a 32-year-old hurdler and triple jumper, said the incident had caused him to lose sleep and nearly 10 pounds.
He said he had also lost his competitive edge.
"This isn't like I pulled a muscle or had a bad day," he said.
"This is messing with my frame of mind. Given that, I have no choice but to give up on the Olympics this year."


Research Files Thrown Away At Columbia
Federal auditors at Columbia University reported yesterday that important records accounting for more than $60 million in Federal research costs in 1986 have been destroyed, even though Columbia knew the government might need them to determine the extent to which inappropriate expenses had been charged to taxpayers.
About 150 cartons of records were compacted and sent to the Fresh Kills landfill, university officials said.


Older People Can Be Helped to Keep Driving
To the Editor:
Your front-page article on the question of public safety versus the rights of older drivers (May 4) raises many important and complex issues that are particularly relevant for physicians who care for older patients.


Gunshots Fired Through a Door Hit 9-Year-Old
A nine-year-old boy who was sitting on his bed playing a video game was critically wounded last night when someone fired four bullets through the front door of his family's apartment in Brooklyn, the police said.
The boy, who was not identified because of his age, was struck once in the back of the neck and hand at about 9:15 P.M. and taken to Elmhurst Hospital, where he was listed in critical condition, said a police spokeswoman, Sgt.
Tina Mohrmann.
Although the boy was playing a Nintendo video game with a friend at the time -- and other people were scattered throughout the second-floor apartment -- only the boy was wounded, the police said.


Classical Music in Review
Janice Weber Pianist Steinway Hall


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: House Race; After 115 Years, a Black Will Represent Alabama
The one thing that is certain about the crowded field seeking to represent Alabama's newly apportioned Seventh Congressional District is that from its ranks will come the state's first black member of Congress in 115 years.
The race in the district, which has a voting-age population that is two-thirds black, has attracted six black Democrats and three black Republicans to run in the June 2 primaries.


2 Nuclear Plants With Faults Get Bigger Fines for Poor Safety History
The Nuclear Regulatory Commission yesterday said that it would fine the owners of the Indian Point 3 nuclear plant, in Buchanan, N.Y., and the Nine Mile Point 1 plant, in Scriba, N.Y., for violating safety rules.
In both cases the size of the fine was increased because of a history of violations.
Indian Point 3, owned by the New York Power Authority, was fined $225,000.
Nine Mile Point 1, owned by the Niagara Mohawk Power Corporation, was fined $200,000.
The fines are larger than the commission usually imposes, but both companies said they would not contest them.


Older People Can Be Helped to Keep Driving; Safer Over 70
To the Editor:
The figures displayed in your May 4 front-page article on the dangers of drivers 70 years of age or older do not support the allegations.


Spain's Insiders in Insider Scandal
The two men who dictated monetarist economic policies are among Spain's best and brightest.
One is governor of the central bank.
The other was Finance Minister in the Socialist Government.
Now the collapse of a small investment bank, following accusations of fraud and phony bookkeeping, has engulfed Mariano Rubio, the governor of the Bank of Spain, and Miguel Boyer, a former Finance Minister, in a deepening stock and regulatory scandal that reached a symbolic climax this week.


New York Memorial Day Parade Fades Away
After years of decline, a venerable New York tradition, the Memorial Day parade up Broadway and Riverside Drive to the Soldiers' and Sailors' Monument overlooking the Hudson, has faded away like the aging veterans who have been its stalwarts since World War I and will not be held this year.
In other boroughs, in other cities, in suburbs and hamlets across the land, Americans will still remember the nation's war dead tomorrow and on Monday with thundering parades, band concerts, fireworks displays and other events draped with the battle flags of Guadalcanal and Normandy, of Inchon and Chu Lai.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Spain Beats France to Make Final


C.M. Montgomery, 92, A Designer of Fashions
Constance Montague Montgomery, who at the age of 66 started a successful fashion designing career that continued for 26 years, died on Wednesday at St.
Clare's Hospital in Manhattan.
She was 92 years old and lived in Manhattan.
She died a few days after suffering a stroke, according to Ralph Allen, a friend and co-executor of her estate.


A Winning Debut For New Manager
Expos 7, Braves 1
MONTREAL, May 22 (AP) -- Felipe Alou was a winner in his debut as manager of Montreal as Dennis Martinez pitched a two-hitter in the Expos' 7-1 victory over Tom Glavine and the Atlanta Braves tonight.


Mincing No Words, Ex-Pilot Drops a Bomb on Would-Be Dropouts
It has been years since Drew Timothy Brown 3d regularly hurled himself supersonic in the cockpit of an Intruder attack jet, yet this lieutenant in the United States Naval Reserve says he is still a full-time warrior.
Now, however, the war he wages is fought with books, not bombs.
His target is New York City and as much of the United States as he can cover.


Guilty Plea in Keating Case
Another defendant in the Federal criminal case against the former managers of the Lincoln Savings and Loan Assocation pleaded guilty today, leaving only Charles H. Keating Jr. and his son, Charles H. Keating 3d, to face trial on the charges this summer.
The defendant, Andrew F. Ligget, a former chief financial officer of Lincoln's parent company, the American Continental Corporation, pleaded guilty to three felony counts relating to money improperly transferred from Lincoln to American Continental.
He was the eighth person to plead guilty to Federal criminal charges in the case, and the third in the last week.


Solemn Angels Consider How Close They Came
Tired, sore and emotionally drained after a frightening and almost deadly bus accident that seriously injured their manager and banged up 11 others, the California Angels resumed their season tonight.
They lost, 5-3, to Ben McDonald and the Baltimore Orioles.


Taiwan Votes Patent Law
Taiwan's Parliament passed revisions to its copyright law today, strengthening protection of foreign patents and copyrights in a bid to avert United States trade sanctions.
The new law gives explicit legal protection to a wide range of products, including Chinese translations of English-language publications, computer software, and films and music recorded on laser disks.


Blind Beggar Is Reunited With His Guide Dog


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Political Memo; In Capital and on Coast, Lines Drawn on Quayle
He may be a tough guy, but William J. Bennett, the Bush Administration's first drug policy chief, did not know what he was up against when he told recovering addicts that Bart Simpson, the resident brat on "The Simpsons" cartoon television series, was a lousy role model.
A public furor broke out, and Mr.
Bennett, a man with no small ego, found himself apologizing to the celluloid celebrity, saying: "I'll sit down with the little spike head. We'll straighten this thing out."


Syrian Jews Find Haven In Brooklyn
Slowly and quietly, the first of 4,500 Jews given the freedom to leave Syria have arrived in Brooklyn, where the largest Syrian Jewish community in the world has welcomed them with a mixture of joy and relief, and trepidation for those still left behind.
With little fanfare, if not outright secrecy, 70 to 100 Syrian Jews from Damascus and Aleppo have flown to the United States on regular commercial flights during the last two weeks, joining families and friends in the deeply observant, tightly knit enclave of 30,000 Syrians in the leafy Midwood neighborhood.


Wife Is Preparing Solzhenitsyn's Return
Natalya Solzhenitsyn returned to Russia today, 17 years after she and her husband, Aleksandr I. Solzhenitsyn, the writer, dissident and Nobel laureate, were forcibly expelled from the Soviet Union.
Now, the Soviet Union is gone but Mr.
Solzhenitsyn, a man of towering stature both here and abroad, has yet to come home.
But when Mrs.
Solzhenitsyn arrived today at Sheremetyevo Airport, with two of the couple's three sons, made clear that her main mission was to set the stage for her husband's own dramatic homecoming from the United States.


3 Ex-Yugoslav Republics Are Accepted Into U.N.
Three former Yugoslav republics were formally elected as full members of the United Nations today in an emotional session punctuated by pleas to save Bosnia and Herzegovina from imminent disintegration.
"A human tragedy of catastrophic proportions threatens to erupt in my country if urgent measures are not taken immediately to stem the reign of terror in Bosnia and Herzegovina," said Foreign Minister Haris Silajdzic in accepting membership for his republic. 'We call on this body to come to our aid in the hour of our greatest need."


Looking for Work
With waves of layoffs sweeping corporate America and with new graduates looking for work, competition for jobs is keen.
But simply having the credentials for a job is not likely to be enough to get one.
Bob Hart, a managing associate at Foster Partners, a New York firm that specializes in career counseling, had this advice for job hunters.
NETWORKING: The most important thing to do in an overcrowded job market is to build contacts through alumni groups, fraternal organizations, friends and former colleagues.
OTHER APPROACHES: Respond to newspaper advertisements, be willing to relocate, follow up on leads from search firms and organize a letter campaign to potential employers.
DURING AN INTERVIEW: Never criticize your former company or its management.
Do not show dissatisfaction with the interview itself.
Make it as productive as possible and evaluate it afterward.
Do not bring up salary.
It will come up in subsequent interviews when appropriate.
Do not plead for a position.
Be a good listener.
Do not try to take control of the interview; it is a give-and-take process.
Be relaxed and willing to discuss hobbies and such, but do not get so relaxed that you, say, show pictures of your children.
Do not discount what executive-search companies or human-resource departments may be able to do for you.  (Source: Foster Partners)


Wilder Accuses Robb and Aides Of Smear Effort
Escalating an already nasty feud between Virginia's two leading Democratic elected officials, Gov.
L.
Douglas Wilder today accused Senator Charles S. Robb of using subordinates to "smear and discredit" him.
Moreover, Mr. Wilder suggested that the effort was racially motivated.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Democrats; Clinton Backs New Jersey's Changes in Welfare System
Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas told a group of women today that he saw some merit in Gov.
Jim Florio's approach to restructuring welfare in New Jersey.
That approach, in a law that takes effect on July 1, denies additional welfare payments to mothers on welfare who have additional children.
"There are some very good things" in the New Jersey law, said Mr.
Clinton, who helped lead a National Governors' Association panel that explored changes in welfare law and who presents himself as an expert on the subject.


Report to Cuomo Says Airport Plan Lost $100 Million
An ambitious program to rebuild Kennedy International Airport as the nation's premier international gateway into the next century ended up wasting at least $100 million before it was scrapped, the head of the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey acknowledged yesterday.
The plan, which was intended to ready the airport for half again as many passengers and which had at its center a $1 billion glass-domed central terminal building the size of Shea Stadium, was excessively optimistic and based on questionable assumptions, the head of the authority, Stanley Brezenoff, said in a report sent to Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo.


Princeton Coach Is Retiring
LARRY ELLIS, the Princeton cross-country coach and assistant track coach, who coached the 1984 Olympics track team, announced his retirement yesterday.
The 63-year-old coach, who was the school's head track coach from 1970-90, is the executive vice president of The Athletics Congress, the governing body of track and field in the United States.
In 22 years as cross-country coach, Ellis led the Tigers to a 161-62 record. (AP)


Wife Is Preparing Solzhenitsyn's Return
Natalya Solzhenitsyn returned to Russia today, 17 years after she and her husband, Aleksandr I. Solzhenitsyn, the writer, dissident and Nobel laureate, were forcibly expelled from the Soviet Union.
Now, the Soviet Union is gone but Mr.
Solzhenitsyn, a man of towering stature both here and abroad, has yet to come home.
But when Mrs.
Solzhenitsyn arrived today at Sheremetyevo Airport, with two of the couple's three sons, made clear that her main mission was to set the stage for her husband's own dramatic homecoming from the United States.


New York's Parks Department Can't See Either Forest or Trees
To the Editor:
The long-awaited reopening of Bryant Park, perhaps soon to become New York's most popular small park, raises anew the question of whether private professional groups are not better qualified to restore and maintain our historic parks than the Department of Parks and Recreation.


Warmus Jurors Send a Signal
The second day of deliberations in the Carolyn Warmus murder trial began with what some in the courthouse viewed as a sign that the jurors could be preparing for a long stay.
Their first order of business this morning was a note asking permission for beer and wine with dinner at the unnamed hotel where they are sequestered.
The defense lawyer, William I. Aronwald, said he had no objection -- as long as one condition was met.
Mr.
Aronwald asked Judge John Carey of Westchester County Court to specify that no deliberations are to continue after the consumption of alcoholic beverages.


Biondi Says He's Now Fit for Olympics
Matt Biondi stood in the sun, on the cement deck of the Hall of Fame swimming complex, a circle of reporters eying his square shoulders.
Was he hurt? Were the tendons as dependable as the tan?


William Gellman, 80, Dies; Psychologist Aided Workers
William Gellman, a psychologist who helped refocus vocational rehabilitation from the teaching of physical skills in specific trades to broader approaches for success in any workplace, died Monday at his home in Chicago.
He was 80 years old.
A spokesman for the Gellman family said the cause of death was cancer.


Edouard Roditi, 81, A Poet and Essayist
Edouard Roditi, a poet, essayist and translator associated with the Surrealists in the 1930's, died on May 10 at his home in Paris.
He was 81 years old.
He died from injuries suffered in an accident in Spain, where he was vacationing, said Garrett White, his literary executor.


CHRONICLE
"Beau Jest," the comedy about panic in a Jewish family over their unmarried daughter, has dialogue between the parents that, until today, went like this:
Father: "I gotta story to tell you. Monday night we're watching Carson. Alan King comes on . . . "
Mother, interrupting him: "It was Tuesday night."


Beliefs
In midmorning on May 12, Joe M. Whittemore, a certified public accountant from Hartwell, Ga., got the floor at the General Conference of the United Methodist Church and asked that the words "offer Christ as Saviour" be inserted in the seventh paragraph of a proposed comprehensive plan for ministering to the needs of American Indians.
There was little debate over that seemingly unchallengeable phrase.
But when it was put to a vote, it passed by a surprisingly narrow margin: 503 to 441.


Classical Music in Review
Music by Peter Schickele Merkin Concert Hall


Violence Flares Again in Delivery Drivers Dispute
In a surge of violence in the 16-day-old newspaper delivery dispute, a replacement driver was critically injured late Thursday by a brick-size rock thrown through the window of a bus carrying nonunion workers into a New Rochelle, N.Y., newspaper distribution center, the New Rochelle police said.
The worker, Gary Lee Mauney, 50 years old, from Fayetteville, N.C., was hit in the head.
He underwent 12 hours of surgery in New Rochelle Hospital and was in critical condition in the intensive-care unit, police and hospital officials said last night.


Joyner Stops Training for Olympics
AL JOYNER, a gold medalist at the 1984 Summer Olympics, said yesterday that stress from a May 8 confrontation with the police in Los Angeles had made it impossible to train for next month's Olympic trials.
Joyner, a 32-year-old hurdler and triple jumper, said the incident had caused him to lose sleep and nearly 10 pounds.
He said he had also lost his competitive edge.
"This isn't like I pulled a muscle or had a bad day," he said.
"This is messing with my frame of mind. Given that, I have no choice but to give up on the Olympics this year."


Spain's Insiders in Insider Scandal
The two men who dictated monetarist economic policies are among Spain's best and brightest.
One is governor of the central bank.
The other was Finance Minister in the Socialist Government.
Now the collapse of a small investment bank, following accusations of fraud and phony bookkeeping, has engulfed Mariano Rubio, the governor of the Bank of Spain, and Miguel Boyer, a former Finance Minister, in a deepening stock and regulatory scandal that reached a symbolic climax this week.


Saratoga's Sparkling Spring Is Stilled No More
Since a spring of sparkling water was found hundreds of feet below sand and rock on a farm here in 1872, the Saratoga Mineral Water Company has been a good-luck charm and a goodwill ambassador for this genteel city.
So for a place that takes its waters as seriously as its horses, it was a dismal day last August when the company's most recent owner, the French company Evian, succumbed to the dual pressures of the recession and the crowded bottled-water market and closed the company, apparently for good.


Top Shareholder Offers Deal to End Bankruptcy at Orion
John Kluge, the largest shareholder in the troubled Orion Pictures Corporation, is willing to put another $25 million into the company and to forgive the $29 million that the company owes him as part of a deal to help the company out of bankruptcy.
The offer, which appeared in court documents during a bankruptcy hearing last week, is not new, according to Wilbur Ross, a senior managing director at Rothschild Inc., which is representing the unsecured creditors.
He said that Mr.
Kluge had always been willing to put in more cash and forgive the note.
A receptionist at Mr.
Kluge's office said the office was closed until Tuesday.


Error on Gala Tickets
The New York City Ballet has announced that the correct curtain time for its spring gala on Thursday at the New York State Theater is 7:30 P.M., not 8, as was printed on some tickets.


The End of Sovereignty
Europe is experiencing severe growing pains.
All 12 members of the European Community must ratify the Treaty of Maastricht, agreed upon by government heads in the Netherlands in December, if European unity is to be achieved.
The debates are stormier than expected.
Critics in each country have their own sticking points, plus domestic political feuds that complicate the issue.
But the storms should have been expected because matters of nation and sovereignty are being broached directly as never before.


Lacrosse Rivals in Reprise
Today's National Collegiate Athletic Association lacrosse semifinal between Johns Hopkins and Syracuse is likely to be something between just another game and a get-even match.
The contest, at Franklin Field in Philadelphia, will be the first of two semifinal meetings in the N.C.A.A. tournament.
North Carolina will play Princeton in the second game, and the winners will meet on Monday for the title.


Corrections
An article yesterday about the new Long Island Research Institute misidentified a director, John H. Marburger, and omitted another.
Mr.
Marburger is the president of the State University of New York at Stony Brook.
The omitted director is Leo A. Guthart, chief executive of Ademco, an alarm manufacturer in Syosset, L.I.


Review/Ballet; Spoleto Festival Opens With Parties in Dance
The 16th Spoleto Festival U.S.A. got under way on Thursday night in a festive manner with a ballet program that was one choreographic party after another.
Audiences at the Gaillard Municipal Auditorium were taken to a Parisian cafe, a garden party and a decadent disco.
This is the first Charleston Festival to open with a dance event.
The choreographic celebrations were an appropriate beginning for a festival that has in recent years weathered a hurricane and a managerial dispute.
The company responsible for the merrymaking was Les Ballets de Monte Carlo, which was established in 1985 under the patronage of Princess Caroline of Monaco.


What Los Angeles Needs
There's been a good deal of babbling about the Los Angeles riots.
Blame for them has been laid to Great Society programs, addiction to welfare and even, by a fevered writer in the National Review, to the fact that Los Angeles schools recently began handing out condoms.
Belatedly, meanwhile, Federal gears have started to grind out assistance.
Congress is acting on an aid package and the city's own task force, called Rebuild L.A., is struggling to get under way.


Nigerians Brace for Fallout of Civil Strife
After 10 days of bitter fighting between Muslims and Christians in which hundreds have been killed or wounded, Nigeria is sliding toward political and social chaos in the worst crisis its military leaders have faced since they seized power seven years ago.
Estimates of casualties vary, but political analysts and ordinary Nigerians say that at least 500 people, and perhaps as many as 800, have been killed and hundreds more have been hurt.
Economy Hurt by Oil Prices
A week of sectarian turmoil in this sub-Saharan Muslim city in northern Nigeria came after a series of skirmishes between anti-Government demonstrators and riot police in Lagos, Nigeria's biggest city, and in other southern coastal towns.


Paddling Out of Town for the Holiday Weekend


Edouard Roditi, 81, A Poet and Essayist
Edouard Roditi, a poet, essayist and translator associated with the Surrealists in the 1930's, died on May 10 at his home in Paris.
He was 81 years old.
He died from injuries suffered in an accident in Spain, where he was vacationing, said Garrett White, his literary executor.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.25-6.5
6.25-6.5
8.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.62
3.85
5.65
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.67
3.67
5.39
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.77
3.78
5.61
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.02
7.07
7.93
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.82
7.86
8.29
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.77
8.81
9.30
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.61
6.61
7.23
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Tackling Colorado's 14,000-Footers
FROM the Great Plains, Pikes Peak rises 8,000 feet, almost twice as high as its softly folded foothills, the first of Colorado's great peaks you encounter from the east.
Broad-shouldered and from a distance sometimes truly purple, Pikes Peak sprawls across the eastern Rockies, which define the western edge of the Plains.


Sharon Melfe, Robert Kuehn
Sharon Anne Melfe, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas A. Melfe of Port Washington, L.I., was married there yesterday to Robert P. Kuehn, a son of Trudy Kuehn of Glen Head, L.I., and Ralph Kuehn of Roslyn, L.I.
Msgr.
Walter E. Simmons performed the ceremony at St.
Peter of Alcantara Church.
Mrs.
Kuehn, 32 years old, is a personnel consultant at Aavis Resources, a personnel agency in New York.
She is a graduate of Susquehanna University.
Her father is a senior partner in the New York law firm of Donovan, Leisure, Newton &amp; Irvine.


Corrections
An article on May 10 about physicians and medical advances misstated the number of lives estimated to be saved by the drug streptokinase.
It saves 27 per 1,000 heart attack patients.


The Score Is Advantage, Foie Gras
FAR more than a mere tennis tournament, the French Open provides a vivid microcosm of Paris, and a tourist eager to understand this city could do a lot worse than spend a day or two strolling the grounds of Roland Garros Stadium.
For two weeks at the end of May and the beginning of June, this multilayered event manages to compress into a 20-acre enclave at the edge of the Bois de Boulogne all the essential Parisian hallmarks -- high fashion, haute cuisine, high-handed evocations of the nation's past glory, ham-handed insistence on linguistic correctness, copious wine, rampant commercialism and pure artistry, on court and off.
Every year the tournament's poster and its program cover are the work of a celebrated artist.
In fact, many of the affiches from earlier decades have become collector's items.
In 1989 when the Museum of Modern Art in New York mounted an exhibition entitled "The Modern Poster," the catalogue cover was a poster by A. M. Cassandre originally done for the 1932 French Open.
The 1991 poster reproduced a watercolor by the later Joan Miro, and as it was the 100th anniversary of the French Open, Roman Opalka painted a mural on the wall behind Courts One and Four, integrating into it the names of the 2,973 men and women who had played at Roland Garros.


Riverside Controversy Reveals Conflicts of Racial Transition
To the Editor:
"Riverside's Pastor at Center of Turmoil" (news article, May 18), on the controversy at Riverside Church, where the Rev.
James A. Forbes Jr. is pastor, reveals the special conflicts of congregations in racial transition.
The struggles at Riverside Church mirror the challenges facing Protestantism in New York City and, increasingly, across the country.


Student Parking, at a Price
At 7:25 A.M., traffic streamed up the long driveway to New Milford High School.
Half-empty buses stopped in front to let out passengers.
Cars with parents at the wheel dropped off teen-agers and quickly turned back.
Most traffic, though, flowed on into the student parking lots, into a daily ritual all too familiar to adults.


Tie-Dye With Gravy Strains
Ben &amp; Jerry's is repackaging the 1960's.
In the fall, the Vermont ice cream company plans to introduce a flavor called Wavy Gravy, after the master of ceremonies at the Woodstock Festival in 1969.
The ice cream will be sold in containers with a tie-dye design.
"This is only the second living flavor, as we call it, named after a living human being," said Lee Holden, a spokesman for Ben &amp; Jerry's, which created Cherry Garcia in 1987 in honor of Jerry Garcia of the Grateful Dead.
"The flavor is going to be a Brazil-nut base with caramel fudge, chocolate chunks and Rainforest Crunch tidbits, which is a Brazil and cashew nut brittle."


Susan Leness, David Peck Jr.
Susan Harfield Leness, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Henry Harfield of New York, was married there Thursday to David Warner Peck Jr., a son of the late Justice and Mrs.
Peck of New York.
The Rev.
Charles Cary performed the Presbyterian ceremony at the Cosmopolitan Club.
Mrs.
Peck graduated from Wheaton College in Norton, Mass.
She is the director of development of the Diller-Quaile School of Music in New York.
Her previous marriage ended in divorce.
Her father is of counsel to the New York law firm of Shearman &amp; Sterling.


A Playwright's Perspective
To the Editor:
In " 'Death and the Maiden' Becomes a Tale of Two Cities' "  [ May 10 ] , Benedict Nightingale suggests that my play "Death and the Maiden" received the Laurence Olivier Award in London as best play of the year but was not nominated for a Tony in New York perhaps because of the "less threatening" way Mike Nichols staged the play for the Broadway audience.


Not a Single Throwaway In the Litter
Brooke Astor's dachshunds now have some competition from a pack of pugs.
In the last few months, the snub-nose dogs have been feted, fawned over and fought over by some of the city's top social lions.
Pugs haven't been this celebrated since the Duke and Duchess of Windsor made the breed popular.


DIPPING LIGHTLY
COCKTAIL HOUR CAN BE THE CRUELEST time.
The wrinkle between the end of the workday and the beginning of dinner is designated decompress time, time to oil the conversational machine, to hone and cajole your appetite for the meal to come.
It is a time when conviviality and appetite are teased to a pique and held there for a few long moments, while restraint battles deliciously with desire.
But demons dance just below the surface of even the most civilized sipping-and-nibbling interlude.
Demons that can turn sips to gulps and even the daintiest nibbler into a human Hoover.
After a few sips of a stylish cocktail, you remember that you had no lunch, you count the hours since breakfast, you check your watch for dinner hour.
You resolve to be firm in the face of hors d'oeuvres.
They are, after all, notoriously fatty, totally addictive, nutritionally incorrect.
And you, of course, are sophisticated enough to know the score when it comes to canapes.
Like a swimmer forswearing oxygen for just one more underwater lap, you hold your appetite like a deep breath and dream of dinner, the finish line.
Past cheese and chips and fatty little hunks of pate you sail.


Margaret Waters, Thomas Battle
Margaret Mary Waters, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Michael F. X. Waters of Brooklyn, was married yesterday in Cambridge, Mass., to Thomas Durham Battle, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Lucius D. Battle of Washington.
Bishop John P. Boles, an auxiliaryBishop of Boston, performed the ceremony at St.
Paul Church.
Ms.
Waters, who is 29 years old and is keeping her name, is a senior technical writer at Interleaf Inc., a software company in Waltham, Mass.
She graduated from Yale University and received a master's degree in Anglo-Irish literature from Trinity College, Dublin.
Her father is a tax consultant in New York and an adjunct professor of real estate at New York University.
Her mother, Dr.
Margaret M. Waters, is a professor of education at Brooklyn College.


Judith Snyder, Stephen Kastenberg
Dr. and Mrs.
Solomon Snyder of Baltimore have announced the engagement of their daughter Judith Snyder to Stephen Kastenberg, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Charles Kastenberg of Cherry Hill, N.J.
An August wedding is planned.
Miss Snyder, 25 years old, is a student at Tufts Medical School.
She graduated magna cum laude from Princeton University, where her fiance graduated cum laude.
Her father, a psychiatrist, is director of the department of neuroscience at the Johns Hopkins Medical School.
Her mother, Elaine Snyder, is the director of Haven, a psychiatric rehabilitation program in Baltimore.


An Election-Year Amendment; Would the Budget Deficit Be Constitution-Proof?
THE proposed constitutional amendment to balance the budget is in many ways a gamble, and the debate about it boils down to whether the gamble is worth taking.
Senator Paul Simon, the Illinois Democrat who is the chief sponsor of the leading proposal, says that only something as weighty as a constitutional amendment can force the White House and Congress to get serious about eliminating the deficit.
Since the President and Congress must swear to uphold the Constitution, he asserts that they would not dare shirk their duty to implement a new amendment.


Photographs and Huge Constructions
AT Aljira here the menu consists, as it usually does, of a group show and a solo.
Titled "Essential Structures," the group features Manuel Acevedo, Albert Pedulla and Alexander Viscio.
Though all have appeared in City Without Walls anthologies and elsewhere, Mr.
Acevedo may be the one best known in both New Jersey and New York City, for his Social Realist photographs and, more recently, wood structures incorporating those photographs.
But in the present display, the artist takes leave of photography except in some small works.
His most ambitious piece runs almost the length of one wall and involves a platform, a screen and a bifurcated beam jammed against a closed door.


This Week's Numbers
Consensus
Last Period
Estimates*
Tuesday
Consumer confidence index
64.8
66
Mid May auto sales, annual rate
5.7
6.1
Wednesday
Durable goods orders, percent
1.6
0.9
Friday
Gross domestic product, percent
2.0
2.5
G.D.P. deflator
3.1
3.1
Chicago purchasing managers index
54.7
55
Monday: Memorial Day, markets closed  Tuesday: British trade balance  Wednesday: Federal Reserve testimony on the Federal Budget and Bank Modernization Act  Thursday: Import and export prices *
Half-day general strike in Madrid (Source: I.D.E.A. Inc.)


The Cowboy In the Japanese
To the Editor:
I have some comments on Todd Gitlin's article about the globalization of American culture  [ "World Leaders: Mickey, et al.," May 3 ] , based on my six months in Japan co-producing "The Japanese Version," a documentary film about the widespread Japanese appropriation of American popular culture.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: On the Trail; STRONG COMMERCIALS CAUSE UNEASINESS IN CALIFORNIA
Advertisements in California's Senate campaigns have become so graphic that some television stations are uneasy about broadcasting them.
A commercial by Bill Allen, a Republican running for the two-year Senate seat, features an eight-second scene of an abortion in progress.
A cable company in San Diego said it did not want to broadcast the commercial but said regulations kept it from rejecting or censoring advertisements by candidates for Federal office.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball National League  HOUSTON ASTROS -- Optioned Luis Gonzalez, outfielder, to Tucson of the Pacific Coast League.
Activated Rob Murphy, pitcher, from the 15-day disabled list.


P.L.O., Ending Silence, Asks An End to Internal Killings
After two years of ignoring the growing number of killings of Palestinians by other Palestinians in the Israeli-occupied territories, the Palestine Liberation Organization has called for an end to the slayings, which have taken at least 500 lives.
A letter signed by the P.L.O. chairman, Yasir Arafat, represents the group's first admission that killings among Palestinians have reached the point where they are hurting their image and distorting the four-year uprising against the Israelis.
In the last year or more, the uprising has been seen by many as losing force.


Bulls Start With Blitz, And Then Do a Waltz
The Chicago Bulls and the Cleveland Cavaliers have developed a familiar pattern during their playoff series.
Whichever team has dominated the first quarter has dominated the game.
Today, it was Chicago's turn to romp.
Building a 22-point lead in the first eight and a half minutes, the Bulls defeated Cleveland, 105-96, at the Richfield Coliseum.
The victory gave Chicago a 2-1 lead in the four-of-seven-game Eastern Conference championship series, with Game 4 to be played here Monday afternoon.


Godzilla Meets the F.B.I.
A dinosaur named Sue became the focus of a bitter legal, ethnic, political and scientific struggle last week after 30 F.B.I. agents confiscated the huge fossil from a South Dakota dealer.
Sue, the largest and most perfectly preserved Tyrannosaurus rex ever found, was excavated in 1990 by Black Hills Geological Research from a site near Faith, S.D.
The company bought fossil-digging rights for $5,000 from the owner of the land, a member of the Cheyenne River Sioux Tribe.
The 45-foot-long skeleton -- named for its discoverer, Susan Hendrickson -- is worth little in the ground but could fetch several million dollars from a museum.
The company's president said he planned to build a non-profit one around it.


Defining Identity: Four Voices; Lousy Language
The following are excerpts from "Fires In the Mirror," which I am performing through June 28 at the Joseph Papp Public Theater, and is part of a series for the stage called "On the Road: A Search for American Character." I interview people with varied points of view, often about controversial events, and create one-woman shows based on those interviews.
The focus of "Fires In the Mirror" is the rioting in the Crown Heights section of Brooklyn last August.
I portray people in both the Lubavitcher and black communities.


Big Donald Is Watching
Ivana Trump can't easily forget that her ex-husband is still her landlord.
On Tuesday, at her gilded penthouse apartment in Trump Tower, Mrs.
Trump gave a party for Kathy Keeton.
Ms.
Keeton, the author of a new book, "Longevity: The Science of Staying Young" (Viking), is married to Bob Guccione, publisher of Penthouse magazine.
The event, which included piano music by 10-year-old Ivanka Trump, was a sedate affair, at least until the lights went out temporarily.


Lauren Kogod, David Smiley
Lauren Kogod and David Smiley, professors of architecture at Washington University in St.
Louis, were married last evening by Rabbi Jeffrey Wohlberg at the Meridian House in Washington.
Ms.
Kogod, who is 31 years old and is keeping her name, graduated from the Rhode Island School of Design and received a master's degree in building design from Columbia University.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert P. Kogod of Washington.
Her father is a partner in the Charles E. Smith Companies in Arlington, Va., a real-estate development and management concern.
Her mother, Arlene S. Kogod, is a mental-health counselor in Washington.


Barbecuing Returns, With Twists
MEMORIAL DAY weekend marks the beginning of one of summer's great pleasures: eating outdoors.
In the last few years, though, the standard scene -- Dad grilling hamburgers while Mom tosses a salad -- has altered.
The barbecue has become the place for cooking anything from tofu to frogs' legs.
And instead of ball-park mustard and ketchup, salsas, cold sauces or compound butters are served on the side.
The standard tools for the barbecue chef have also changed.
In California it is now against the law to use lighter fluid as a fire starter because of its contribution to air pollution (not to mention the bad taste it can impart to food).
Instead, people are using kindling.
But a useful new product for lighting charcoal easily has just been produced by Griffo Grill.
Called Cob Lites, it consists of corn cobs that have been dipped in food-grade paraffin.
They produce an intense heat when burned, and they don't smell.
They are available at Williams-Sonoma stores and from their mail order catalogue, from the Chef's Catalogue and at Crate and Barrel stores.


The Nippon Jungle
PACIFIC RIFT
By Michael Lewis. 128 pp. New York: W. W. Norton &amp; Company
.  $14.95.


Put Police Before Prisons
The Los Angeles policeman came by the couple's house a day after it was firebombed by a drug dealer they had tried to get arrested.
The cop assured them he was on the case and promised to have more cars cruise by.
"But what if he tries to retaliate again when you're not here?" the worried woman asked.
The officer sighed.
They both knew the department couldn't provide more surveillance.
"In that case," he said, "you'll have to defend yourself."
Many Angelenos feel reduced to self-defense after the rioting.
Many other Americans need no riot to feel similar fear.
And it's no secret why police departments in many cities have failed to keep up with rising crime.


Lucky Pennies, Luckless Silver
CONSIDER the lowly cent.
Today, it's barely worth picking up off the ground.
But in the middle of World War II, it was regarded a little differently.
During the war, a severe shortage of copper forced the Treasury to use zinc-coated steel for all one-cent coins instead of the normal bronze.
But rumors abounded that a few bronze 1943 cents were produced.


Topics of The Times; Vote for Courage in Connecticut
Last Monday the John F. Kennedy Library Foundation presented its annual "Profiles in Courage" award to Gov.
Lowell Weicker of Connecticut for his "extraordinary political courage" and "steadfast leadership" in fighting for a state income tax.
Governor Weicker finally prevailed in that fight, but the bitterness of the battle left legislators who supported him trembling for their own survival in this year's elections.
Last Tuesday voters had their say.
Remarkably, the pro-tax candidates won.
The battlefield was Democratic primaries to pick delegates for seven district nominating conventions.
Despite the ferocious anti-tax commotion that has roiled Connecticut politics for 18 months, pro-tax candidates won in all seven districts.
Incumbents who voted for the tax defeated anti-tax challengers, and two challengers beat anti-tax incumbents.


Contest Introduces Students to Wall Street Risks
THE red brick elementary school in East Orange may seem an unlikely place to run across the trappings of Wall Street, but for 10 weeks more than 200 students at the school, the Jackson Academy, were engaged in managing stock portfolios worth hundreds of thousands of dollars.
Each of the participating classes received a theoretical $100,000 to invest in any stock listed on the New York, American or NASDAQ stock exchanges.
And at the end of April, their results were compared with those chalked up by some 20,000 students across the state -- all players in a competition called the Stock Market Game.


Nicole Kidman, From Down Under to 'Far and Away'
I know well the sorts of Australian summers that the actress Nicole Kidman used to flee.
Cicadas screamed with brief life in the gum trees of the northern Sydney suburb she grew up in.
Other Australian children stripped themselves down for the bright day.
The young Ms.
Kidman covered up.
Big hat, long sleeves.
She would have loved to conform to the national obsession with reddening, blistering, getting bronzed, this Celt far from the headwaters of her gene pool.
To the misfortune of complexion was added the misfortune of her parents' uncomfortable politics.
The liberal opinions of these genial people abashed the child Kidman in the conservative suburb of Longueville.
Her mother, Janelle, was a member of the Women's Electoral Lobby, her father, Antony, active in Labor politics in an electorate Labor never won.
"There was always political discussion at our table," says Ms.
Kidman, now 24 years old.
"We had a sit-down dinner every night, and politics was sort of the thing to discuss."


To Whom Much Is Given
To the Sports Editor:
Darryl Strawberry and Eric Davis reminiscing about growing up in the inner-city of South-Central Los Angeles ("Dodgers Are Trying to Put Turmoil Behind Them," The Times, May 6) was very moving.
It is praiseworthy how these men turned their lives around through hard work and talent.
They went from a life of poverty and drudgery to one of wealth and bliss.
But I wonder whether these men are now giving something back to the neighborhoods in which they grew up.
Their community needs money to rebuild the playgrounds, recreation centers and baseball leagues that once were.
It is time for the successful men and women who have overcome the hardships of the ghetto to give today's inner-city youth the direction and hope that they so desperately need.
DAVID Z. KLESTZICK Brooklyn


From Mr. Blandings's Nightmare, a Couple's Dream House Stirs
ANYONE who has seen "Mr. Blandings Builds His Dream House," the classic 1948 comedy about the nightmares of homeownership, can readily recall favorite scenes.
Remember the Blandings's difficulty in digging a well?
Or the time they (Cary Grant and Myrna Loy) locked themselves in Muriel Blandings's dressing room?
And no actress has ever described paint colors with as much panache as Miss Loy, when she requests that the kitchen walls be the shade of "unsalted butter." Benjamin Moore Paints uses such scenes in its current print and television advertising campaigns.
What many of the movie's fans may not realize is that the Blandings's house really exists, still standing in the foothills of the Berkshire Mountains in New Milford.
It was the brainchild of Time Inc. vice president Eric Hodgins, who wanted to create an idyllic retreat from the bustle of New York City.


100 Years of Doctoring
THE LIFE AND DEATH OF MY MOTHER
By Allen Wheelis. 128 pp. New York:  W. W. Norton &amp; Company.


NORTHEAST NOTEBOOK: Philadelphia; It's Lippincott For Lippincott
AS it enters its third century in this city, the J.B.
Lippincott Company is ending a decade as a renter in its own namesake building.
The publisher's Dutch parent company, Wolters Kluwer U.S.
Corporation, bought the five-story, red-brick building on Washington Square from a New York real estate company in time for Lippincott's 200th anniversary in April.
For 10 years, the company leased space there after an earlier corporate parent sold the property to raise cash.


Fantasies and Fiascoes
To the Editor:
Malcolm Bradbury, in his review of Fredric Jameson's "Postmodernism" (April 12), remarks that the Marxist critic "belongs to  [ an ]  endangered species" and that Mr.
Jameson "is far better at getting himself into post-modernism than at getting out of it and back into Marxist history again." These are expressions of high civility.
But is it not time, really, to challenge more strenuously the application of exhausted Marxist categories to a phenomenon like post-modernism?


Valley of the Severed Head
UNDERWORLD
By Peter Conrad. 252 pp. New York: Poseidon Press. $21.


Scouts' Late Night Out
The Girl Scout Council of New York celebrates its 80th birthday; May 20, 9:30 P.M.


4 EX-SOVIET STATES AND U.S. IN ACCORD ON 1991 ARMS PACT
The United States and the four former Soviet republics with nuclear arms signed an agreement today that opens the way for ratification of a 1991 treaty signed before the collapse of the Soviet Union to drastically reduce the number of long-range weapons stockpiled during the cold war.
Three of the newly independent republics -- Ukraine, Belarus and Kazakhstan -- also agreed to destroy or turn over all strategic nuclear warheads to the fourth republic, Russia, and to adhere "in the shortest possible time" to the 1968 Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty.


A Giant Leap For the Knicks
To the Sports Editor:
The world might believe that the Knicks overachieved this season.
But I know that this is just a step in the right direction for New York.
What happened this season was expected of such a gathering of players and personnel.


Animal Experiments: Further Views
In reply to Dr.
Neal Barnard's negative comments on my letter to the editor on April 12 supporting the use of animal experiments:
With regard to penicillin, one reason for my original letter was to refute a statement (in the New Jersey Q &amp; A on March 22) that penicillin was shelved for 10 years because "it killed guinea pigs" and therefore animal experiments are worthless.
Guinea pigs had no part in penicillin's early history.
In 1929 Sir Alexander Fleming reported that penicillin injected into rabbits and mice (not guinea pigs) was not toxic.


A Downtown Started for Rural Retirees
Like many rural areas around the nation, this town of 650 people has seen hundreds of retirees move in in recent years, not only to specially designed retirement communities, but also to scattered houses beside Lake Marion or one of three championship golf courses.
Now the town, halfway between Charleston and Columbia, wants to give something special to its new residents: a downtown.
Because Santee was built up first as a resort and only later as a retirement community, it has never had what is commonly considered a downtown.


Conversations/Sergio Munoz; An Invisible Presence Grows In the Barrios of Los Angeles
THE only decoration on the wall of Sergio Munoz's new office as executive news director of KMEX television is a color-coded map showing the density of the Hispanic population of Los Angeles by zip codes.
"This is the real story, as shown on this map," he said the other day, starting to speak before a visitor had time to take a seat.
"You can see it very clearly. The growth of the Latino population is a fact of life. But if you look at the power structure, look at the social structure, look at the government, it's not there. From the outside, it's some sort of ghost, and it frightens people."


Ila Mazel, M. J. Scheckner
Dr. and Mrs.
Alan J. Mazel of Great Neck, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Ila Beth Mazel, to Matthew Joseph Scheckner, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Ernest C. Scheckner of Bayside, Queens.
A September wedding is planned.
Ms.
Mazel, 25 years old, is the business manager of Clinique Laboratories Inc. at Lord &amp; Taylor in New York.
She graduated from the New York Fashion Institute of Technology.
Her father is an orthodontist with offices in New York and Great Neck;, her mother, Vicki Mazel, is the manager of the offices.


Ellen Longbine, Steven G. Waugh
Ellen Sue Longbine, a daughter of Robert F. and Geraldine Longbine of Vero Beach, Fla., was married yesterday in Southport, Conn., to Steven George Waugh, the son of George and Suzanne Waugh of Old Lyme, Conn.
The Rev.
Loring Ensign, a Congregational minister, and the Rev.
Maurice Maroney, a Roman Catholic priest, performed the joint ceremony at the Southport Congregational Church.
Mrs.
Waugh, 27 years old, graduated from Lafayette College.
She is a manager at Andersen Consulting in Stamford, Conn.
Her father, now retired, was the president and vice chairman of the Champion International Corporation, the forest-products company in Stamford.
Her mother, also retired, was a nurse at the Bethesda North Hospital in Cincinnati.


New &amp; Noteworthy
"H" IS FOR HOMICIDE, by Sue Grafton. (Fawcett Crest, $5.99.) Ms.
Grafton's fans probably wish the alphabet were twice as long.
In this one of her series of lettered thrillers, her heroine, the private detective Kinsey Millhone, befriends a gang lord's girlfriend in order to unravel several crimes.
Last year our reviewer, Nancy S. Dye, called the book "intelligent, fast-paced and filled with memorable characters."
THE PRIME OF LIFE: The Autobiography of Simone de Beauvoir.
Translated by Peter Green. (Athena/Paragon House, $14.95.) In her first volume of autobiography, "Memoirs of a Dutiful Daughter," Simone de Beauvoir described her childhood and adolescence.
This book begins in 1929, when she is 21 years old, drunk on her newfound independence, and ends with the liberation of Paris in 1944, when her career as a writer is beginning to flourish.
When the book was first published in English, our reviewer, Germaine Bree, found it remarkable both as testimony to an important period in the author's life and as a record of 15 tumultuous years in history.
"With this volume Madame de Beauvoir takes her place as one of the major figures in contemporary letters, the witness of a period rather than a creative writer," Ms.
Bree said here in 1962.
Also new in paperback is Ms. de Beauvoir's 1946 novel, ALL MEN ARE MORTAL (Norton, $9.95), in which a woman encounters a man who feels cursed because he can never die.


A Fair Shake Is Sought For Left-Handed People
WHILE growing up, John Diana of Port Jefferson found himself left out of a right-handed world.
Remembering his childhood, he recalled often being at a disadvantage because of his left-handedness.
In school, while sitting awkwardly at a right-handed desk, he struggled with an inkwell built into the right side.
"The ink always splattered and dribbled across my paper," Mr.
Diana said.


'Bright Air, Brilliant Fire'
To the Editor:
It has been the misfortune of thinkers who are ahead of their time to be misunderstood, misread and derided.
Perhaps Gerald Edelman was reflecting on his own experience when he wrote the dedication for "Bright Air, Brilliant Fire": "To the memory of two intellectual pioneers, Charles Darwin and Sigmund Freud. In much wisdom, much sadness."  NANCIE SENET Allenhurst, N.J.


Monitoring of the Police Is Tightened
Conceding that the case of five New York City police officers charged with cocaine trafficking has exposed flaws in the department's internal safeguards, police officials have compiled a list of officers who aroused suspicions in the past, and they say they will use wiretaps, after-hours surveillance and other extraordinary steps to weed out corrupt officers.
While details of the new system have not been decided, precinct commanders have already informally submitted "more than 50 names" of officers who have aroused suspicions of drug use, illegal gambling and other wrongdoing, an official of the Internal Affairs Division said.
Some of these officers will immediately be subject to increased scrutiny, said the official, who spoke on condition of anonymity.


The Dinner Trade
At the New York Stock Exchange; May 16, 7 P.M.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: ay 24, 1992
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
17
THE FIRM, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $5.99.) A young lawyer learns that his firm is engaged in secret, possibly illegal activities.
2
5
AS THE CROW FLIES, by Jeffrey Archer. (Harper Paperbacks, $6.50.) A man strives to create the biggest store in the world.
3
17
FRIED GREEN TOMATOES AT THE WHISTLE STOP CAFE, by Fannie Flagg. (McGraw-Hill, $6.95.) Life in rural Alabama.
4
6
"H" IS FOR HOMICIDE, by Sue Grafton. (Fawcett, $5.99.) The private eye Kinsey Millhone on the trail of perpetrators of an insurance scam.
5
4
ASPEN GOLD, by Janet Dailey. (Little, Brown, $5.99.) A woman returns to her native Colorado to face a choice: fame in Hollywood or love with an old flame.
6
1
THE KITCHEN GOD'S WIFE, by Amy Tan. (Ivy, $5.99.) A Chinese-American matriarch tells the harrowing story of her life.
7
6
THE SECRET, by Julie Garwood. (Pocket, $5.99.) A 12th-century English belle finds romance.
8
28
PATRIOT GAMES, by Tom Clancy. (Berkley, $5.99.) In this 1987 novel, the C.I.A.'s Jack Ryan battles terrorists in England, Ireland and America.
9
55
THE PRINCE OF TIDES, by Pat Conroy. (Bantam, $5.99.) Complex family relationships in South Carolina's low country and New York City.
10
14
LOVES MUSIC, LOVES TO DANCE, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Pocket, $5.99.) Two women get caught in the snare of a serial killer.
11
6
A TIME TO KILL, by John Grisham. (Wynwood, $9.95.) Racial tensions surface during a trial.
12
13
HEARTBEAT, by Danielle Steel. (Dell, $6.50.) A chance meeting of a man and a woman brings them long-sought happiness.
13
4
SHADOWS OF YESTERDAY, by Sandra Brown. (Warner, $4.99.) A widow in a crisis is rescued by a man who hides his past.
14
5
SKY MASTERS, by Dale Brown. (Berkley, $5.99.) The United States Air Force goes to the aid of the Philippines in a war with China in 1994.
15
3
THE COVENANT OF THE FLAME, by David Morrell. (Warner, $5.99.) Pursuing a murderer in New York, a woman reporter and a policeman come upon a 2,000-year-old secret global conflict.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
2
5
AMERICA: WHAT WENT WRONG? by Donald L. Barlett and James B. Steele. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $6.95.) How the practices of Washington lawmakers and Wall Street deal makers have benefited a few Americans at the expense of most.
3
53
YOU JUST DON'T UNDERSTAND, by Deborah Tannen. (Ballantine, $10.) The different languages men and women speak.
4
6
JFK: CONSPIRACY OF SILENCE, by Charles A. Crenshaw with Jens Hansen and J. Gary Shaw. (Signet, $4.99.) A surgeon tells what he observed while treating the dying John F. Kennedy.
5
11
YOU'LL NEVER EAT LUNCH IN THIS TOWN AGAIN, by Julia Phillips. (Signet, $6.99.) Life in Hollywood as experienced by a producer.
6 *
45
A YEAR IN PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A sojourn in the south of France.
7
10
IF YOU REALLY LOVED ME, by Ann Rule. (Pocket, $5.99.) The bizarre family relationships behind the murder of the wife of an entrepreneur.
8 *
446
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Inspiration. (LP)
9
1
GROWING UP BRADY, by Barry Williams with Chris Kreski. (Harper Perennial, $10.) The making of the "Brady Bunch" television series, as recollected by the actor who played Greg and other members of the cast.
10
127
ALL I REALLY NEED TO KNOW I LEARNED IN KINDERGARTEN, by Robert Fulghum. (Ivy, $5.95.) Inspirational essays.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
41
LIFE'S LITTLE INSTRUCTION BOOK, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $5.95.) Some 500 tips for achieving a self-fulfilling life.
2
5
LIVE AND LEARN AND PASS IT ON, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $5.95.) Morsels of what they've learned about life, from people aged 5 to 95.
3
89
THE T-FACTOR FAT GRAM COUNTER, by Jamie Pope-Cordle and Martin Katahn. (Norton, $2.50.) How to reduce fat in one's diet.
4
10
ATTACK OF THE DERANGED MUTANT KILLER MONSTER SNOW GOONS, by Bill Watterson. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $8.95.) "Calvin and Hobbes" cartoons.
5
70
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $9.95.) Principles for success.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,000 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 38,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.


Iris Kopeloff, Michael Rahmin
Dr.
Iris Hope Kopeloff, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Arnold I. Kopeloff of Paramus, N.J., was married last evening to Dr.
Michael Gabriel Rahmin, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Raymond Rahmin of Woodmere, L.I.
Rabbi Jack Sparks officiated at Water's Edge in Long Island City, Queens.
Dr.
Kopeloff, who is 28 years old and is keeping her name, is a resident in dermatology at New York Univeristy.
She graduated summa cum laude from Wellesley College, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and received an M.D. from the Mount Sinai School of Medicine.
Her father is an endocrinologist in Paramus.


Teen-Age Murderers: Plentiful Guns, Easy Power
Andre, who was 15 years old at the time, remembers the bang of the .32-caliber revolver and the little red spot that blossomed on the cheek of the boy he shot.
He remembers dodging traffic in Brooklyn to get away from the boy's friends and, finally, crouching on the floor of an abandoned apartment and listening to the scream of police sirens.


Abigail Goodnough, J. F. Hassell 4th
August wedding plans for Abigail Susan Goodnough and John Fleming Hassell 4th, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Hassell 3d of Charleston, S.C., have been announced by her parents, Dr. and Mrs.
C.
Peter Goodnough of Elmira, N.Y.


An Alternative to Seawolf
To the Editor:
Washington helpless?
Hardly.
The problem in Washington is not a lack of funds but a lack of imagination throughout the system, which includes both political parties.


The Big Guy Deflated
THEY are the brutes, the steak-a-day colossi, hulked out on hormones both natural and synthetic.
In ninth-grade gym class, they took the longest showers, endlessly soaping their cavernous armpits and actually drinking from the shower head as the rest of us looked on in fear and envy.
In college, they carbo-loaded at special "training tables." Eventually, the lucky ones "went pro" and managed to earn a few million bucks before blowing out a knee or a shoulder or cracking up their Testarossas.
In middle age, they put on flab and called themselves "businessmen," opening supper clubs called Jocko's or starring in low-budget flicks.
The big guys.
Mike Tyson, the late Lyle Alzado, even Magic Johnson.
Looking more and more like a socially endangered species -- Homo humongous americanus -- the big guys are falling, tripping themselves up.
Their stories are very different, of course, but all share the theme of the strong man laid low by his craving to feel even stronger, more dominant.


Many Pregnant Addicts, Just a Few Beds
ALTHOUGH the number of babies born with drugs in their systems has soared since crack appeared in the mid-1980's, almost no treatment beds have been allotted on Long Island for pregnant addicts.
Rejected by treatment centers, the pregnant addicts often feel coerced into having abortions so that they can receive care without the threat of legal action.
Many mothers, suspicious of authorities who might try to place their children in foster care, have delayed seeking help until their addictions were so severe that they lost their children anyway.


RECORD BRIEFS
Mahler: Symphony No. 1
Chicago Symphony conducted by Klaus Tennstedt.
EMI CDC 54217-2; CD.
Berlin Philharmonic conducted by Claudio Abbado.
Deutsche Grammophon 431 769-2; CD.


A Monster-Truck Slur
To the Editor:
In "Caterpillar's White-Collar Lessons" (April 26), Barbara Presley Noble, referring to the striking workers, says that "white-collar workers may see nothing but losers and monster-truck racing fans." I understand that this is not necessarily your opinion, but I think it is wrong to print stereotypes like this one.
Some factory workers may like monster-truck racing, but others prefer baseball and some may even enjoy watching "Masterpiece Theater."


Kathy Phillips and Jake Daehler
WHEN Jake Daehler, a 33-year-old actor, met Kathy Phillips, a 31-year-old actress and bike messenger, it was not love but fear at first sight.
"We met four years ago in an acting class," Mr.
Daehler said.
"Kathy was this totally wild person. She hitchhiked. She went hang gliding. She ran with the bulls in Spain. I remember I saw her on the street once: She was on her bike, smoking a cigarette and wearing this nutty Mary Poppins hat and a cat suit. I thought, 'She's cute but probably criminally insane.' "


Clamps Often Have a Pivotal Role
CLAMPS are valuable in any collection of home-improvement tools.
Besides holding together pieces for gluing, they can secure materials safely when working with power tools and sharp hand tools.
C-clamps and their variants are the most versatile.
Conventional C-clamps, which are the least expensive, are made entirely of metal.
Their name derives from their shape, which resembles the letter C. They are commonly available with jaw openings ranging from 3 to 12 inches.
For home repairs, C-clamps with 4- or 6-inch openings, which cost about $5 each, are usually the most practical.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on May 10 about the film "The Waterdance" misidentified the producers.
They are Gayle Anne Hurd and Marie Cantin.


Given an Inch, Irises Will Win Over the Yard
THE irises are in bloom.
These stately border flowers with their regal presence are a sure cause for admiring pauses.
Even the flat rather bold iris foliage makes a decorative statement.
But for many gardeners, the iris season has already gone by.
Or for others, the best is yet to come.
This is thanks to the huge size of the clan itself.
There are zillions of irises, or so it seems.
And while one gardener may favor one type, another gardener favors another.
Some gardeners devote their entire grounds to the iris clan.
This is one flower it is quite easy to become goofy about.


Catherine White, Christopher Murphy
Catherine Goldsborough White, the daughter of John P. White and Clarissa T. White, both of Easton, Md., was married there yesterday to Christopher William Murphy, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
William R. Murphy of Woodbridge, Conn.
The Rev.
Dr.
Harry B. Bainbridge 3d officiated at Christ Episcopal Church, assisted by the Rev.
Robert Coine, a Roman Catholic priest.


Planes to Widen Exit Rows
A Federal Aviation Administration rule, effective this fall, will improve passenger access to the emergency exits in airplanes.
The rule requires a wider open space between seat rows adjoining the exit.
If there are two seats across in a row, the rule requires an unobstructed path of 10 inches between the back of the seat ahead of the exit and the front of the seat beside the exit.
Where there are three seats in the row, the unobstructed space must be 20 inches unless the seat next to the window has been removed.
In this case, the path need be only 6 inches wide.
The space between seats is measured with the seat backs in an upright position.
The width of this unobstructed space in regular rows in coach sections of airplanes at present is usually 6 inches.
The rule, issued May 4, requires that planes carrying more than 60 passengers adapt their seating to the new configuration by Nov. 4.


Coach Hired for 1994 Winter Games
TIM TAYLOR, who has coached Yale for 15 years and led the United States to a silver medal in the 1991 Canada Cup, was hired yesterday by USA Hockey to coach the United States team at the 1994 Winter Olympics.


The Overview, Close Up and Wide
FOR photographers who have always wanted to take panoramic pictures or close-ups without special accessories, there are two single-use cameras that have just arrived on the market.
The Fuji QuickSnap Panoramic Flash lights subjects at a distance of 3 to 10 feet with an electronic flash unit, while the Kodak Fun Saver TeleFoto, which does not have a flash, is designed to take close-up portraits.
Both cameras produce pictures of excellent quality.
Although they can be used indoors, they were intended for outdoor use under bright sunlight.


A QUESTION OF LIFE
Although I am only 30, I have worried about breast cancer for some years because my mother was diagnosed with the disease when she was only 26, less than a year after the birth of her first child ("A Question of Life," by Nora Frenkiel, May 3).
Her article made me realize what an extraordinary thing it was that my mother went on to have four more children after her diagnosis.
I didn't find out she'd had cancer until I was in my teens.
She never talked about it and seemed simply to put it behind her.
Today, my mother leads an active life, free of cancer.
Her story may provide hope to others with breast cancer who worry about taking the risk of having children.
CYNTHIA L. POLLOCK
Seattle


Sicily Bomb Kills Anti-Mafia Fighter and 5 Others
One of Italy's senior anti-Mafia investigators, who had been expected to head a new agency to combat organized crime, was slain in Sicily today when a car bomb blasted his bullet-proof sedan.
At least five other people also died in the attack, the police and news reports said.
The assassination of the investigator, Giovanni Falcone, took place on a highway near Palermo in the Mafia heartland.
It followed the killing of a senior Christian Democratic leader, Salvo Lima, in the same city in March.
More than any other anti-Mafia investigator, Mr.
Falcone had achieved the status of a national hero in the fight against the mob.


Given an Inch, Irises Will Win Over the Yard
THE irises are in bloom.
These stately border flowers with their regal presence are a sure cause for admiring pauses.
Even the flat rather bold iris foliage makes a decorative statement.
But for many gardeners, the iris season has already gone by.
Or for others, the best is yet to come.
This is thanks to the huge size of the clan itself.
There are zillions of irises, or so it seems.
And while one gardener may favor one type, another gardener favors another.
Some gardeners devote their entire grounds to the iris clan.
This is one flower it is quite easy to become goofy about.


Sweetness? At the Philharmonic?
The history of the New York Philharmonic, like that of any great institution, is one of adjustments, refinements, compensations.
But transitions have been tumultuous during the last 40 years: each change in music director has been an attempt to change the orchestra itself.
In 1958, Leonard Bernstein's appointment was meant to bring American dynamism to the ensemble's predominantly Germanic tradition.
No sooner had his aura faded than Pierre Boulez was chosen to make the organization more contemporary, more avant-gardishly European.
Zubin Mehta then displaced French rationalism with exotic charisma and explosive Romanticism.
And now, of course, there is Kurt Masur, who completes an impressive first season as music director tomorrow.


Police and Mourners Clash at Funeral Procession
On streets where drugs and guns sell like candy, the fatal shooting of Jose Uviles in Brooklyn by the police last week had resounded with a thud.
Early deaths come hard but frequently, neighbors said with resignation.
But on Friday night, when the police interrupted an impromptu funeral procession for the 21-year-old man through Bushwick, Mr.
Uviles's friends reacted with rage.


Knights Wrap Up With Razzle-Dazzle
The often outlandish trappings of World League action were here today: a halftime competition for male and female body builders, an Air Force swearing-in ceremony for 16 recruits, a streaker who punctuated the end of the second quarter.
And, of course, the knight on the white charger.
In short, it was as if the National Football League had gone to a party and wore a lamp shade.


Kathleen O'Reilly, John Fischer
Kathleen Mary O'Reilly, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard C. O'Reilly of Mount Pleasant, S.C., was married yesterday to Dr.
John F. Fischer Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Fischer of Morris Township, N.J.
The Rev.
Patrick Brown performed the ceremony at St.
Peter's Roman Catholic Church in Columbia, S.C.
Mrs.
Fischer, 23 years old, graduated from the University of South Carolina.
She is a teacher at James B. Edwards Elementary School in Mount Pleasant.
Her father is the president of Electronic Data Services in Charleston, S.C.
Her mother, Marcia O'Reilly, is an obstetrics nurse at East Cooper Community Hospital in Mount Pleasant.


The Overview, Close Up and Wide
FOR photographers who have always wanted to take panoramic pictures or close-ups without special accessories, there are two single-use cameras that have just arrived on the market.
The Fuji QuickSnap Panoramic Flash lights subjects at a distance of 3 to 10 feet with an electronic flash unit, while the Kodak Fun Saver TeleFoto, which does not have a flash, is designed to take close-up portraits.
Both cameras produce pictures of excellent quality.
Although they can be used indoors, they were intended for outdoor use under bright sunlight.


A QUESTION OF LIFE
It was good to read Frenkiel's article and find out that I am not the only one facing this difficult issue.


Perspectives: Taxation of Wetlands; Cutting Assessments Near Giants Stadium
THE late H. Jerome Sisselman had high hopes for his land along Berrys Creek Canal here.
He thought he would develop a boat terminal on its barren banks and lure pleasure craft plying the Hackensack River.
But after he died in 1980, his heirs disagreed on what to do with the 240 acres of Meadowlands property, which are zoned for commercial and industrial development and fall under the jurisdiction of the Hackensack Meadowlands Development Commission.
The land sat idle, and eventually a liquidator-trustee was appointed to dispose of it.


Brothers Hurt in Dive Off of Coney Pier
Two brothers diving off the fishing pier at Coney Island were critically injured yesterday when they dove into shallow water and struck the bottom, the police said.
The brothers, John and Virgil Brown, dove together from the crowded pier at 4:45 P.M., but landed in 5-foot-deep water, striking their heads on the seabed, a police spokeswoman, Sgt.
Mary S. Wrensen, said.


SURFACING
DESTINATION --
The New Vegas:
Sandra Bernhard played Bally's on the strip last weekend.  HAIR --
Male blonding:
Highlights were the highlights of Susan Crosland's book party at Le Cirque last week.
CUISINE --
Japanese barbecue:
Do-it-yourself grilled meat, seafood and vegetables at Shabu-Tatsu in Greenwich Village.
ACCESSORY --
Sunflower topiaries:
An alternative to the ubiquitous sheaves of dried wheat. WORD --
"Deselected":
What happens to incumbents who aren't re-elected.


Making a Difference; The $5 Billion Sleeper
Ray B. Mundt let some scoops out of the bag last week.
In an interview, he disclosed that the company he heads, the Alco Standard Corporation, was looking for a partner in Europe and that it expected to post record sales and earnings in its fiscal year ending Sept. 30.
Who cares, you say?
What's Alco Standard?
The company is a sleeper, not well known to the public because it has no major consumer products.
But it is well known to Wall Street as the world's largest paper distributor, with annual sales breaking $5 billion and a return on shareholder equity at a compounded rate of 19 percent a year over its 25-year history.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Personal Finances; Perot Reneged on Pledge to Reagan
A little more than a year after pledging $2.5 million to support President Ronald Reagan's official library, in thanks for the President's "years of outstanding leadership and service," Ross Perot reneged on most of the pledge in 1987 because he apparently was angry over what he saw as a lack of interest in American servicemen missing in Southeast Asia.
The episode suggests the importance of Mr.
Perot's experiences with the prisoner-of-war and missing-in-action issue in changing his feelings toward the Reagan Administration and then Vice President George Bush, whom Mr.
Perot now seeks to replace in the White House.


Watching Carson Fade Into a Video Sunset
There he was: Father Comedy looking vaguely funereal in dark jacket, white shirt, red tie and that low-watt smile, letting the guys in the control room flick the switches for an audience estimated at 55 million.
Not a bad goodbye, really, to get toasts and tears from one-fifth of the nation.
Of course, a lot of people slept right through the final "Tonight" show on Friday night.
And many of those who didn't still wanted Johnny Carson, all these decades into it, to win them over one last time.
Even when you're waving goodbye, New Yorkers can be tough.
Many never even turned away from the baseball and hockey games that were on at the same hour.


Making a Difference; The 'Real' Murphy Brown
"From every source available to us, the same story emerges," Robert S. Alley and Irby B. Brown wrote in their 1990 book, "Murphy Brown: Anatomy of a Sitcom" (Delta Books).
"Murphy Brown is Diane English."
Candice Bergen, who plays the title character on the CBS series, might take exception.
But there is no question that Ms.
English, the show's 44-year-old creator, shares any number of traits with Murphy, including a willingness to take on ideologically charged issues.


New Children's Museum: Please Touch
A DUEL was brewing outside castle walls.
As two combatants in plastic armor fashioned building pegs into swords, a tulle-gowned fairy princess darted past them from within the castle's portals and made a beeline for the miniature grocery store nearby.
Startled by the loss of their audience, the combatants paused.
One of them threw down his helmet and breastplate, grabbed his father's hand and scurried toward the open cockpit of a real Hughes 269A helicopter parked a few yards away.


POSTINGS: Off Times Square; Brightening the Side Streets
At first glance, it might seem that bright lights are not among the things of which Times Square is most in need.
But a second glance, particularly down the long side streets, reveals dark stretches that add to a sense of nighttime danger.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Home State; In His Theater, Clinton Plays Favorite-Son Role
Perhaps hoping the hoopla would distract a citizenry ambivalent about his candidacy for President, today Gov.
Bill Clinton sent in the marching bands.
And the Boy Scouts.
And the cotton candy.
And the confetti.
Only the clowns weren't here.


'The World Is Our Thrift Shop'
PLACE: -- Jackie 60, 432 West 14th Street, Manhattan.
OPEN: -- Tuesdays only; live show at midnight.
IDENTITY: -- Raw dance space in the meat-packing district, with live performances.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Undeclared Candidate; Intrigued by Perot Screenplay, Hollywood Hesitates to Bite
The movie director John Milius was on the phone, making a pitch to Clint Eastwood.
"Perot wins the popular vote, but the electoral college throws it out and tries to impose Clinton, so the American people go crazy and take to the streets with guns," Mr.
Milius, who wrote the screenplays for "Dirty Harry" and "Magnum Force," explained urgently.
"The Government sends in the Marines, but the Marines won't fire on Americans." He leaned back, puffed on his cigar, and cut to the happy ending.
"We have a real revolution in this country, at last."
Mr.
Milius, well-known in Hollywood as an outspoken conservative, was not talking movies; he was talking politics.
He is an ardent Ross Perot supporter.
So is Pat Kingsley, a high-profile publicist who is just as well-known for championing liberal causes.
Ms.
Kingsley had supported Senator Bob Kerrey of Nebraska earlier in the campaign and said she had no use for Mr.
Clinton.
"I'm trying to figure out how to support Perot," she said.
"He certainly doesn't need our money."


The Bronfmans' Leveraged Leviathan
Back in 1979 two of Canada's great dynastic business families seemed headed for a sensational confrontation.
The Bronfman brothers, Edward and Peter -- they're the "other" Bronfmans, not the Seagram branch of the family -- and the Reichmann brothers, Paul, Albert and Ralph, coveted a real estate holding company called Trizec Corporation.
Trizec was the company through which William Zeckendorf, the New York developer, assembled an impressive collection of Canadian properties.
The Bronfmans, intent on building a real estate empire, had taken a 37 percent stake in Trizec three years earlier.
Then the Reichmanns, busy building their own empire, came along and snapped up a 35 percent stake.
The looming collision over who would control Trizec promised to be as exciting as any plot a potboiler novelist might dream up.


European Nations Preparing for Penalties Against Serbia; Belgrade Is Silent
The Bush Administration's move to increase pressure on the Yugoslav Government was met with official silence here today.
But continued fighting by Serbian forces in Bosnia pointed to a determination not to yield to the threat of tightening sanctions.
Mr.
Milosevic's Government appeared to be watching closely to see how far the European Community's members would go in pressing new economic sanctions.


All About/Cover Girls; The Look That Sells Is Both Girl-Next-Door and Celebrity
Cheryl Tiegs.
Christie Brinkley.
Cindy Crawford.
They are some of the world's most famous cover girls.
Their faces have launched thousands of new looks, setting the standard for what millions of women think of as beautiful.
Riding on those looks are millions of dollars of advertising and marketing expenditures from companies for clothes and cosmetics.
That has made cover girls hot properties with skyrocketing rates of pay.
The salaries for models have grown from a seemingly paltry $50 an hour in 1960 to as much as $20,000 a day in 1991 for the best-known cover girls.


Early Musicker Arrives Late But Catches Up in a Big Way
Roger Norrington got there first, but first isn't necessarily best.
Ask Christopher Hogwood, who was the first to record all the Mozart symphonies on original instruments; most have now appeared in more convincing period performances.
"There," in Mr.
Norrington's case, was the Romantic repertory: the Beethoven symphonies, Berlioz's "Symphonie Fantastique," symphonies of Schumann and Mendelssohn, and more.
But now others are challenging Mr.
Norrington in the 19th-century staples, most aggressively, John Eliot Gardiner.
When Mr.
Norrington first performed Berlioz on early instruments, in 1988 in London, Mr.
Gardiner sat prominently at a snack table during intermission, his coat flung over his shoulders like a Romantic cape, and told all who would listen that the Norrington performance was rather a disappointment, wasn't it?, and that he would soon address the same symphony with his new Orchestre Revolutionnaire et Romantique.


14 Businesses Find A Way in the Recession
DESPITE the recession, some small businesses are thriving.
Last Wednesday, in conjunction with National Small Business Week, 14 of them were named Westchester winners for their performance as the fastest-growing successful small companies in the county by the Westchester Small Business Council, an affiliate of the County Chamber of Commerce.
"In order to be considered for an award, each business had to meet specific requirements," said Edward Murray, executive president of the County Chamber of Commerce.
"Each of the companies had to have a five-year sales history of continuous growth pattern. They also had to have obtained at least $150,000 or less than $25 million in sales in 1991, with 50 percent of their revenues coming from Westchester."


Elyse Adrian, Scott Johnston
Elyse A. Adrian, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Shahan A. Adrian of Forest Hills, Queens, was married yesterday in Kinnelon, N.J., to Scott R. Johnston, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
E.
Ray Johnston of Wayne, N.J.
The Very Rev.
Houssig Bagdasian performed the Armenian Apostolic ceremony at the Smoke Rise Village Inn.
Mrs.
Johnston, 30 years old, is a lawyer with Paine Webber Inc. in Weehawken, N.J.
She graduated from Barnard College and received a law degree from Brooklyn Law School.
Her father is a prosthodontist in Forest Hills.


Bosnia's Nightmare; Fear and Unreason Twist a Spiral of Death
THE man's face was becoming tauter, and the screwdriver he was twisting in his hands turned ever more quickly while he recalled his role in the recent ethnic killing.
"It's difficult to explain," he said, as he sat in the hair salon on Zvornik's main street.
"Normal people turn out to be beasts, as if you're watching a Frankenstein movie. They become monsters." In the dusk outside, nothing moved except the glowering Serb militiamen who are the town's new masters.
Anger, barely suppressed, erupting suddenly into violence; fear and suspicion fed by rumors and half-truths, becoming paranoia; a burning sense of past injustices unavenged, and of similar tragedies ahead, if ethnic rivals are not corralled, punished and expelled: This is Bosnia, six weeks into a civil war that is spiraling ever more dangerously out of control.
According to figures compiled by Bosnian relief groups, the toll now stands at 2,225 dead, 2,500 missing, 8,000 wounded in hospitals, 930,000 people made homeless, countless towns and villages ransacked, blasted and torched, and between $60 billion and $100 billion in property destroyed.


Columbus (Ohio) in Bloom
Late May is the last chance to see the half-million tulips along with the early summer annuals at Ameriflora '92 in Columbus, Ohio.
The 88-acre exposition, marking the quincentenary of the city's namesake's first New World voyage, includes educational, entertainment and shopping pavilions surrounded by more than a million flowers.
Ameriflora, which began April 20, continues to Oct. 12.


Ms. Woodworth, J. W. Keohane
Laura Staples Woodworth, the daughter of Martha Williams of Fairfield, Conn., and Dr.
Thomas Bell Woodworth of Midland, Mich., was married yesterday in Chapel Hill, N.C., to Jonathan Wilmore Keohane, the son of Ann Wright Keohane of Franklin, N.C., and Robert O. Keohane of Wellesley, Mass.
The Rev.
Timothy E. Kimbrough performed the Episcopal ceremony at the Church of the Holy Family.
Mrs.
Keohane, 25 years old, graduated from Yale University and received a law degree from the University of North Carolina.
Her father is a senior occupational health specialist at Dow Chemical Company in Midland.
Her mother is the membership director at WSHU, a public radio station in Fairfield.


The Will to Adorn
Pistachio and lavender have replaced mustard and bordeaux as this season's fashion colors, but two-inch-thick shoulder pads are still de rigueur.
White silk head scarves are more popular than the dark prints and paisleys of winter, but hemlines, hovering around the ankles, have not changed.
Some women reveal their frosted, four-inch-high bouffant hairdos under scanty scarves, but the most daring are baring their heads on the lightly policed highway to the Caspian Sea.


Official Summer Outlook Calls for Clean Shores and Big Crowds
From Mystic to Cape May, from Fire Island to the Thousand Islands, the New York region is approaching the summer of 1992 with an optimism unseen in recent years, anticipating clean beaches and big crowds.
Just as a blast of hot weather this week quickly burned off the chill of a cold spring, officials are hopeful that their expanding fight against ocean pollution will result in a second straight trouble-free beach season, further dimming memories of the beach closing in 1987 and 1988 prompted by the washup of medical waste and other pollution problems.


Technology; Road Racing, Without Exhaust Fumes or Engine Roars
The Indianapolis 500 it's not, but Anne Warden, inching up to the starting line in the American Tour de Sol behind the wheel of a battery-powered blue-green subcompact called The Force, pronounced herself "pumped." In the next vehicle, an 860-pound lemon-yellow tricycle-car made from Kevlar and electrical tape and called The Flash, James D. Worden, who built both cars, was giving Miss Warden hand signals.
Mr.
Worden is a 25-year-old mechanical engineer who lives and breathes electric cars and founded the Solectrica Corporation of Arlington, Mass., to design and make them.
Gesturing to Miss Warden, a distant cousin, he held up his hand, palm facing forward.
He slowly lowered his fingers until his hand was parallel with the ground.
"Floor it," he mouthed.
The light turned green and she pulled away.
"Bye," he waved.


Rio de Janeiro
Back in the days when environmentalists called themselves naturalists and traveled by steamship, Rio de Janeiro's green forests, gray granite hills and South Atlantic beaches exerted a legendary allure.
So it is appropriate that next month 30,000 environmentalists will descend by jet on Rio, a tropical city where nature is never far from view.
Formally called the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, the meeting will last from June 3 to 14.
Preparing for what may be modern history's largest environmental gathering, Rio's city leaders have invested heavily, hoping to reverse in one stroke a negative image of crime and decay.
From Rio's newly refurbished international airport, visitors will speed down a specially constructed five-mile superhighway that feeds into tunnels leading to the Southern Zone's beachfront neighborhoods.


Adele Marie O'Grady, James Botticelli
Mrs.
John Patrick O'Grady of New York has announced the engagement of her daughter Adele Marie O'Grady to James Carlo Botticelli, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Cosmo R. Botticelli of Rye Brook, N.Y.
A June wedding is planned.
Miss O'Grady is also a daughter of the late Mr.
O'Grady.
She is a graduate of Smith College and the president of the Donnellan Birdsall Company, a Brooklyn real-estate concern headed by her mother, Marion D. O'Grady.
Her father was an electronics consultant in Rye, N.Y.


Mary McGowan, Gregory S. Heins
Mary Ellen McGowan, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Clarence A. McGowan Jr. of Philadelphia, was married there yesterday to Gregory Saylor Heins, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John J. Heins 2d of Princeton, N.J.
The Rev.
William Graham performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at Old St.
Joseph's Church.
Mrs.
Heins, 24 years old, graduated from the University of Pennsylvania.
She was until recently a sports therapist at Physical Therapy Services in Washington.
Her father is an investment broker at Kidder, Peabody &amp; Company in Philadelphia.


He Is an Operating System
HARD DRIVE
Bill Gates and the Making of the Microsoft Empire.
By James Wallace  and Jim Erickson.
Illustrated. 426 pp.
New York: John Wiley &amp; Sons
.  $22.95.


In the Region: Connecticut and Westchester; Recent Sales
Avon, Conn. 190,000
181 West Avon Road  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 17-year-old colonial; freshly painted interior, ceramic and hardwood floors, 1 acre; taxes $2,715.
Madison, Conn. 157,000
442 Opening Hill Road  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 6-year-old cape cod; oversized rooms, pantry, wooded lot, 2.1 acres; taxes $2,471.
West Hartford, Conn. 134,000
61 Knollwood Road  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 42-year-old ranch; enclosed porch, hardwood floors, 0.25 acre; taxes $2,619.
Armonk, N.Y. 1.175 million
6 Wampus Lakes Drive
5-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, year-old frame brick; 2 fireplaces, formal dining room, library, deck, Jacuzzi, 3 acres; taxes not yet assessed.
Bronxville, N.Y. 715,000
2 Studio Lane
4-bedroom, 3-bath, 42-year-old colonial; fireplace, den, eat-in kitchen, family room, dining room; taxes $14,101.
Scarsdale, N.Y. 285,000
108 Brown Road
3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 5-year-old colonial; fireplace, dining room, kitchen; taxes $5,060.
OTHER AREAS Bridgewater, N.J. 193,000
821 Country Club Road
3-bedroom, 2-bath, 32-year-old ranch; patio, 2-acre plot, fireplace; taxes $3,521.
Hazlet, N.J. 115,000
584 Beers Street
3-bedroom, 2-bath, 10-year-old ranch; oak cabinets in eat-in kitchen, full basement; taxes $3,700.
Commack, L.I. 160,000
6 Byron Road  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 32-year-old ranch; dining room, eat-in kitchen, den, family room, basement, 1-car garage; taxes $3,900.


'Bright Air, Brilliant Fire'
To the Editor:
In his review of Gerald M. Edelman's "Bright Air, Brilliant Fire: On the Matter of the Mind" (April 19), George Johnson states that Dr.
Edelman "won a Nobel Prize in 1972 for establishing that the immune system works according to Darwinian principles." Actually, the prize was specifically awarded for seminal scientific investigations that helped substantially to lead to our better understanding of the molecular structures of immunoglobulins (antibodies), a noteworthy, direct and noncontroversial contribution to the field of molecular immunology.


A Village of Quixotes
CAETANA'S SWEET SONG
By Nelida Pinon. Translated by Helen Lane. 402 pp. New York: Alfred A. Knopf.


The Dinner Trade
At the New York Stock Exchange; May 16, 7 P.M.


Returnees' 'Stuff' Overflows Houses
WHEN Janet Kranik's son, a college student from Northport, arrived home for the summer with a van loaded with a roomful of furniture, a stereo, books, supplies and boxes of clothes, his mother would not let him into the house.
"Don't even stop," Ms.
Kranik told her son, instructing him to deposit everything at a nearby storage warehouse.
Ms.
Kranik recalled how she had spent the prior summer tripping over his things and vying for room.


Biblical Israel
To the Editor:
Your review of several children's books with Jewish themes (April 12) refers to "biblical Palestine." That is a historical inaccuracy with unpleasant political overtones.


Update; That Telethon Idea Might Have Possibilities
When Mayor David N. Dinkins threw open the doors of City Hall for a day last August and invited the public in to chat, he was looking for a splashy way to show that he cared about ordinary New Yorkers' concerns.
Some ideas people brought him, including a proposal to sell city bonds in denominations more affordable to small investors, have been adopted.
But many of the 1,058 suggestions have been left on the shelf, and the city's official report on the open house -- printed in February but never released -- helps explain why.


Scouts' Late Night Out
The Girl Scout Council of New York celebrates its 80th birthday; May 20, 9:30 P.M.


INSIDE
Thai Premier Reported Ready to Leave Country
Thailand's Prime Minister prepared to flee into exile after the King granted all government officials amnesty in the violent suppression of pro-democracy demonstrations last week, Thai officials said.
Page 8.
Philippine Power Politics
As the latest presidential election enters its third week in the Philippines, the determining factor is not people power but electric power.
Blackouts have stalled the economy.
Page 3.
Giving by the Rich Declines
The rich are getting richer, and there are more millionaires in America than ever these days, but on average they are giving less of their money to charity.
Page 16.


Jill Sabin, Charles Garner
Mr. and Mrs.
Arnold L. Sabin of New York have announced the engagement of their daughter, Vivien Jill Sabin, to Charles Hugh Farkas Garner, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robin L. Farkas of New York.
An August wedding is planned.
Miss Sabin, who is 29 years old and is known as Jill, is the assistant national facilities manager in New York of the Stanley H. Kaplan Educational Center Ltd.
She graduated from the University of Pennsylvania and received a master's degree in real-estate development from Columbia University.
Her father retired as the vice chairman and treasurer of the Foreston Coal Corporation in Lake Success, L.I.


Lisa Jayne, Matthew Sippel
Lisa LaForge Jayne, a daughter of Mrs.
David W. Jayne 3d of Pelham, N.Y., and the late Mr.
Jayne, was married yesterday in New York to Matthew John Sippel, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Robert C. Sippel of Kenmore, N.Y.
The Rev.
Timothy S. Healy performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Ignatius Loyola Church.
Mrs.
Sippel, 28 years old, graduated from Williams College and received the Williams-in-Hong-Kong teaching fellowship.
She is the assistant manager of the education program at Newsweek magazine in New York.
Her father was the senior producer of the ABC Evening News in New York.
Her mother is a real-estate broker with Ann DeSantis Realtors in Pelham Manor, N.Y.


Focus: Santee, S.C.; A Downtown Started for Rural Retirees
LIKE many rural areas around the nation, this town of 650 people has seen hundreds of retirees move in in recent years, not only to specially designed retirement communities, but also to scattered houses beside Lake Marion or one of three championship golf courses.
Now the town, halfway between Charleston and Columbia, wants to give something special to its new residents: a downtown.
Because Santee was built up first as a resort and only later as a retirement community, it has never had what is commonly considered a downtown.


Topics of The Times; Unfinished Constitutional Business
Congress has rushed to bless the 27th Amendment to the Constitution with near unanimity -- and transparent self-admiration.
Pending since 1789, the amendment says members of the legislative branch can't vote themselves mid-term raises.
Ratification became a fact when the 38th state recently approved it, so Congressional action wasn't necessary.
But it did help dispel doubts about the amendment's validity after so many years.
That's not why Congress hurried, though.
Facing elections, and ominous rumbling against incumbents, members were eager for a vote that exuded self-discipline.
In the House, it was 414 to 3.
In the Senate, 99 to 0.


Lucky Pennies, Luckless Silver
CONSIDER the lowly cent.
Today, it's barely worth picking up off the ground.
But in the middle of World War II, it was regarded a little differently.
During the war, a severe shortage of copper forced the Treasury to use zinc-coated steel for all one-cent coins instead of the normal bronze.
But rumors abounded that a few bronze 1943 cents were produced.


Patients Paying To Be Subjects In Brain Study
At this time last year, Parkinson's disease had left Robert Orth severely disabled.
"I was afraid to talk to anybody because my voice shook," said Mr.
Orth, a 59-year-old former telephone company supervisor from Santa Maria, Calif.
"I was afraid to answer the door because I was embarrassed by my appearance. I wanted to be normal. I was desperate."


In the Shadow Of the Pistons
To the Sports Editor:
In response to William C. Rhoden's "The Bad Boys Are Sent Home for Good," (The Times, May 4), I must make some comments and disagreements.


Barbecuing Returns, With Twists
MEMORIAL DAY weekend marks the beginning of one of summer's great pleasures: eating outdoors.
In the last few years, though, the standard scene -- Dad grilling hamburgers while Mom tosses a salad -- has altered.
The barbecue has become the place for cooking anything from tofu to frogs' legs.
And instead of ball-park mustard and ketchup, salsas, cold sauces or compound butters are served on the side.
The standard tools for the barbecue chef have also changed.
In California it is now against the law to use lighter fluid as a fire starter because of its contribution to air pollution (not to mention the bad taste it can impart to food).
Instead, people are using kindling.
But a useful new product for lighting charcoal easily has just been produced by Griffo Grill.
Called Cob Lites, it consists of corn cobs that have been dipped in food-grade paraffin.
They produce an intense heat when burned, and they don't smell.
They are available at Williams-Sonoma stores and from their mail order catalogue, from the Chef's Catalogue and at Crate and Barrel stores.


Warmus Trial Jury Deliberates 3d Day
The jurors considering the fate of Carolyn Warmus, the former Westchester schoolteacher charged with killing her lover's wife, deliberated for a third day today, retiring for the night at 7 P.M. without reaching a verdict.
The lawyers and Judge John Carey of Westchester County Court spent much of the day searching through the stenographer's notes of the testimony in the 4-and-a-half-month trial.
The jurors asked to rehear testimony dealing with how Ms.
Warmus is alleged to have discarded the gun prosecutors say she used in the murder of Betty Jeanne Solomon, and with testimony about a 55-minute conversation Ms.
Warmus had with Paul Solomon, the husband of the murdered woman, hours before the shooting.


Susan Black, John Berard
Susan Black, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Owen J. Black Jr., of Southport, Conn., was married yesterday in Fairfield, Conn., to John Berard, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Tony J. Berard of Cranford, N.J.
Frederic P. Kimball, a justice of the peace, performed the ceremony at the Patterson Club.


POSTINGS: East Harlem; 51 Low-Income Apartments
An apartment building for low-income families and the homeless sponsored by three Roman Catholic parishes opened in East Harlem on Thursday.
The parishes behind the project, which took 14 months to complete and is at 111-117 East 100th Street, are St.
Francis de Sales, St.
Cecilia and the Church of Holy Agony.
As part of a state housing program, they received a no-interest, 99-year, $4.3 million loan to rehabilitate four four-story tenements into a single 51-unit building.


Girl, 17, Arraigned In Shooting of Woman
Amy Fisher, the 17-year-old accused of shooting the wife of a 38-year-old man with whom she had had an affair, was described by fellow high school students today as a loner with few friends.
A few students gathered this morning in the parking lot of John F. Kennedy High School before heading for nearby Jones Beach on the first day of the Memorial Day weekend.
"We first heard about it when we got out of school yesterday," said Brian Sobol, a junior.
"No one seems to know to much about her. She was sort of a loner." Miss Fisher is scheduled to graduate in four weeks.
Gun Has Not Been Found
Late Friday night, she was arraigned on charges of attempted murder.
Miss Fisher is said to have left school Tuesday morning, gone to the home of Mary Josephine Buttafuoco, 37, in Massapequa, and shot her once in the head as she answered the door.
The police said they have not recovered the gun.


On Global Warming; Why So Chilly?
The Bush Administration has drawn sharp criticism for weakening the global warming treaty that will be signed at the United Nations environmental summit in Brazil next month.
The treaty will set no firm targets and timetables for reducing the emission of greenhouse gases that could alter world climate.
It will simply require countries to adopt greenhouse-reduction programs.
But the Administration's opposition to mandatory limits was on solid ground -- the need is not yet proved and the cost could be high.
The Administration's real failure is more fundamental.
Even by its own "no regrets" policy, the Administration is doing far too little to curb emissions.


Lucky Pennies, Luckless Silver
CONSIDER the lowly cent.
Today, it's barely worth picking up off the ground.
But in the middle of World War II, it was regarded a little differently.
During the war, a severe shortage of copper forced the Treasury to use zinc-coated steel for all one-cent coins instead of the normal bronze.
But rumors abounded that a few bronze 1943 cents were produced.


The Stubborn General at the Firestorm's Center
Prime Minister Suchinda Kraprayoon, whose switch from Supreme Commander of the armed forces to Prime Minister of Thailand early in April provoked the storm of dissent that has paralyzed national life, is the latest in a line of army generals drawn inexorably into politics.
Although he said that he took up the duties of Prime Minister reluctantly, General Suchinda had been the real power behind a caretaker Government in Thailand since February 1991, when under his leadership a civilian Government was overthrown and a military junta formed.


Bears' Defensive Line Is Aging Gracefully
Over the last few years, the Chicago Bears' defensive line, once the ferocious Maulers of the Midway, has lost some of its bite because of age.
The Bears' defensive coordinator, Vince Tobin, wants to avoid the nightmare of waking up one Sunday to discover that his defensive line is toothless.
"It does have some age on it and it's something that we've been trying to address for the last couple of years," Tobin said.
"I've been here six years and there has been significant turnover in all areas of the defense, except the defensive line."


Sports of The Times; Don King's Desperate Disclaimers
ONLY a few steps from the boutiques on the corner of Madison Avenue and East 69th Street, the crown logo of Don King Productions perches above a closed-circuit camera that peers down at anybody ringing the bell.
Hung over the sidewalk like an arched eyebrow, the camera was installed several years ago after the boxing promoter's offices were firebombed.
Uneasy lies the head that wears the crown of Don King's fright-wig hair.


Wall Street; Mutual Funds' Boom in the Bond Market
The power mutual funds wield in the stock market may soon be rivaled by their muscle in the corporate bond market, if the current pace of new bond fund sales continues.
In the 1980's, funds were "a bit player" in the bond market, said James S. Riepe, managing director of T. Rowe Price Associates and chairman of the Investment Company Institute.
Indeed, bond fund assets totaled just $54 billion in 1985.
But at the end of March, bond and income fund assets were a record $464 billion, eclipsing stock fund assets of $383.6 billion.
As for buying power, funds bought $54 billion worth of corporate bonds last year -- or 43 percent of total net purchases.
By comparison, the fund stock purchases last year accounted for 70 percent of net equity purchases.


'The World Is Our Thrift Shop'
PLACE: -- Jackie 60, 432 West 14th Street, Manhattan.
OPEN: -- Tuesdays only; live show at midnight.
IDENTITY: -- Raw dance space in the meat-packing district, with live performances.


Deborah Bloom, Paolo Fulghieri
Deborah Jane Bloom, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
William H. Bloom of Bay Shore, L.I., was married there yesterday to Paolo Antonio Fulghieri, a son of Franca Zamara and Dr.
Giancarlo Fulghieri, both of Milan, Italy.
Cantor Raymond Smolover officiated at the home of the bride's parents.
Mrs.
Fulghieri, a graduate of Smith College, is an assistant treasurer at the Bank of New York in New York.
Her father is a neurosurgeon in Bay Shore.
Her mother, Barbara Bloom, retired as a reporter in New York for National Public Radio.


A G.M. Success And A Relief for Wall Street
It worked.
The pricing of stock offerings, especially large ones, is an art.
And for a day it looked as if General Motors and its lead underwriter, Morgan Stanley, had pushed too far when they decided to raise the amount of stock being sold.


Taking On the Change-NY Challenge
A caustic feud has erupted among Republicans in Westchester County that vividly demonstrates the growing role in state G.O.P. circles played by Change-NY, the group that vows to replace moderate Republicans with "true believers" -- anti-tax, anti-spending conservatives.
But even more than that, the episode may illustrate the resiliency of Mary B. Goodhue, the 70-year-old State Senator at the center of the fight.
She says she is so angry with Change-NY that she is forgoing retirement plans and that she intends instead to become known as "Mrs. Claude Pepper" -- a reference to the Florida Congressman who stayed in Congress until he died at 88.


Distributor Accuses Drivers Union of Violating Ban on Violence
Lawyers for a wholesale newspaper distributor yesterday accused the drivers union of violating a court orders intended to prevent violence in the 17-day-old newspaper delivery dispute and blamed the Police Department in New Rochelle, N.Y., for failing to control angry pickets outside a distribution center there.
At the lawyers' request, State Supreme Court Judge Alfred M. Lama yesterday scheduled hearings for Tuesday morning in Riverhead, L.I., to determine if the union or the police department was in contempt of the orders.
As the city's highest official, the Mayor of New Rochelle, Timothy Idoni, as well as the Police Commissioner, Michael Armiento, were named individually in the papers filed yesterday.


Women March Home To Recognition at Last
WHEN the New Haven Memorial Day Parade steps off today, a woman will be at the head of the march for the first time in its history.
Dr.
Doris Troth Lippman of Westport, a professor of nursing at Fairfield University and a Vietnam veteran, will lead the parade down Chapel Street at 2 this afternoon.
"Since the Gulf War, I think, more people are aware of women veterans," Dr.
Lippman said.


ABOUT NEW JERSEY
IN the bewildering days after Los Angeles broke, Douglas E. Winterich sat on the wooden steps of the house that is the soul of Camden and wondered about what people really felt in their undeceiving hearts.
"I'd look up the street, to where Camden begins, and wonder how many people believe that if a big fissure were to open up and Camden just float away, that would solve everybody's problems," he said.


Oldies, Unite!
To the Editor:
Oops.
If WNEW-AM's owners are based in Los Angeles, then Wilfrid Sheed's fears for it are justified  [ "To the Barricades in Defense of American Classics," May 10 ] .


On Trying to Cope With 66 (sic) Entrees
THE first time I visited the Curtis House in Hicksville, it was Murphy's Law in action.
Everything that could go wrong did go wrong.
A hungry crowd, lured by a $9.95 early bird dinner special, had descended on the restaurant that afternoon, devoured the kitchen's supplies and left the staff shellshocked.
The harried hostess made the rounds, trying to explain the situation.
"It's been slow lately, and the chef didn't show up tonight," she concluded.


Medics in the Musical Wars
Ah, the life of the symphonic musician: graceful strains emanating from the instrument, well-practiced fingers directing the flow of sound.
Not to mention the searing pain in the shoulder, the crick in the neck, the embarrassing tremor in the index finger.
Playing in an orchestra may not look dangerous, but the most recent major survey on the subject, compiled in 1987 by the International Conference of Symphony and Opera Musicians, indicated otherwise.
"It was a staggering result," said John J. Kella, a violist in the Metropolitan Opera Orchestra and a rehabilitation therapist.
"Eighty-two percent said they experienced a medical problem, either physical or psychological, and 76 percent said it was severe enough to interfere with their work."


Bass and Seclusion in Canal
Deep, deep in the Everglades, on the edge of the Big Cypress Reservation, where the Seminoles fish and hunt, there is a canal full of bass and alligators.
It is overgrown, so you are protected from the worst wind, and it is so hard to find that you can be reasonably sure you will escape the hordes of weekend bass fishermen.
On a Saturday in early spring, however, after two hours of driving down unmarked dirt roads that cross a bewildering grid of canals, we found two boat trailers parked at our destination.
It didn't bother me, but my guide and old friend, Jack Allen, was set on our having the fishing all to ourselves.


U.S. Acts the Spoiler in Global Climate Talks; Telltale Coral Stress
To the Editor:
"The World's Oceans Are Sending an S O S" (The Week in Review, May 3) rightly notes the importance of coral bleaching as an early warning sign of global degradation, but misidentifies the nature of this alarming phenomenon and its major cause.


MAY 17-23: Haiti; Coast Guard Suspends Rescues of All But the Most Rickety
Haitian refugees are fleeing their tearful, impoverished island in record numbers, and the Bush Administration is groping for ways to stem the exodus.
After the Coast Guard announced that it would only pick up Haitians aboard the most rickety boats because there was no more room at the naval base at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, officials began trying to come up with a long-range policy they can stick with.
More than 10,400 Haitians have been picked up by the Coast Guard already this month -- many of them just outside Haitian waters, more than 500 miles from Miami but less than 50 from Cuba.
The Coast Guard's announcement was largely to deter flimsy boats from loitering just beyond Haiti's 12-mile limit hoping for a rescue -- and passage to the American base in Cuba for processing.


UP AND COMING: Sue Williams; An Angry Young Woman Draws a Bead on Men
Sue Williams swears she doesn't hate men.
"I just hate the violence," says the 38-year-old artist.
And her angry, scathingly funny new exhibition at the 303 Gallery in the SoHo section of Manhattan corroborates her claim.
The show, whose cartoonish paintings and clunky sculptures tackle such topics as infidelity, battery and rape, could easily be titled "Men at Their Worst."
This is the third, and best, New York show for Ms.
Williams, who has enjoyed a strong underground following for several years.
It stands out in a season in which several women artists -- including Cindy Sherman, Deborah Kass and Kiki Smith -- have been showing work that takes increasingly angry aim at sexism in and out of the art world.


These Tiny Cameras Can Take Lots of Heat
The quest to find new ways to use miniaturized cameras at the Indianapolis 500 (today at 11 A.M., Channel 7) continues unabated.
The other day, technicians mounted one of the lipstick-sized, two-ounce cameras near a car's exhaust system only to see it melt within seconds of a pit stop.
"When the car was under way, air flowed through the car so the heat was removed," said John Porter, a pioneer in adapting the cameras to auto racing, "but when it stopped, the heat stagnated and temperature shot up."


MAY 17-23: The Vatican; Opus Dei's Founder Steps Closer to Sainthood
Pope John Paul II gave new stature last week to Opus Dei, a movement that unites 75,000 Roman Catholics in a highly disciplined spiritual life and strict loyalty to papal policy.
At an outdoor Mass in St.
Peter's Square, the Pope beatified Msgr.
Jose Maria Esciva de Balaguer, the Spaniard who founded the secretive movement in 1928.


Across Southeast Asia, Awakenings to Democracy
AN announcer on an army-run television channel in Bangkok tried to explain last week why several hundred thousand Thais were in the streets demanding that an unelected Prime Minister resign.
Evildoers, the announcer said, had "planted time bombs in the minds of the people."
Time bombs have indeed been going off with some regularity over the last decade in minds in much of Southeast Asia, but there are more credible causes than "evildoers." In areas of rapid economic growth, political liberalization has not in general kept pace; in other countries, autocratic regimes have thwarted economic growth.


What Might Have Been: 3 Ad Campaigns for the Yugo
The demise of the Yugo, the Yugoslavian car that America loved to laugh at, was no laughing matter for the three New York advertising agencies that had been named as finalists in a review of the company's advertising account.
They had been waiting to hear from Yugo's American distributor, Yugo America Inc., since November, but as civil war tore apart Yugoslavia, their presentations for Yugo's 1992 model-year campaign were postponed again and again, until Yugo America filed for bankruptcy last month to liquidate its assets.
Nevertheless, the three agencies agreed to share their undelivered presentations, providing a rare behind-the-scenes look at advertising's creative process and a lesson in resuscitating a failing product.


Niche Farms: the Appeal of New Crops
After 35 years of tending cows for a living, Steve Verrill sold his dairy herd in 1990 and said goodbye to 4 A.M. milkings, to chasing runaways and to watching helplessly as expenses gobbled up profits as milk prices fell.
Now Mr.
Verrill spends his days driving around in a van between what were once grain fields, stopping to poke cabbage heads, asparagus shoots and habanero peppers, searching for freeze damage or hungry bugs.


Big Donald Is Watching
Ivana Trump can't easily forget that her ex-husband is still her landlord.
On Tuesday, at her gilded penthouse apartment in Trump Tower, Mrs.
Trump gave a party for Kathy Keeton.
Ms.
Keeton, the author of a new book, "Longevity: The Science of Staying Young" (Viking), is married to Bob Guccione, publisher of Penthouse magazine.
The event, which included piano music by 10-year-old Ivanka Trump, was a sedate affair, at least until the lights went out temporarily.


P.S. 30's Helping Hands: College Mentors
WHEN Mathilda Cuomo, a strong advocate of public education, suggested that every sixth grader in the state's schools be assigned a mentor, the administrators at Public School 30 in Yonkers thought the idea had merit and got in touch with their neighbor, Sarah Lawrence College, where there are no specific majors.
"We were very receptive to doing something with them," said Robert Cameron, associate dean of student affairs at the college.
"The timing was right." The college wanted to expand its student volunteer activities in Yonkers, he said, and the mentor idea proposed by the Governor's wife "seemed like a good fit."
"It had the additional advantage of literally being in our own backyard," Mr.
Cameron said.
"We are within walking distance of P.S. 30."


Mutual Funds; An Outbreak of Rights Offerings
Investors have poured record-breaking sums of money into mutual funds in the 1990's so far, and closed-end funds are also enjoying an infusion of new capital.
These funds are raising millions of dollars by initiating "rights offerings," invitations to current investors to buy additional shares.
Rights offerings, which were virtually unheard of among closed-end funds in the 80's, are rapidly spreading.
Four offerings came to market last year and seven so far in 1992.


Here's One Loser People Really Look Up To
Meet George Costanza, Lord of the Losers and Jerry Seinfeld's best friend on NBC's "Seinfeld."
Behold his self-esteem: "No one's a bigger idiot than me."


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
BIKING FOR DIABETES
About 500 bicyclists are expected to take part in the Tour de Cure next Sunday, sponsored by the Lower Hudson Valley Chapter of the American Diabetes Association.
Riders may choose from three scenic courses of 25, 50 or 100 kilometers, all beginning and ending at the Stouffer Hotel in Harrison.
Registration at $25 will begin at 6:30 A.M., and cycling will start at 8 A.M.
Each rider will be required to have a minimum of $50 in pledges, and winners will receive merchandise from Sharper Image or, as a grand prize, a four-day cruise for two to the Bahamas.


The Will to Adorn
Pistachio and lavender have replaced mustard and bordeaux as this season's fashion colors, but two-inch-thick shoulder pads are still de rigueur.
White silk head scarves are more popular than the dark prints and paisleys of winter, but hemlines, hovering around the ankles, have not changed.
Some women reveal their frosted, four-inch-high bouffant hairdos under scanty scarves, but the most daring are baring their heads on the lightly policed highway to the Caspian Sea.


Baja California
To the Editor: Through my brother in Pennsylvania, I was sent a copy of your article "A New Baja California" (Feb. 16).
We have lived on the Baja Peninsula of Mexico for four years and have seen the coming of the end of the Baja in its transformation to southern California.
It will not happen quickly, but with the good efforts of a number of misguided people in the Mexican Government allied with the greed of mostly non-Mexican entrepreneurs, it will happen.


The Executive Computer; More Home Workers and More Machines in Their Offices
Talked on the phone recently with the chief executive of a small prosperous company?
You may never have suspected that the calm, assured voice at the other end belonged to a man in his underwear, interrupted while searching under the desk for an escaped hamster.
Ah, the joys of the home office.


One Big Thank-You Note
For moral, oral and technical support I am very grateful to Gary, Binky, Marie, Morgan, Mona, Michael, Nick, Terry, Bret, Barry, Liz, Carl, Rust, Erroll, Sonny and Garth."
-- Acknowledgments from Jay McInerney's new novel, "Brightness Falls" (Alfred A. Knopf; $23)


Prelude To Sounds And Sights Of Nature
The spring rain had been falling all morning.
But among the 10 New York City families gathered for the weekend, few spirits were dampened.
Donna Boyd, a 10-year-old from Brownsville, Brooklyn, gazed out a nearby window.
"It's like a jungle out there," she said, a smile creeping across her face.


Godzilla Meets the F.B.I.
A dinosaur named Sue became the focus of a bitter legal, ethnic, political and scientific struggle last week after 30 F.B.I. agents confiscated the huge fossil from a South Dakota dealer.
Sue, the largest and most perfectly preserved Tyrannosaurus rex ever found, was excavated in 1990 by Black Hills Geological Research from a site near Faith, S.D.
The company bought fossil-digging rights for $5,000 from the owner of the land, a member of the Cheyenne River Sioux Tribe.
The 45-foot-long skeleton -- named for its discoverer, Susan Hendrickson -- is worth little in the ground but could fetch several million dollars from a museum.
The company's president said he planned to build a non-profit one around it.


Mia Schlappi, Peter Yearley
Mr. and Mrs.
Dale D. Schlappi of Sunderland, Mass., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Mia Alexandra Schlappi, to Peter Barlow Yearley, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Douglas C. Yearley of Scottsdale, Ariz.
An August wedding is planned.
Miss Schlappi, 27 years old, graduated from Mount Holyoke College and received a master's degree in art history from the University of Massachusetts at Amherst.
She is an assistant in the American paintings department at Christie's, the auction house, in New York.
Her father is a professor of fine arts at UMass.
Her mother, Diane R. Schlappi, is an art teacher at Granby (Mass.) High School.


The 'Mobile Phone Mob' Faces Guns and Tanks
HOWEVER else it is remembered, the bloodiest popular uprising in the modern history of Thailand is likely to be recalled as the first clash in a momentous battle between the two most powerful elements of Thai society -- the well-entrenched military and the nation's booming and suddenly vocal middle class.
As the weekend began, the Thai middle class appeared to have the advantage.
Its participation in last week's massive street protests had been instrumental in raising the pressure on Gen.
Suchinda Kraprayoon, the architect of a 1991 coup, to resign as Prime Minister.


Power Failures Slow Philippine Vote Count and Feed Suspicions of Fraud
When Filipinos voted in 1986, the election was decided not by the rigged tallies, but by huge "people power" demonstrations that ultimately ousted the ostensible winner, Ferdinand E. Marcos, and installed Corazon C. Aquino as President.
But this weekend, as the painfully slow process of tabulating results in the latest presidential election enters its third week, the determining factor is not people power but electric power.


Volunteers Help Speed Cases in Family Court
THERE are more than 1,100 children in foster care in the county, and each will have his case reviewed yearly in the crowded dockets of the Westchester Family Court.
The average foster-care hearing lasts three to five minutes.
In that brief period a Family Court judge must make critical decisions about a child's life, deciding whether the child remains in foster care, is reunited with parents or is released for adoption.


Cameras in the Courtroom: Assessing the Role of the Image on the Screen
It is a scenario that haunts opponents of the movement to allow television coverage of trials, a movement that gained momentum last week when New York State legislators agreed to once again allow cameras in the courts:
"That's the man," the eyewitness testifies, his identification based more on seeing the defendant's face in televised courtroom proceedings than on fleeting recollections of the crime.


Guns Are Result, Not Cause, of Crime
To the Editor:
"If Troops, Then Guns" (letter, May 13) rightly points out the tragedy of illegal firearms, specifically as used during the Los Angeles riots.
Nevertheless, James Rudolph seems to assume that regulating sale and possession of such weapons will solve the problem.
That is no solution.


The Bronfmans' Leveraged Leviathan
Back in 1979 two of Canada's great dynastic business families seemed headed for a sensational confrontation.
The Bronfman brothers, Edward and Peter -- they're the "other" Bronfmans, not the Seagram branch of the family -- and the Reichmann brothers, Paul, Albert and Ralph, coveted a real estate holding company called Trizec Corporation.
Trizec was the company through which William Zeckendorf, the New York developer, assembled an impressive collection of Canadian properties.
The Bronfmans, intent on building a real estate empire, had taken a 37 percent stake in Trizec three years earlier.
Then the Reichmanns, busy building their own empire, came along and snapped up a 35 percent stake.
The looming collision over who would control Trizec promised to be as exciting as any plot a potboiler novelist might dream up.


Results Plus
TENNIS German Team Stops United States Germany, led by the Wimbledon champion, Michael Stich, beat the United States, 2-0, yesterday in a match at the World Team Cup tournament in Dusseldorf, Germany.
The victory, however, had no effect on today's final.
Spain and Czechoslovakia, which also won yesterday, had enough points in their games to secure spots in the final of the round-robin tournament.
Stich beat No. 3-ranked Pete Sampras of Bradenton, Fla., 6-7 (6-8), 6-2, 6-4, and Carl-Uwe Steeb took only 58 minutes to beat Derrick Rostagno of Pacific Palisades, Calif., 6-1, 6-3.
Czechoslovakia's hard-serving Petr Korda beat Aleksandr Volkov of Russia, 6-4, 6-4.
Karel Novacek completed Czechoslovakia's strong showing, eliminating Andrei Cherkasov of Russia, 6-7, 6-3, 6-4. (AP)


Data Shows Fall in Giving by Rich, Even as Ranks of Millionaires Grow
While the incomes of the rich rose in the 1980's at a pace unmatched since the 1920's, on the average they gave a far smaller share of their income to charity, new studies show.
In 1979, people making more than $1 million (as measured in constant 1991 dollars) gave more than 7 percent of their after-tax income to charity; by 1991 the figure had declined to less than 4 percent.


Residential Resales
Closings in the week ended May 9  MANHATTAN  Greenwich Village 1.4 million
172 Sullivan Street  (MacDougal-Sullivan Gardens)  3-family, 4-story town house to be converted to one-family residence; 2 bedrooms, 2 baths in primary duplex; 1 bedroom, 1 bath in the other simplex units; fireplace in each; rear garden, 22- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $7,500 (Broker: William B. May)  SoHo 140,000
21 Prince Street  1-bedroom, 1-bath, 800-sq-ft. co-op; c/a, 2 fireplaces, skylight, original pine floors; maintenance $200, no tax deduction (Broker: Meisel Real Estate)  Upper East Side 390,000
30 East 85th Street  1-bedroom, 1-bath, 850-sq.-ft. condo in a 5-year-old building; 24-hr. doorman, concierge, dining area, 450-sq.-ft. private terrace; common charge $602, taxes $1,200 (Broker: Island Homes New York)  Upper West Side 890,000
131 Riverside Drive (85th St.)  3-bedroom, 3-bath, 2,500-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, manned-elevator, 2 maid's rooms, dining room, Hudson River view; maintenance $1,818, 45% tax-deductible (Brokers: Stribling &amp; Associates-Corcoran Group)  West Side 138,500
185 West End Avenue (67th St.)  (Lincoln Towers)  1-bedroom, 1-bath, 850-sq.-ft. postwar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, dining area, terrace, Hudson River view; maintenance $823, 50% tax-deductible (Broker: Eden Realty)  BRONX  Castle Hill 184,000
2034 Haviland Avenue  4-bedroom, 2-bath, single-family, detached, stucco and frame house; dining room, finished basement, 25- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,000 (Broker: ERA/Marland Real Estate)  Riverdale 382,000
4414 Tibbett Avenue  4-bedroom, 2-bath, single-family, detached, Tudor; dining room, fireplace, heated sunporch, 87- by 120-ft. irregular lot; taxes $3,000 (Broker: ERA/Susan E. Goldy &amp; Co. Realtors)  BROOKLYN  Bay Ridge 260,000
73 73d Street  2-family, semi-attached, brick house; 3 bedrooms in primary unit; 2 bedrooms in other; dining room, 1 bath in each; full basement, 1-car garage, 20- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $2,273 (Broker: Mcpyel Associates)  Midwood 320,000
1205 Glenwood Road  2-family, detached, stucco and frame Victorian; 4 bedrooms in primary duplex; 3 bedrooms in other duplex; 2 baths, dining room, fireplace in each; original oak details, 60- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $2,200 (Broker: Mary Kay Gallagher)  Park Slope 505,000
122 Prospect Park West  4-family, attached, limestone; 2 bedrooms, 1 bath in each unit; 2-story extention, south garden, 19.6- by 97-ft. lot; taxes $3,100 (Broker: Aguayo &amp; Knox)  QUEENS  College Point 199,000
127-01 23d Street  2-family, detached, frame house; 3 bedrooms in primary unit; 2 bedrooms in other; 1 bath, dining room in each; full basement, 2-car garage, 50- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $920 (Broker: Century 21/Weber &amp; Rose)  Rego Park 210,000
85-33 67th Avenue  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, single-family, detached, brick house; dining room, finished basement, 1-car garage, 22- by 110-ft. lot; taxes $1,348 (Broker: Madeleine Realty)  STATEN ISLAND  Grimes Hill 182,500
56 Theresa Place  3-bedroom, 1-bath, single-family, detached, Colonial; dining room, sunporch, 1-car garage, 60- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,700 (Broker: Salmon Real Estate)  Westerleigh 196,000
120 Margaretta Court  4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, single-family, detached, frame house; dining room, butler's pantry, enclosed porch, 1-car garage, 40- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,176 (Broker: Coldwell Banker/DeSimone)


European Nations Preparing for Penalties Against Serbia
European nations prepared today for a crucial meeting this week on the crisis in Bosnia and Herzegovina, with Germany's new Foreign Minister saying he favored the toughest possible economic sanctions.
The German, Klaus Kinkel, told reporters after a meeting with Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d that he would back trade and oil embargoes against the new, smaller Yugoslavia as well as a ban on air traffic to and from Belgrade, the capital.
He said Europeans should "shut down" Yugoslavia economically.


SURFACING
DESTINATION --
The New Vegas:
Sandra Bernhard played Bally's on the strip last weekend.  HAIR --
Male blonding:
Highlights were the highlights of Susan Crosland's book party at Le Cirque last week.
CUISINE --
Japanese barbecue:
Do-it-yourself grilled meat, seafood and vegetables at Shabu-Tatsu in Greenwich Village.
ACCESSORY --
Sunflower topiaries:
An alternative to the ubiquitous sheaves of dried wheat. WORD --
"Deselected":
What happens to incumbents who aren't re-elected.


Wall Street; Congress Stops, the Dow Goes Up
In today's quiz, the answer is: "A place full of greedy, selfish people who are oblivious to the damage they inflict on the real world." The correct question is: a.) How would an investment banker define Congress?, b.) How would a legislator describe Wall Street?, or c.) Both of the above.
Unfortunately, you should choose "c." Now that the cold war is over, the world offers few ideological divisions as wide or as deep as the one that yawns between the nation's capital and the nation's marketplace.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Personal Finances; Perot Reneged on Pledge to Reagan
A little more than a year after pledging $2.5 million to support President Ronald Reagan's official library, in thanks for the President's "years of outstanding leadership and service," Ross Perot reneged on most of the pledge in 1987 because he apparently was angry over what he saw as a lack of interest in American servicemen missing in Southeast Asia.
The episode suggests the importance of Mr.
Perot's experiences with the prisoner-of-war and missing-in-action issue in changing his feelings toward the Reagan Administration and then Vice President George Bush, whom Mr.
Perot now seeks to replace in the White House.


Paul de Man: The Plot Thickens
ONE day last fall, a little more than six months after my book "Signs of the Times: Deconstruction and the Fall of Paul de Man" was published, I received a letter announcing the existence of a cache of documents that flesh out the story of Paul de Man's sojourn at Bard College.
De Man -- the deconstructionist guru and Yale University eminence who was revealed in 1987, four years after his death at the age of 64, to have written nearly 200 articles for Nazi-controlled newspapers in his native Belgium during World War II -- taught at Bard from 1949 to 1951.
It was at this small progressive college in the Hudson Valley, where de Man held (and lost) his first teaching job in the United States, that he accomplished the crucial final stage in the transformation of his personal history: he abandoned his European past and started a new family -- and a new American identity -- by marrying one of his students without first obtaining a divorce from his wife.
"A pity I did not know of your project on de Man and his circle before it was published," wrote Artine Artinian.
"I would have provided you with powerful ammunition on his two years at Bard."
Now 84 years old, a longtime resident of Palm Beach, Fla., Mr.
Artinian had cut a flamboyant figure on the Bard College campus from the time he joined its faculty in 1935 until his retirement 29 years later.
A pipe-smoking, cape-wearing, Bulgarian-born Armenian professor of French with a particular interest in Guy de Maupassant, he had been instrumental in hiring de Man at Bard for the academic year beginning September 1949.
Mr.
Artinian had acted largely on the strength of a recommendation that he received from the novelist Mary McCarthy, who had met de Man at Dwight Macdonald's apartment on East 10th Street in New York City the previous fall.


Young Athletes Learn Grace Under Pressure
WHEN he counted the spectators in the stands at a recent game in New Canaan, the shortstop for the Warren Harding High School varsity baseball team, Juan Cruz, turned to his coach and asked, "Don't any of these parents work?"
The crowd at Mead Memorial Park on a weekday afternoon was perhaps 50 fans, mostly parents of the New Canaan players and students.
But it was still about 50 more than usually show up for a game at Seaside Park in Bridgeport, where the Harding Presidents play their home games.


Karen L. Wing, Jeffrey Feldhahn
Karen Lisa Wing, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
George R. Wing Jr. of Ridgewood, N.J., and Jeffrey Feldhahn, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Tom Feldhahn of Westport, Conn., were married May 16 in Ridgewood.
The Rev.
Charlotte H. Sommers performed the ceremony at West Side Presbyterian Church.
Mrs.
Feldhahn, 25 years old, graduated from the University of Richmond.
She is an assistant buyer at Macy's in New York.
Her father is the vice president of information technology at Givaudan-Roure Corporation, a manufacturer of flavors, fragrances and chemicals in Clifton, N.J.
Her mother, Diana D. Wing, is the president of Wing Venture Inc., a sales-promotion consulting business.


Nancy Gillen, Matthew Difazio
Nancy Louise Gillen, a daughter of James R. Gillen of Morristown, N.J., and Rita W. Gillen of Mendham, N.J., was married there yesterday to Matthew Colin Difazio, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Rudolph Difazio of Royal Oak, Mich.
Msgr.
Kenneth Lasch performed the ceremony at the Church of St.
Joseph.
Mrs.
Difazio, 23 years old, graduated from the University of Michigan.
Until recently she was a publishers' liaison for Book Inventory Systems, a wholesaler and retailer of books in Ann Arbor, Mich.
Her father is a senior vice president and the general counsel of the Prudential Insurance Company of America in Newark.


Rick Mears's Roar and Peace
To understand how Rick Mears, defending champion in the Indianapolis 500, has held up during a May that has been one of the less-inspiring ones for Penske Racing, you need only hear his own summation of the month.
"The checkered flag hasn't fallen yet," Mears replies.


A New Strategy For Luring Vacationers
EUGENE DILBECK, the state's travel and tourism director, stood before an easel in the interpretive center at Liberty State Park in Jersey City, describing for the benefit of the State Senate Budget and Appropriations Committee the national advertising campaign his office started this spring.
Its slogan is "New Jersey: You Should See Us Now!"
The ads carry images of history, seafood, amusements, casinos and the outdoors, and they are part of a major new strategy to convince out-of-state travelers that New Jersey's image as a polluted, crime-ridden stepchild of a state is out of date.


STOLEN PROMISE
I am Jewish and a contemporary of Patricia Raybon's daughter, and I have heard a similar story from my more religious relatives: "Every time the Jews have assimilated, they have been victimized. A non-Jew is not eligible for you."
My response to my relatives and to Raybon is the same: Anyone who is "eligible" for me would be sensitive to my heritage, regardless of his own background or characteristics.
The deep scars of history -- of African-American history, of Jewish history -- will be healed by mutual respect and regard for differences.
It is up to me, to the younger Raybon and to those of our generation to recognize that neither race, religion nor gender defines the eligibility of those we choose to love.
ABBY JO SIGAL
New York, N.Y.


F.B.I. Setting Sights on Street Gangs
When agents for the Federal Bureau of Investigation saw videotapes of the beating of a truck driver at the start of the rioting here, they said they recognized street gang members they had already been tracking.
Two weeks later they were among the law officers who seized four men in an early morning raid that Charlie J.  Parsons, special agent in charge of the bureau's Los Angeles office, said could be an example for F.B.I. cooperation with the police.


Given an Inch, Irises Will Win Over the Yard
THE irises are in bloom.
These stately border flowers with their regal presence are a sure cause for admiring pauses.
Even the flat rather bold iris foliage makes a decorative statement.
But for many gardeners, the iris season has already gone by.
Or for others, the best is yet to come.
This is thanks to the huge size of the clan itself.
There are zillions of irises, or so it seems.
And while one gardener may favor one type, another gardener favors another.
Some gardeners devote their entire grounds to the iris clan.
This is one flower it is quite easy to become goofy about.


A Symphony Is Where You Find It
Schubert was the most prolific and remarkable of piano duet composers.
In fact, his output for one piano, four hands, may be the most bewilderingly varied body of music in a single genre by any major composer.
And yet this repertory -- rarely heard in concert, rarely recorded -- is well known only to those who perform it at home.
The four-movement, 45-minute Grand Duo (D. 812) is a case in point.
Composed in 1824, two years after the "Unfinished" Symphony, it might have become one of Schubert's most popular and "characteristic" works had it been conceived for orchestra.
In fact, a new, newly recorded version of the Grand Duo, by the conductor Raymond Leppard (Koch Classics KC 2221; CD), achieves precisely this transformation, and with impressive results.


Victory No. 5,000 for Vasquez
JACINTO VASQUEZ rode his 5,000th career winner yesterday as his mounts finished first in three races at Calder Race Course in Miami.
Vasquez, who rode his first winner when he was 16 in his native Panama, had won two previous races yesterday before reaching the milestone in the last race of the day aboard Susan Pixum.


RABIN FOES TRYING A RUMOR CAMPAIGN
While always gritty and bruising, Israeli politics has had scant experience with an American-style focus on a candidate's character, as defined by who may have slept with whom and who did or did not inhale what.
But that has changed dramatically in the last few days with a no-holds-barred assault by the governing Likud Party on the front-running opposition Labor leader, Yitzhak Rabin.


Kathy Phillips and Jake Daehler
WHEN Jake Daehler, a 33-year-old actor, met Kathy Phillips, a 31-year-old actress and bike messenger, it was not love but fear at first sight.
"We met four years ago in an acting class," Mr.
Daehler said.
"Kathy was this totally wild person. She hitchhiked. She went hang gliding. She ran with the bulls in Spain. I remember I saw her on the street once: She was on her bike, smoking a cigarette and wearing this nutty Mary Poppins hat and a cat suit. I thought, 'She's cute but probably criminally insane.' "


St. Anthony's Takes Catholic Title
Scoring heavily in place points, St.
Anthony's of Huntington, L.I., won the Catholic High Schools Athletic Association outdoor track and field title yesterday at St.
John's University.
The Friars scored 43 points.
Bishop Ford of Brooklyn was second with 37 points and Archbishop Molloy of Queens, the defending champion, was third, with 33.
There were three double winners in the meet, run in 90-plus degree heat at a facility that has little shade.
In view of the heat, the most amazing double was registered by William Vespe.
The Molloy senior, who is headed for the University of Houston, first won the 3,000-meter steeplechase in 9 minutes 36.7 seconds and 90 minutes later returned to the track to win the 3,200-meter run in 9:21.1.


Corrections
A Recordings View column on April 26 referred incorrectly to Pinchas Zukerman's new recording of the Beethoven violin sonatas.
It was Mr.
Zukerman's second release of these works, not his first.


Streetscapes: The Fred R. French Building; Refurbishing 'Mesopatamia'
THE highly colored terra cotta of the 1927 Fred F. French Building at 551 Fifth Avenue, at 45th Street, has been wrapped in scaffolding for two years.
This fall, as a $9 million facade restoration is completed, it will reappear.
A fresh look at the building's ancient styling and skyscraper modernity should give anyone a start.
Fred Fillmore French, developer of the building, began his real estate career in 1908.
In 1921 he hit on the "French plan" to finance his development activity -- each project was sold as common stock to small investors.
By avoiding traditional bank financing he was able to maximize both control and profits, a goal he furthered by organizing his own departments for architecture and property management.


Realtors Say the 90's Mood Is Sober
IT began with a wrong turn off a highway.
With that and what they have come to call "the souring of their romance with city life." David Nelson and Jazan Higgins, executives with publishing concerns in Manhattan, were driving in the county one Sunday afternoon last spring when they found themselves on Main Street here.
The couple recalled coming upon a sleepy village with the charm of a bygone era -- a quaintness, they said, that no amount of money could buy in New York City.
They also remembered looking at pictures of houses for sale in the windows of Peter J. Riolo Inc., a Hastings real-estate concern, and asking each other, "Why not?"


Motels Turn Their Attention to Security
SPURRED partly by well-publicized negligence settlements against Motel 6 in the last year, safety gets increased attention in motels these days.
When I stayed in a Holiday Inn last month in Columbia, Mo., I got a plastic card with a magnetic strip -- like the ones in high-priced downtown hotels -- to open an electronic lock on my room door, instead of the metal key for a tumbler lock.
Increasingly these electronic locks, which may cost $250 to install, are found in budget places.
The reason is that a metal key often has a room number on it and is easy for a criminal to copy or keep for theft later.
A Holiday Inn spokeswoman said that the organization "highly recommended" that hotels convert to the key card when they modernized, and that key card systems were required for all its new buildings.
Because franchise holders are not required to report on this recommendation, the organization does not know how many have converted.
Lock Systems Crucial
A motel's system for locks is crucial to guest security.
Ray Ellis, head of risk management for the American Hotel and Motel Association, estimates that break-ins are reduced 75 to 80 percent when electronic locks are used.


Conquest of Outer Space: The Stamp
After a last-minute change in design, the United States and the Soviet Union -- uh, make that Russia -- are issuing eight stamps on Friday to celebrate their joint and separate achievements in space.
When the design was announced on Dec. 11, the American and Soviet astronauts shown on the upper two stamps of the blocks of four bore their nations' initials on their space suits: "USA" and "CCCP," the Cyrillic equivalent of U.S.S.R.


Children's Books; Bookshelf
Additional titles of interest:
RED DAY, GREEN DAY.
By Edith Kunhardt.
Illustrated by Marylin Hafner.
Greenwillow. $14. (Ages 3 and up) The real subject of this charming tale is the kindergarten curriculum, specifically show-and-tell projects that involve identifying and celebrating colors.
Andrew's jolly class observes the colors, marking a red day, a green day and so on, and there is a multicolor surprise at the end.


Corrections
A map last Sunday with an article about Africa after the cold war mislabeled a country.
It was Burkina Faso; Upper Volta is its former name.


Twofer


No Tarnish On the Cup
To the Sports Editor:
While sharing Joe Lapointe's indignation over Adam Graves's slashing and injuring Mario Lemieux, I am a bit perplexed by his histrionics.
Lapointe exclaimed that if the Rangers had won the Stanley Cup, it would have been "a tainted championship, a tarnished trophy. Let them drink sweet champagne from it until they get a hangover."


The Big Guy Deflated
THEY are the brutes, the steak-a-day colossi, hulked out on hormones both natural and synthetic.
In ninth-grade gym class, they took the longest showers, endlessly soaping their cavernous armpits and actually drinking from the shower head as the rest of us looked on in fear and envy.
In college, they carbo-loaded at special "training tables." Eventually, the lucky ones "went pro" and managed to earn a few million bucks before blowing out a knee or a shoulder or cracking up their Testarossas.
In middle age, they put on flab and called themselves "businessmen," opening supper clubs called Jocko's or starring in low-budget flicks.
The big guys.
Mike Tyson, the late Lyle Alzado, even Magic Johnson.
Looking more and more like a socially endangered species -- Homo humongous americanus -- the big guys are falling, tripping themselves up.
Their stories are very different, of course, but all share the theme of the strong man laid low by his craving to feel even stronger, more dominant.


For Mears, It's Roar and Peace
To understand how Rick Mears, defending champion in the Indianapolis 500, has held up during a May that has been one of the less-inspiring ones for Penske Racing, you need only hear his own summation of the month.
"The checkered flag hasn't fallen yet," Mears replies.


STOLEN PROMISE
Patricia Raybon writes that she feels anger "when accomplished black men choose white women for their wives" (Hers: "Stolen Promise," May 3).
I suppose I must be one of the white women with whom she is angry.
My husband came to this country as an immigrant from Jamaica in 1977.
He and I met in college and married in 1986.
I have seen Raybon's anger in the faces of the black women I pass in Crown Heights, where my husband and I often take our two children to visit his relatives.
I am never prepared for the volume of hatred I see in their eyes.


Happy Birthday
UP in a side room of the executive offices of the New York Stock Exchange, the photo session was almost finished.
"Can we
do
it, please?" Matthew Rich, a publicity agent, was saying to two dozen men in black tie and one woman in a blue dress who stood around a cake and smiled as the bulbs started flashing.
"Don't block other faces and don't touch the cake," Mr.
Rich told the stock-exchange chiefs who had come from around the world to celebrate the Big Board's bicentennial and to help initiate its foundation to benefit public education in New York City.
They shuffled demurely on the beige carpet, hands at sides.


An Open Letter To Fay Vincent
Dear Mr. Vincent:
Say it ain't so!
Please tell me you're not seriously considering the reinstatement of George Steinbrenner.


In the Region: Long Island; Recent Sales
Commack 160,000
6 Byron Road  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 32-year-old ranch; dining room, eat-in kitchen, den, family room, basement, 1-car garage; taxes $3,900.
East Massapequa 148,000
38 East Hamilton Avenue  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 60-year-old ranch; dining room, eat-in kitchen, 2-car garage; taxes $3,500.
East Northport 192,000
5 Barnett Place  5-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 30-year-old high ranch; family room with fireplace, deck, 2-car garage, 0.5 acre; taxes $4,800.
Nesconset 183,000
73 Empress Pines Drive  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 22-year-old colonial; dining room, eat-in kitchen, den w/fireplace, 2-car garage; taxes $5,000.
Seaford 240,000
4059 Hudson Avenue  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 35-year-old split level; dining room, eat-in kitchen, 1-car garage; taxes $6,800.
Smithtown 260,000
22 Whitney Gate  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath 27-year-old colonial; dining room, eat-in kitchen, 2 fireplaces, 1 acre waterfront; taxes $6,200.
OTHER AREAS West Hartford, Conn. 134,000
61 Knollwood Road  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 42-year-old ranch; enclosed porch, hardwood floors, 0.25 acre; taxes $2,619.
Armonk, N.Y. 1.175 million
6 Wampus Lakes Drive
5-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, year-old frame brick; 2 fireplaces, formal dining room, library, deck, Jacuzzi, 3 acres; taxes not yet assessed.
Bridgewater, N.J. 193,000
821 Country Club Road
3-bedroom, 2-bath, 32-year-old ranch; patio, 2-acre plot, fireplace; taxes $3,521.


Name That Decade
A DECADE is a decade is a media construction.
Just try getting into the Park Avenue Cafe to discuss the earnest, penitential 90's with a friend and you'll see what I mean.
A phone call to the restaurant to book a table produced the same results on three separate occasions in the last two weeks: nothing available until 9:30.
So much for everyone sitting at home, munching on terra chips and watching the latest video release.


Passionate Musical Bares Life's Bounties
ON the one hand a story about love, death, betrayal, murder and suicide seems an unlikely tale for the musical theater.
On the other hand, as Tevya of "Fiddler on the Roof" might say, "What else is there?"
In "Zorba," at Theater Three in Port Jefferson through June 20, life is the subject and a drifter named Zorba is its interpreter.
The passionate musical, which is based on Nikos Kazantzakis's novel "Zorba the Greek," is by Joseph Stein, John Kander and Fred Ebb.


No Headline
IN an office overlooking the gardens at the Wave Hill estate, a research tool is being cultivated to revolutionize access to information on the history of American landscape architecture.
The Catalogue of Landscape Records in the United States is a data base that notes the location of document collections referring to land use.
In down-to-earth terms, this resource could guide a researcher to the professional papers of a landscape architect, the site plan for a college campus, aerial photographs of a geographical region or the historic files of a local garden club.
It could assist in the restoration of an overgrown 19th-century cemetery or the reproduction of a garden from the 1920's.


Exile Is Reported Imminent For the Thai Military Ruler
Thailand's beleaguered Prime Minister prepared to flee into exile today after the King granted all Government officials amnesty for wrongdoing in the violent suppression of pro-democracy demonstrations last week, diplomats and Thai officials said.
They said the Prime Minister, Suchinda Kraprayoon, had been expected to leave from the military airport in Bangkok this morning but delayed his departure for several hours to be certain that a number of his senior military advisers also received full clemency.


A Political Movement Blends Its Ideas From Left and Right
HERE'S a barely noticed fact that could augur a serious change in the political landscape: not everyone who agrees with Dan Quayle about Murphy Brown is a conservative.
On the same day the Vice President complained in California that the popular television series was contributing to the woes of the poor by rendering single motherhood glamorous and derogating the importance of fathers, two speakers at a largely liberal gathering in New York City made exactly the same point.


Too Bare For America
The May issue of French Glamour magazine contains a nude photo display of Isabella Rossellini, which was deemed too racy for the American market.
The four pages with the most explicit photos, by Paolo Roversi, were cut out of the copies distributed in the United States and Britain.
"The reason it was taken out was the nudity," said a source involved with the magazine's distribution, who spoke on condition of anonymity.
"The mood in this country right now is that you can't sell that stuff. Also, the June issue has a topless model on the cover that will be covered up with a sticker" in the United States.


Enjoy!
In Donna Adele, an authentically Italian restaurant in Washington, an Italian headwaiter took my order, ripped the page off his order book with a flourish, handed it to the Italian waiter, adding a few words in Italian, and said to me cheerfully, over his shoulder, "
Enjoy!
"
That's not Italian.
The same concluding good wish was offered on the island of Maui, in Hawaii, by a waitress in a grass skirt (she was from Seattle, but the uniform called for grass skirts).
Again, not
Aloha
or
Mahalo
, not even the French
Bon appetit
, but
Enjoy!


Clamps Often Have a Pivotal Role
CLAMPS are valuable in any collection of home-improvement tools.
Besides holding together pieces for gluing, they can secure materials safely when working with power tools and sharp hand tools.
C-clamps and their variants are the most versatile.
Conventional C-clamps, which are the least expensive, are made entirely of metal.
Their name derives from their shape, which resembles the letter C. They are commonly available with jaw openings ranging from 3 to 12 inches.
For home repairs, C-clamps with 4- or 6-inch openings, which cost about $5 each, are usually the most practical.


Vegetable Time
Inspect hemlocks for the white cottony egg cases of the woolly adelgid.
Spray the entire tree -- the tops and bottoms of all leaves -- with horticultural oil.
If the tree is large, hire an arborist with a hydraulic sprayer.
Continue to plant beets, carrots and lettuce for continued harvest throughout the summer.
Sow warm-weather crops, like corn and beans, and don't wait much longer to plant zinnias, cosmos, cleome and other annual flowers.


Data Update
NATIONAL HOUSING TRENDS
*4*(In thousands of units, seasonally adjusted annual rates)
Mar. 92
Mar. 91
Change
Starts
1,344
918
+46.4%
Completions
1,104
1,188
- 7.1%
Sales
513
497
+ 3.2%
*4*Source: Census Bureau, U.S. Department of Commerce
*4*MORTGAGE INTEREST RATES (Averages)
Last Week
Previous Week
Year Ago
New York
Conventional (30-yr)
8.80
8.93
9.77
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
6.00
6.04
7.37
New Jersey
Conventional (30-yr)
8.69
8.80
9.59
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.82
5.80
7.27
Connecticut
Conventional (30-yr)
8.72
8.83
9.59
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.91
5.86
7.08
Co-ops (N.Y.)
Conventional (30-yr)
8.92
9.06
9.86
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
6.38
6.42
7.71
*4*Indexes for Adjustable-Rate Mortgages*
1-yr. Treasury security
4.12
4.25
6.13
National Mortgage Contract Rate
8.14
8.14
9.24
*Rates on most adjustable mortgages are set 1 to 3 percentage points above these indexes.  (Source: HSH Associates)


Jo Ann Dagy, John A. O'Hara Jr.
Jo Ann Dagy, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William J. Dagy of Shawnee, Okla., was married there yesterday to John Armstrong O'Hara Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
O'Hara of Northfield, Ill.
The Rev.
Michael Roethler officiated at St.
Benedict Roman Catholic Church.
Ms.
Dagy, 31 years old, is a senior account executive at Perry Ellis International in New York.
She graduated from Oklahoma State University.
Mr.
O'Hara, 33, is an assistant vice president at Merrill Lynch in New York.
He graduated from Georgetown University and received an M.B.A. from New York University.


Making a Difference; Taking the Ego and Emotion Out of a Bank Merger
For an M.B.A. project, Allen L. Lastinger Jr. wrote in 1971 about the growth opportunities for banks in Florida, where his family had lived for more than 150 years and where he planned to spend his entire career.
He landed a job with Barnett Banks Inc. upon graduation and put some of his ideas to work as the state blossomed.
More than 20 years later, Florida is still growing, but banks are consolidating, and Mr.
Lastinger, now Barnett's president and chief operating officer, has emerged as one of the executives driving that trend.
Last Monday, Barnett announced that it would acquire First Florida Banks Inc. of Tampa, a merger of Florida's two oldest banks that would solidify Barnett's rank as the state's largest.


Steady Local Gains by Women Fuel More Runs for High Office
MURPHY BROWN is not the only woman cutting a wide swath through American politics this year.
There are Lynn H. Yeakel in Pennsylvania and Carol Moseley Braun in Illinois, a pair of surprise Democratic Senate nominees who have solid chances of winning in November.
They may soon be joined by women in both California Senate races: former Mayor Dianne Feinstein of San Francisco, who is considered the likely winner in the June 2 primary, and Representative Barbara Boxer, who has a tougher, three-way battle for nomination.


Networking; Software That Spans 2 Categories
Ask hardcore corporate number crunchers to recommend a favorite piece of spreadsheet software, and you may be surprised to find that they do not mention Lotus 1-2-3 and Microsoft's Excel -- but cite the Sinper Corporation's TM/1 instead.
The product, which is actually a data base spreadsheet program, makes life easier for financial analysts who must combine scores of spreadsheets sent to the home office.
The usual practice for consolidating all the numbers is to create a master sheet with a program like Excel or 1-2-3 and electronically cut and paste all the pieces together.
Another approach is to link the spreadsheets.
Both methods are time consuming and allow the data to be viewed only from a set of predetermined assumptions.
If those assumptions change, an entirely new spreadsheet must be constructed.
For example, if the master spreadsheet is set up to view a company's sales numbers by division, the branch office numbers might not be broken out.
To see them, a new spreadsheet would have to be created.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Personal Finances; Perot Reneged on Pledge to Reagan
A little more than a year after pledging $2.5 million to support President Ronald Reagan's official library, in thanks for the President's "years of outstanding leadership and service," Ross Perot reneged on most of the pledge in 1987 because he apparently was angry over what he saw as a lack of interest in American servicemen missing in Southeast Asia.
The episode suggests the importance of Mr.
Perot's experiences with the prisoner-of-war and missing-in-action issue in changing his feelings toward the Reagan Administration and then Vice President George Bush, whom Mr.
Perot now seeks to replace in the White House.


A Different Kind of Ship Is Viewed in New York Harbor


From the Pool, Comes a Cry: Don't Tread on Me!
Jenny Thompson wraps herself in the American flag every night when she goes to bed.
Her comforter is all stars and stripes and quilted padding.
Her pillow, her lampshade, are both decorated in red, white and blue.
She tried to hang an oversized flag on the ceiling of her dorm room at Stanford so she could go to sleep dreaming the American dream about medal stands and national anthems.
The flag wouldn't stick.
It went on the wall, instead.


Business Diary/May 17-22
THE ECONOMY A Civil End to Salomon's Bond Market Caper


POSTINGS: Lynbrook Library; Joining the Old and the New
The neo-classical Lynbrook Public Library, which opened in Lynbrook, L.I., in 1929, is still impressive -- especially its 12-foot-high fanlight windows and wide stairway leading to the entrance.
But the 7,500-square-foot building had been outgrown by the village (pop. 19,208) and by its collection of 85,000 volumes.
"It lacked space, had very little seating, was not accessible to the handicapped and its wooden floors sagged," said Natalie Lapp, the library director.


Night Games: $75
Forget the barbecue sauce.
What your next backyard cook-out really needs is 1,000 watts of pure unadulterated halogen light.
Regent's portable lighting system holds twin floodlights atop a stand that can be extended to seven feet.
Regent's Lighting of Burlington, N.C., suggests you use the lights nocturnally on the boat or to paint the garage.
But if you really want the neighbors to love you, why not hook a few of these babies together and play a little night baseball?
In yellow, $75, at Home Depot stores.


Q and A
Responsibility for a Roof Question: When I bought my co-op I purchased the rights to the use of the roof as well.
The proprietary lease says that my responsibility is to maintain and repair the roof.
Now the building needs a new roof, and my co-op board is telling me that it is my responsibility to take up the old roof and replace it.


From Honda, An All-New '92 Prelude
THE question comes up time and again: What kind of car should I buy?
I get it on the phone, in the mail, from friends.
And, like a good psychoanalyst, I answer the question with a question.
What kind of car do you
want
? Because you won't really be happy with anything else.
But the answer is never easy.
It depends on what kind of vehicle you need, obviously, and on how much you want to pay.
It depends on how long you will keep it, on your ego, on a balance of safety and pizazz and cost of operation.


2 Paths, One Goal: Taking First Place
GARY KASPAROV of Russia, the world champion, and Vasily Ivanchuk, a Ukrainian grandmaster, tied for first place in the Dortmund International, which finished at the end of April, but got there in different ways.
Kasparov sought wild complexity but went too far against Grandmasters Gata Kamsky of Brooklyn and Robert Hubner of Germany and was soundly punished.
He compensated by winning five games.


BASEBALL: National League; The How-Do-You-Do Is Truly Fine for Alou
Expos 7, Braves 6
MONTREAL, May 23 (AP) -- Larry Walker and Tim Wallach hit consecutive home runs in the eighth inning today, leading Montreal over Atlanta and giving the Expos' new manager, Felipe Alou, his second straight victory.
The score was tied, 5-5, when Walker stepped to the plate and hit his eighth home run of the season off Mike Stanton (0-2).
Four pitches later, Wallach followed with his second.
Wallach was returned to third base by Alou after playing first base for the first seven weeks of the season.


The Olympia Ordeal: It Won't End Soon
Up and down Wall Street, the titanic failure of Olympia &amp; York Developments Ltd. was met with smiles and handshakes.
The ink on the Canadian bankruptcy petition was scarcely dry when analysts began to explore how this news too might be turned into a plausible reason to buy common stocks.
For one thing, they said, the Federal Reserve might have to lower interest rates again.
What could be more bullish?
Then, some said, the ordeal of the Reichmanns marked the end of an era, not the beginning of one.
The centipede of the real estate market had at long last dropped its final shoe.
As for Olympia's $15 billion of debt, what of it?
It was no larger than the debt of the average third world country, and the third world debt crisis was over.


Perot Dominates California Race That He's Not In
Ross Perot is threatening to steal the California primary, too.
In a week of unrelieved good news for the Texas billionaire on the national scene, he also hogged the spotlight in the country's largest state, which holds its election in 10 days, on June 2.
The Los Angeles Times poll confirmed what the California Poll had said the week before: the maverick independent is leading President Bush and Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas, the likely Democratic Presidential nominee.


Where Patrons Can Design Their Own Pizza
IMAGINE walking into a restaurant for the second time and finding that everything looks the same -- except the name.
It's about what happened to us in New Canaan recently when we strolled down the brick walkway leading to the back of the building on Main Street that housed the Sunrise Pizza Cafe, which had opened to much praise last summer.
But in its place was another pizza parlor called Tom E Toes (as in tomatoes), which utilizes the identical low-key decor (a stylized rendering of a map of Italy on the stairwell, posters and signs in the main, second-floor dining space).
Like its predecessor, Tom E Toes also serves the Norwalk-made Atlantic Amber beer as well as Italian wines.
Even our waiter looked familiar; he had survived the change in ownership.


One Big Thank-You Note
For moral, oral and technical support I am very grateful to Gary, Binky, Marie, Morgan, Mona, Michael, Nick, Terry, Bret, Barry, Liz, Carl, Rust, Erroll, Sonny and Garth."
-- Acknowledgments from Jay McInerney's new novel, "Brightness Falls" (Alfred A. Knopf; $23)


MAY 17-23: Heeere's Jay; With His Family on Stage, Carson Says Goodbye
Johnny Carson relinquished his reign over middle-of-the-night America in the early hours of yesterday morning.
He departed the "Tonight" show stage a show-business icon after three decades as the most laughed-at man in the country.
His last turn was not the quite the same as the other 4,500-plus editions he hosted.
For once a main feature of the night was tears, not laughter, as he thanked his staff and family and remembered his son, Rick, who died in a car crash last year.


Wynton Marsalis Raises a Joyful Noise
When Wynton Marsalis, the 30-year-old trumpeter and most celebrated jazz musician of his generation, hits the stage at Lincoln Center on Wednesday night, he'll be playing in a style that, for the most part, can't be heard on his recordings.
The audience's unfamiliarity won't be a new experience for Mr.
Marsalis.
Since 1989, his music has taken a radical new form that has primarily been heard only in clubs and in concerts.
Mr.
Marsalis has been moving so fast that his recordings haven't been able to keep up with him.
At least until the release of "Blue Interlude" last week, which includes a 45-minute composition of the same name.
Three years ago, Mr.
Marsalis expanded his group to a septet, and since then he has been producing long works that take advantage of the group's size.
The pieces resound with echoes of jazz's masters: Duke Ellington, Louis Armstrong, Miles Davis, John Coltrane, Charles Mingus.


Landscape of Absurdity and Lots of Contradictions
FIRST, the "Falsettos" musicals, now, "Reckless." The Hartford Stage Company started and is concluding the season with contemporary works about the search for identity and contact in an age of threatened and redefined relationships.
What Hartford Stage is trying to prove with so bold a beginning and ending must have something to do with the healing power of theater.
And, like it or not, audiences are being confronted with the shaking up of complacent attitudes and established forms.
In "Reckless," Rachel, in bed on Christmas Eve, jabbering incessantly about Santa Claus, about how "terminally happy" she is, is told sulkily and simply by her husband, Tom, "I took a contract out on your life."


Wood Constructions and a Realist's Paintings Share a Show
BLUE HILL PLAZA here is a corporate hive existing more or less in symbiosis with the Canada geese attracted by its lake.
At this time of year, however, the balance of power is thrown off by the emergence of goslings, eight of which were recently observed stumping down the corporate drive with one parent at the head of the line and the other bringing up the rear.
It was a sight worth seeing, as are the paintings and sculpture displayed inside the building.
The paintings are by Francisco Bologna, who, though he studied for a while during the 1950's, notably with Reginald Marsh at the Art Students League, describes himself as largely self-taught.
In a career of some 30 years, he has exhibited in Manhattan and Italy as well as in East Hampton, where he runs a gallery of his own.
These are also the locales where he has done most of his painting.


There, Out on the Horizon, It's Another Cup Challenge
As the shipping containers along San Diego's waterfront begin to fill up with a year's worth of gear from the 1992 America's Cup races, new challengers are emerging for the next event.
The San Diego Yacht Club, whose America
team successfully defended the cup last week against the challenge of Il Moro di Venezia of Italy, plans to stage the next series in 1995 off San Diego.


Sallie Wilson, Keeper Of the Tudor Flame
Antony Tudor's "Undertow" is a ballet that can amaze and disturb.
One person who was certainly startled when she first saw it many years ago was a teen-age dance student named Sallie Wilson.
"I had to cover my face with my hands and peek at the stage from time to time through my fingers," Ms.
Wilson recalled in a recent conversation.
"I was so very virginal and Hugh Laing was so sexual in the leading role that the ballet frightened me."


Greenburgh Raises a New Issue Against Westhelp
EIGHTEEN months after a Westhelp complex to provide temporary housing for the homeless opened in Greenburgh, neighborhood opponents have mounted a new attack against the 108-unit project.
Although elected officials and residents agree that the operation has run smoothly, they remain suspicious of the Westhelp organization.
Last week, as the latest of several court decisions appeared to end efforts to limit the project's impact, neighborhood opponents released evidence of what they consider a new threat.
They said the county was about to renege on its promise to keep homeless children out of the Valhalla schools.


Waldheim Is Missing Link in Austrian Elections
When Austrians vote Sunday in runoff elections for the country's successor to President Kurt Waldheim, it seems clear that few people here will be consciously thinking of him at all.
The stormy debate that broke out during the 1986 campaign over Mr.
Waldheim's less than frank public statements about his service as an intelligence officer with the German Army during World War II has long since ebbed.
Neither candidate -- Thomas Klestil, the conservative People's Party nominee and chief of the diplomatic corps, or Rudolf Streicher, a former Social Democratic minister -- has made Mr.
Waldheim's international isolation a campaign topic, although some Austrians clearly were pained that their nation's leader was treated as an international pariah.


Melanie Klein? She Shrunk Her Kids
I'm fairly sure that the British playwright Nicholas Wright intends for us to be of several minds about Melanie Klein, the controversial Viennese psychoanalyst who is the central character of his 1988 drama, "Mrs. Klein."
A disciple of Freud, she was, it would appear, something of a tyrant who lay down her pioneering theories of child development as if they were law.
But her combative temperament and her keen mind made her a fascinating tyrant, and she was not easy to ignore.
For much of her adult life, which she spent in London beginning in 1926, she seems to have been at the center of one professional storm or another.


Relatively Speaking


Snow-White Insect Is Hemlock Poison
THE woolly adelgid is starting to sound like the insect that ate Long Island -- and Connecticut, too.
This tiny insect, a brownish-red oval creature no longer than one thirty-second of an inch, is sucking the life from the hemlocks of backyards and wild forests alike.
A single female can lay 50 to 300 eggs, and there are two generations produced every year.
So it's small wonder, that if left uncontrolled, the adelgid can kill a tree in a single year.


Corrections
A brief report on May 10 with an article about the sculptor Eva Hesse referred incorrectly to a work credited by the artist Sol LeWitt as a great influence on him.
It was "Metronomic Irregularity II," not "Metronomic Irregularity I"; it has three panels, not two.


Sarah Miller, John Hodges Hart
Sarah Rogers Miller, a daughter of William R. Miller of New York and the late Nancy M. H. Miller, was married yesterday in Garden City, L.I., to John Hodges Hart, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert J. K. Hart of Cedarhurst, L.I.
The Very Rev.
Robert V. Wilshire performed the Episcopal ceremony at the Cathedral of the Incarnation, assisted by the Rev.
Alan Chisholm.
Mrs.
Hart, 28 years old, graduated from Mary Baldwin College.
She is an interior decorator in New York.
Her father is the president of the William B. May Management Corporation, a New York real-estate company.
She is the stepdaughter of Mrs.
William R. Miller.


Collette Brown, Anthony Bruce
Anne Collette Brown, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
J.
Terrell Brown Sr. of Baton Rouge, La., was married there yesterday to Anthony Dean Bruce, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
E.
Edward Bruce of Washington.
The Rev.
Francis Daunt performed the ceremony at St.
James Episcopal Church.
Mrs.
Bruce, who is 25 years old and known as Collette, graduated from Southern Methodist University.
Until recently she was an account coordinator for the Young &amp; Rubicam advertising agency in New York.
Her father is president and chief executive of United Companies Financial Corporation in Baton Rouge.


Italy Cautious on Bosnia Refugees
Faced with the possibility of 5,000 Bosnian war refugees gathering on their borders, the authorities in Italy displayed increasing reluctance today to become Europe's only haven for the fugitives and said they had not decided whether to admit them.
News reports from the Croatian port of Split said more than 5,000 refugees who had been held hostage by Serbian gunmen in Sarajevo, the Bosnian capital, arrived by bus and car late Friday.
Croatian officials were quoted as saying the refugees, many of them pregnant women, were bound for Italy after a perilous journey across the mountains to Split, a resort on the Adriatic.


Kacey Constable And Paul Nugent
Mrs.
W.
Pepper Constable of Princeton, N.J., has announced the engagement of her daughter Katharine Celeste Constable to Dr.
Paul Francis Nugent, a son of Brigid Nugent of Mullingar, Ireland, and the late Thomas Nugent.
A July wedding is planned.
Miss Constable, who is known as Kacey, graduated from Kirkland College and Georgetown University and received a master's degree in landscape architecture from the University of Pennsylvania.
She is a landscape architect at the Philadelphia firm of Hanna/Olin Ltd.
Her father, the late Dr.
Constable, was the chief of medicine at the Princeton Medical Center.
Her mother, Elizabeth Howe Constable, now retired, was the coach of the women's varsity squash team at Princeton University.
The bride's grandmother Mrs.
William F. Howe was the first national women's squash champion.
THE Howe Cup, awarded to the national women's hardball-team champion, is named for her, the bride's mother and her aunt, Margaret Howe Reed.


'Home Fires,' a Look at Women in Wartime
ALTHOUGH there is no need for yet another show that promises a blast from the past, somehow those re-creating the World War II Stage Door Canteen revues have not worn out their welcome.
One's high hopes for "Home Fires," which is currently being produced by the American Stage Company, were further sparked by the prospect of a new feminist take on an era in which patriotism was honest and simple.
Then, it was easy to differentiate between good and bad, to separate enemies from heroes (who did exist).
And songs were catchy, instantly evergreen.


Newest U.S. Teams Have a Texas Accent
AS a result of the international team playoffs that ended in Memphis a week ago, the United States representation in the 1992 world championships in Salsomaggiore, Italy, in August will have a Texas accent.
On the open team, Seymon Deutsch of Laredo, Tex., will try to defend the Olympiad team title along with Bob Hamman and Bob Wolff, both of Dallas, Eric Rodwell of Naperville, Ill., and Jeff Meckstroth of Tampa, Fla.
Their sixth player, replacing the late Jim Jacoby, will be Michael Rosenberg of Manhattan, and Dan Morse of Houston will be the nonplaying captain.
If they win, Hamman will move past Pietro Forquet of Italy in the all-time list of world master-point winners, but will still trail Giorgio Belladonna and Benito Garozzo.


Dan Enright, 74, TV Producer; Was Figure in Quiz Show Scandal
Dan Enright, a producer of some of television's best-known quiz shows who admitted playing a central role in the rigging scandals that shattered the industry in the late 1950's, died Friday in Los Angeles.
He was 74 years old and died after a brief illness, a family spokesman said, The Associated Press reported.


U.S. Acts the Spoiler in Global Climate Talks
To the Editor:
Last week delegates from 143 countries reached tentative accord on a Framework Convention on Climate Change after marathon debates during their final negotiating session at the United Nations in New York.
As it stands, the convention requires that industrialized countries look to "return by the end of the present decade to earlier levels of anthropogenic emissions of carbon dioxide and greenhouse gases" but includes no specific reductions or timetable.
While the convention has been criticized as being too weak, a second criticism must be directed not to the result but to the process.


KENYAN CATHOLICS GIVE MOI A SHOVE
In an unusually blunt statement released on Friday amid continuing turmoil and tension in this East African nation, the Roman Catholic Cardinal and Kenya's 18 Catholic bishops said the Government had lost its right to rule and suggested that it resign.
The church hierarchy's warning increases pressure on President Daniel arap Moi, whom the clerics severely criticized three weeks ago, blaming him and his officials for repeated ethnic strife.
In their new statement, the clerics said the Government was turning a blind eye to "trained warriors" responsible for the violence.


Sports of The Times; Don King's Desperate Disclaimers
ONLY a few steps from the boutiques on the corner of Madison Avenue and East 69th Street, the crown logo of Don King Productions perches above a closed-circuit camera that peers down at anybody ringing the bell.
Hung over the sidewalk like an arched eyebrow, the camera was installed several years ago after the boxing promoter's offices were firebombed.
Uneasy lies the head that wears the crown of Don King's fright-wig hair.


Hamburg Airport
To the Editor: Friends of mine in New York (where I lived for 27 years until October 1990) sent me your informative feature about my new domicile, "What's Doing in Hamburg (Feb. 16), which is excellent on all our good points. It leaves out the "warts," but these may become apparent only to permanent residents.
One aspect may well be of importance to travelers arriving by air.
The new terminal, opened in October 1991, brought adverse comments printed in newspapers from passengers who had to walk 250 yards, including two narrow staircases, to Terminal 2 without a lift, moving walkways or escalators.


A Blueprint of the Future Along the Hudson River
In the three decades since the West Side piers bristled with waterborne commerce, New York City has been trying to revive the decaying Hudson River shoreline.
For the most part, the efforts have produced one failed plan after another, seemingly as numerous as the stark pilings that mark the voids where piers once stood.
But in the last few weeks, a series of proposals and decisions have come forth that have the potential for remaking much of the West Side waterfront, from Battery Park City to West 72d Street.


Stewart and Welch Lose Their 1-2 Punch
Two years ago, when the Oakland Athletics won their third successive pennant, Dave Stewart and Bob Welch, the one-two punch of their pitching staff, started successive games 29 times.
They won successive games 13 times, and the team won their consecutive starts 4 other times for a total of 17 double victories.
Only twice did Stewart and Welch, or the team for that matter, lose consecutive games.
Last year, the Oakland pennant-winning streak stopped, and the results of the Stewart-Welch starts were revealing.
They pitched consecutive games 26 times, and they won in tandem only three times while losing twice.
The Athletics won their consecutive starts four other times for a total of seven and lost three other times for a total of five.
Instrumental Factors
With Stewart and Welch, or any other talented combination of starters, pitching effectively, a team is going to generate winning streaks and avoid long losing streaks.
That combination is instrumental in winning division championships.


Making It in the Majors
Even on a day like today, when the breeze that rustles the grass on an Indiana baseball diamond has kept tempers cool and spirits up, Penny Marshall is gloomy.
The director of the back-to-back hits "Big" and "Awakenings" had thought it would be refreshing to spend the summer in the Midwest's affable sunshine directing "A League of Their Own," about two baseball-playing sisters.
But she hadn't bargained on 110-degree heat that has had actresses passing out from heatstroke in the middle of a take, hitting the ground like a missed fly ball; she wasn't prepared for the broken noses and concussions, the wild pitches that nearly beaned the cameramen or the organizational nightmare of directing a cast of 32 actresses (most of whom still throw like girls in spite of eight weeks of training) and 6,000 extras.


Barbecuing Returns, With Twists
MEMORIAL DAY weekend marks the beginning of one of summer's great pleasures: eating outdoors.
In the last few years, though, the standard scene -- Dad grilling hamburgers while Mom tosses a salad -- has altered.
The barbecue has become the place for cooking anything from tofu to frogs' legs.
And instead of ball-park mustard and ketchup, salsas, cold sauces or compound butters are served on the side.
The standard tools for the barbecue chef have also changed.
In California it is now against the law to use lighter fluid as a fire starter because of its contribution to air pollution (not to mention the bad taste it can impart to food).
Instead, people are using kindling.
But a useful new product for lighting charcoal easily has just been produced by Griffo Grill.
Called Cob Lites, it consists of corn cobs that have been dipped in food-grade paraffin.
They produce an intense heat when burned, and they don't smell.
They are available at Williams-Sonoma stores and from their mail order catalogue, from the Chef's Catalogue and at Crate and Barrel stores.


Betsy Morgan, Charles Robinson
Dr. and Mrs.
John L. Morgan of Chestertown, Md., have announced the engagement of their daughter Elizabeth Griswold Morgan to Charles Paul Robinson, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles R. Robinson of New York and Washington, Conn.
An August wedding is planned.
Ms.
Morgan, 25 years old and known as Betsy, is a market manager in the pensions department at Metropolitan Life in New York.
She graduated from Haverford College, as did her fiance.
Her father is a pediatrician in Chestertown, where her mother, Bonnie Morgan, is a social worker.


Read His Lips
President Bush himself has admitted that "fluency in English is something that I'm often not accused of," and the editors of The New Republic for some time have been underlining the truth of Mr.
Bush's observation by keeping an eye on his distinctive approach to the language.


Striving for Balance
Weak and wobbly though it may be in some ways, the treaty on preserving the world's biological species adopted on Friday in Nairobi, Kenya, is being characterized by some conservationists as a bona fide breakthrough in dealing with the central problem to be addressed at next week's Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro: how to accommodate economic development without damaging the planet's life support system.
As the global economy expands and the population of developing countries soars, humans are destroying natural ecosystems and habitats at a rate that some biologists fear will result in the extinction of perhaps a quarter of the world's plant, animal and microbial species in the next 50 years.
The organisms are part of the interdependent web of life vital to all species, including Homo sapiens.


Noted With Pleasure
The Spiritual Life of Stone
Great sculpture, the artist Henry Moore argues, must do more than just reflect the world's surfaces.
This is from "Henry Moore on Sculpture," edited by Philip James (Da Capo, paper).


RECORD BRIEFS
Seventeenth-Century Madrigals
Guillemette Laurens, mezzo-soprano; Capriccio Stravagante conducted by Skip Sempe.
Deutsche Harmonia Mundi 77220-2; CD.


More Amendments Lurk in the Mists of History
"AMENDMENTS to the Constitution ought to not be too frequently made . . . (if) continually tinkered with it would lose all its prestige and dignity, and the old instrument would be lost sight of altogether in a short time."
When President Andrew Johnson said that in 1866, did he really expect the states to dillydally for 200 years before ratifying Constitutional amendments?


SHEER STRENGTH
It would be easy to blame it on the sun -- for making designers poke holes, drop stitches and wrap bodies in gossamer fabric that flies away with the softest sea breeze.
But it isn't just the heat that's sparking the current interest in sheer.
After staring at pages and pages of randy advertisements, people are more than ready to be seduced by a little mystery.
The power of the blatant is increasingly giving way to innuendo.
At the same time, men and women have been discovering that those days spent chugging to nowhere on the Versaclimber and nights of picking through pomodoro while craving carbonara have produced a gain in narcissism as much as a loss in body fat.
These days, what you see is not necessarily what you get, but it sure is fun imagining.


Mediation Smooths the Way Toward Divorce
AT the Divorce Mediation Center in West Hartford a couple can divide the assets of a marriage and develop a settlement agreement and petition that can be brought to court in an uncontested divorce.
The center, which was opened at the end of 1989, is run by Emily J. Moskowitz, who specialized in family law when she worked for Connecticut Legal Services.


In the Region: Connecticut and Westchester; Making the Iroquois Pipeline Palatable
THE Iroquois Gas Transmission System may have found an aspirin for the headaches its highway and corporate construction projects cause communities they intrude upon.
In an experiment that could become a model for the future, it has embarked on a $10 million program to compensate 60 New York State and Connecticut towns disrupted by the installation of its 370-mile-long natural gas pipeline.
The money will pay for the purchase of open space and the enhancement of environmental and recreational facilities.


Clamps Often Have a Pivotal Role
CLAMPS are valuable in any collection of home-improvement tools.
Besides holding together pieces for gluing, they can secure materials safely when working with power tools and sharp hand tools.
C-clamps and their variants are the most versatile.
Conventional C-clamps, which are the least expensive, are made entirely of metal.
Their name derives from their shape, which resembles the letter C. They are commonly available with jaw openings ranging from 3 to 12 inches.
For home repairs, C-clamps with 4- or 6-inch openings, which cost about $5 each, are usually the most practical.


The Bronfmans' Leveraged Leviathan
Back in 1979 two of Canada's great dynastic business families seemed headed for a sensational confrontation.
The Bronfman brothers, Edward and Peter -- they're the "other" Bronfmans, not the Seagram branch of the family -- and the Reichmann brothers, Paul, Albert and Ralph, coveted a real estate holding company called Trizec Corporation.
Trizec was the company through which William Zeckendorf, the New York developer, assembled an impressive collection of Canadian properties.
The Bronfmans, intent on building a real estate empire, had taken a 37 percent stake in Trizec three years earlier.
Then the Reichmanns, busy building their own empire, came along and snapped up a 35 percent stake.
The looming collision over who would control Trizec promised to be as exciting as any plot a potboiler novelist might dream up.


Penguins Glide Into The Finals
Despite a season that saw triumph turn to turmoil and tragedy, the Pittsburgh Penguins are back in the Stanley Cup finals, preparing to defend their championship against the Chicago Blackhawks.
The Penguins beat the Boston Bruins, 5-1, at Boston Garden tonight to complete a four-game sweep of the Wales Conference finals.
Mario Lemieux scored two goals for the Penguins, who occasionally toyed with their foes the way the Harlem Globetrotters have with the Washington Generals.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-15  NUCLEAR ARMS PACT SIGNED


Susan Solie, Brian Mullaney
Susan Lori Solie, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
O.
B.
Solie of Rockford, Ill., was married yesterday in New York to Brian Francis Mullaney, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph E. Mullaney of Westport, Mass.
Msgr.
William F. Guido performed the ceremony at the Church of Our Saviour.
Mrs.
Mullaney, 32 years old, is a freelance advertising art director in New York.
She graduated from the University of Wisconsin at Madison, from which she also received a master's degree in graphic design.
Her father owns O.B.
Ltd., a furniture and housewares design concern in Rockford.


Newest U.S. Teams Have a Texas Accent
AS a result of the international team playoffs that ended in Memphis a week ago, the United States representation in the 1992 world championships in Salsomaggiore, Italy, in August will have a Texas accent.
On the open team, Seymon Deutsch of Laredo, Tex., will try to defend the Olympiad team title along with Bob Hamman and Bob Wolff, both of Dallas, Eric Rodwell of Naperville, Ill., and Jeff Meckstroth of Tampa, Fla.
Their sixth player, replacing the late Jim Jacoby, will be Michael Rosenberg of Manhattan, and Dan Morse of Houston will be the nonplaying captain.
If they win, Hamman will move past Pietro Forquet of Italy in the all-time list of world master-point winners, but will still trail Giorgio Belladonna and Benito Garozzo.


Corporate Violence
To the Editor:
Though your reviewer doesn't mention it, there is an obvious fallacy in Richard A. Epstein's attack on employment-discrimination laws in his book "Forbidden Grounds" (May 3).
The right-wing libertarian argument that government should use its coercive power only against "violence" or "fraud" and not interfere with freedom of contract recognizes only violence by individual criminals.
But businesses that use their economic power to deny whole classes of people the opportunity to make a decent living commit violence as surely as any robber.
The same can be said of a group of people (whites, men) that exercises its collective social power to consign another group (blacks, women) to inferior status -- whether or not that status is written into law.


Barbecuing Returns, With Twists
MEMORIAL DAY weekend marks the beginning of one of summer's great pleasures: eating outdoors.
In the last few years, though, the standard scene -- Dad grilling hamburgers while Mom tosses a salad -- has altered.
The barbecue has become the place for cooking anything from tofu to frogs' legs.
And instead of ball-park mustard and ketchup, salsas, cold sauces or compound butters are served on the side.
The standard tools for the barbecue chef have also changed.
In California it is now against the law to use lighter fluid as a fire starter because of its contribution to air pollution (not to mention the bad taste it can impart to food).
Instead, people are using kindling.
But a useful new product for lighting charcoal easily has just been produced by Griffo Grill.
Called Cob Lites, it consists of corn cobs that have been dipped in food-grade paraffin.
They produce an intense heat when burned, and they don't smell.
They are available at Williams-Sonoma stores and from their mail order catalogue, from the Chef's Catalogue and at Crate and Barrel stores.


BENEFITS
Restoration in Brooklyn
MAY 26 -- The Bedford-Stuyvesant Restoration Corporation, founded by the late Senators Robert F. Kennedy and Jacob K. Javits, will celebrate 25 years as one of the nation's first and most successful community development programs.
Senator Kennedy's widow, Ethel Kennedy, who has remained active in the organization, and his brother, Senator Edward M. Kennedy, are due to attend a cocktail party from 6:45 to 9:45 P.M. at the organization's headquarters at 1368 Fulton Street at New York Avenue in Brooklyn.
Benefit tickets, $100, from (201) 886-1102.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
SEAL CARVINGS
The small square markings, or seals, that one sees in the corners of Chinese works of art are the subject of an exhibition at the Yale Art Gallery.
Conceived by Qianshen Bai, a graduate student in the history of art and a practitioner of the art of seal carving, the exhibition highlights an obscure but important element of Chinese culture.


Leonard Horowitz, 44, Heart-Rhythm Expert
Leonard N. Horowitz, a cardiologist who was an expert in diagnosing and treating abnormal heart rhythms, died Thursday at the University of Pennsylvania Hospital in Philadelphia.
He was 44 years old and lived in Bryn Mawr, Pa.
He died of cancer, his family said.


Too Bare For America
The May issue of French Glamour magazine contains a nude photo display of Isabella Rossellini, which was deemed too racy for the American market.
The four pages with the most explicit photos, by Paolo Roversi, were cut out of the copies distributed in the United States and Britain.
"The reason it was taken out was the nudity," said a source involved with the magazine's distribution, who spoke on condition of anonymity.
"The mood in this country right now is that you can't sell that stuff. Also, the June issue has a topless model on the cover that will be covered up with a sticker" in the United States.


Adrienne Samuels, Stephen O'Neill
Mr. and Mrs.
Daniel Samuels of Armonk, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter Adrienne Gail Samuels to Stephen Hewitt O'Neill, a son of John J. O'Neill of Grantsville, W. Va., and June O'Neill of Fayetteville, N.C.
A July wedding is planned.
Ms.
Samuels, 30 years old, is the assistant to the coaches and trainers of the New York Rangers in Rye, N.Y.
She graduated from Boston University.
Her father is an engineer with Hardesty &amp; Hanover, an engineering consulting firm in New York.
Her mother, Iris Samuels, is a catering sales assistant at the Doral Arrowwood, a resort conference center in Rye Brook, N.Y.


Recalling a 'Skirmish on Poverty'
To the Editor:
In regard to "After the Riots, Washington May Be Helpless" (Market Watch, May 3), I agreed with much of what Floyd Norris said.
But I must say that the post-riots expenditures in the 1960's were not all that large, especially after deducting the funds spent on arming the police, in some cities with tanks.
We used to talk about the skirmish on poverty.


Hertz to Join Avis in Offering Methanol Cars
Hertz plans to join Avis in bringing to car rental counters in Sacramento, Calif., the brave new world of low-pollution cars that run on something besides gasoline.
Early this month, Avis launched a fleet of 20 1992 Chevrolet Luminas that burn methanol.
Hertz will follow with 50 1993-model Ford Tauruses this fall.


Mets Get Bang-Up Game From Bonilla
The renaissance of the run producer, which traced itself to a study of old highlights, reached its full expression this afternoon with a performance worthy of a vintage video of its own.
Bobby Bonilla, scattering fans in the bleachers and sending outfielders racing everywhere, banged out four hits, including a home run and a double, and drove in three runs as the Mets defeated the Giants, 6-3, today at Candlestick Park.


Jury Deliberates in Racketeering Case Against Sect
From its start five months ago, the twin themes in the murder and racketeering trial of Yahweh ben Yahweh and 15 disciples have been race and religion.
That was especially apparent today as Judge Norman C. Roettger Jr. of Federal District Court gave the case to the jury today, with these instructions:


Data Bank/May 24, 1992


She's a Dynamo, but She Rustles Wheelchairs
SISTER JEAN does not take Visa or American Express -- yet.
The fund-raising nun of St.
Francis Hospital deals in cash when selling her $200 apiece raffle tickets.
"Or people give me a voucher," Sister Jean said.
Those who pledge pay up.
It is hard to do otherwise when confronted by a 75-year-old nun who barely reaches 5 feet tall; weighs 105 pounds, habit and all, and promises to pray for you.


Art and Honorables
Outstanding women, canine art and new graduates line up in the limelight.


Woman Hit and Killed Pushing Stalled Car
A 25-year-old woman going to the beach with two friends was killed in Queens yesterday morning when their car broke down and was struck by another car, the police said.
The accident occurred at 10:40 A.M. after two of the women in the disabled car got out to push it out of the right eastbound lane of South Conduit Boulevard.
The car had stalled near Kennedy International Airport.


Name That Decade
A DECADE is a decade is a media construction.
Just try getting into the Park Avenue Cafe to discuss the earnest, penitential 90's with a friend and you'll see what I mean.
A phone call to the restaurant to book a table produced the same results on three separate occasions in the last two weeks: nothing available until 9:30.
So much for everyone sitting at home, munching on terra chips and watching the latest video release.


Normandie Keith, Jonathan Avery
Mr. and Mrs.
Norman C. Keith of Mill Neck, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Normandie Keith, to Jonathan Stuart Avery, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Nathan Avery of Houston.
A July wedding is planned.
Miss Keith, 20 years old, is an actress in commercials and films in New York.
Her father, who is retired, was the president and chairman of the Commonwealth Oil Refining Company in New York.


Indonesia Delays
To the Editor: Travelers should be aware that equipment failures frequently cause the Indonesian airlines, Garuda Indonesia and Merpati Nusantara, to cancel flights, stranding travelers overnight.
In November I experienced five cancellations, resulting in four overnight strandings, on an eight-flight itinerary covering Bali, Sulawesi, Borneo and Java.


Some Welcome Fiddling With Landmarks
Two proposals to change the face of New York saw the light of day in the last couple of weeks, and they may or may not have something to do with each other.
No, strike that.
Actually, they have quite a bit to do with each other.
Each plan is about giving the public what it wants, and about the realization by people in authority that what the public wants in architecture is not always what it has been given.
And each in its own way holds out no small degree of hope for this beleaguered city.
The more striking of the two proposals -- and the one that seems almost too good to be true -- is the suggestion floated by Amtrak officials that the railroad abandon the present Penn Station, that wretched thing undeserving of the noble name it bears, and build a new train station within the shell of the old Post Office across Eighth Avenue, due to be largely vacated in 1993.
Amtrak's spokesman even talked of the "marketability of architecture" as an aid to train travel.


A Blueprint of the Future Along the Hudson River
In the three decades since the West Side piers bristled with waterborne commerce, New York City has been trying to revive the decaying Hudson River shoreline.
For the most part, the efforts have produced one failed plan after another, seemingly as numerous as the stark pilings that mark the voids where piers once stood.
But in the last few weeks, a series of proposals and decisions have come forth that have the potential for remaking much of the West Side waterfront, from Battery Park City to West 72d Street.


Making a Difference; Hewlett Tries Some Mainframe Magic
The list of minicomputer manufacturers that have entered the mainframe market is a short one, and with good reason: most that have tried have failed.
Undaunted, the Hewlett-Packard Company announced its first mainframe-class machines last week.
Lewis E. Platt, Hewlett-Packard's executive vice president and general manager of the computer systems organization, said the new machines offered performance comparable to an I.B.M. 3090, but for one-tenth the cost and at one-tenth the size.
The machines achieve this performance breakthrough with the use of reduced-instruction-set computing, or RISC, which speeds things up by relegating many common tasks to software.


Debra Valentine, John Hauge
Debra Ann Valentine, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard H. Valentine of West Hartford, Conn., was married there yesterday to John Resor Hauge, a son of Helen R. Hauge of New York and the late Gabriel S. Hauge.
The Rev.
Lee Moore performed the ceremony at the First Church of Christ Congregational.
The bride is a partner in the Washington law firm of O'Melveny &amp; Meyers.
She graduated magna cum laude from Princeton University, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, was a Fulbright scholar in Germany, and received a law degree from Yale University.
Her father, who is retired, was the chief engineer and director of research and development for the New Departure division of General Motors in Bristol, Conn.


Commercial Property: Subleases; Bargains for Companies Looking for Modest Space
A PROFUSION of office space for subletting in the Northeast is giving prospective tenants an opportunity to make bargain-basement deals.
The space is cascading onto the market as more and more troubled companies scramble to find alternative users for space they leased in the boom years but no longer need or cannot afford to carry.


Animal Experiments: Further Views
In his letter to the New Jersey editor on May 3, Dr.
Neal Barnard continues to maintain that the toxicity of penicillin to guinea pigs demonstrates that animal experimentation is of little benefit to humans.
In support of this view Dr.
Barnard cites the fact that sick guinea pigs are treated with sulfa drugs.
There is irony in this citation.
The sulfa drugs are a classic example of an entire family of drugs that could not have been discovered without the use of animal testing.


Ye Olde Inferiority Complex
THERE are times when thoughts of New Jersey bring a tear to the eye -- times when trash fires spew forth enough airborne contaminants to cause widespread weeping on both sides of the Hudson.
Or when mayors of various communities are under investigation for various forms of corruption.
Or when headlines tell of the latest roundup of New Jersey-based mobsters or the State Health Department declares war on eggs "over easy."
A rich compost of negative images applied over three centuries has given rise to one of the state's hardiest crops, the collective inferiority complex.


Is There Life After Death For Failed Series?
Last time on "Capitol News," amid half-empty coffee cups and glowing computer terminals, it was business as usual at the pressure-packed newspaper The Washington Capitol.
The flamboyant gossip columnist Miles Plato, chewed out for his extravagant expense account, was selling his Rolls-Royce to pay off his debts.
Anne McKenna, an eager young reporter, was being sued for libel by a sleazy computer school operator.
Called onto the carpet by Jonathan Joseph (Jo-Jo) Turner, the newspaper's seasoned and charismatic editor in chief, she was upbraided and told that her fate was in the hands of the legal department.
That show, seen on April 30, 1990, was the last episode of "Capitol News" broadcast by ABC, which had jettisoned the series.
But fans might be interested to know that there are subsequent episodes lying around that have never been viewed in this country.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
Memorial Day Rounds
SOME war memories may be more distant than others.
But that doesn't mean that they should be forgotten.
Every Memorial Day, Wilbur (Bill) Dugal of Oceanside visits the grave of his grandfather, Sgt.
James Dugal.
Sergeant Dugal was a bugler in the Civil War.
He sounded recall at Appomattox Court House, when Lee surrendered to Grant.


Crime
In her determination to keep Kinsey Millhone on her toes, Sue Grafton has put the gutsy heroine of her alphabet mysteries (" 'A' Is for Alibi" . . .) in some ludicrous situations lately.
But if shoving Kinsey into a dud romance, endless household renovations and an awkward undercover stint on the mean streets of Los Angeles turned out to be dead ends in her development, a change of professional venue in "I" IS FOR INNOCENT (Holt, $18.95) provides a true challenge for the private eye.
"I was rude, pugnacious and uncooperative," Kinsey concedes of the attitude that got her booted out of her long-term arrangement with an insurance company and set her on an independent, if wobbly, footing.
"I wanted to feel like the old Kinsey again," she says.
"Being cowed and uncertain was really for the birds."


What an American Aristocrat Saw in the Common Man's Art
As a collector, Abby Aldrich Rockefeller showed singular prescience.
Decades before American folk art was widely exhibited and documented in books, she bought prime examples by unidentified makers.
From the 1920's until her death in 1948, she frequented the folk-art galleries of pioneering dealers in New York and New England, acquiring the ancestor portraits, weathervanes and cigar-store indians that other collectors, including her husband, John D. Rockefeller Jr., scorned.
The story of the evolution of Mrs.
Rockefeller's collection and what it sparked here at Colonial Williamsburg is the subject of a lively show that fills the newly enlarged Abby Aldrich Rockefeller Folk Art Center, where it will remain through October.


Designs for Living
Duncan Grant was a painter who worked simultaneously in a variety of styles and in different media, from printmaking and fabric design to ceramics and interior decoration.
This often left him at odds with the English critical establishment, which considered his versatility frivolous, his wide-ranging production merely decorative.
An intuitive painter rather than a theorist, Grant (1885-1978) was as distrustful of art-world rhetoric as he was of hewing to a single stylistic party line.
He felt it was as relevant to draw from Giotto and Piero della Francesca as from fellow modernists like Picasso and Matisse.
Likewise, he believed it was as legitimate to work out ideas on pots and fireplace surrounds as on canvas.
Yet Grant paid dearly for these views, writes Simon Watney in THE ART OF DUNCAN GRANT (John Murray/Trafalgar Square, $55), a well-written, lavishly illustrated book that attempts to consider the artist's work in a wider historical context than that of the Bloomsbury group.
Mr.
Watney, the author of "English Post-Impressionism," is noticeably defensive when discussing Grant's artistic strengths.
He writes as if expecting to be challenged, spending as much time analyzing the reasons for the artist's neglect as he does building a fresh case in support of his work.
Among the many reasons he cites for Grant's obscurity are his unorthodox career (Grant tended to double back periodically and reinvestigate old themes), his association with Bloomsbury (out of favor in the 1940's and 50's) and the destruction during World War II of many of his finest painted interiors.
It is only when Mr.
Watney discusses Grant's work on its own terms that his thesis beings to emerge: that Grant's equal attendance to all media constituted its own radicalism, as did his belief that art and everyday life were of the same substance.


Deborah Bloom, Paolo Fulghieri
Deborah Jane Bloom, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
William H. Bloom of Bay Shore, L.I., was married there yesterday to Paolo Antonio Fulghieri, a son of Franca Zamara and Dr.
Giancarlo Fulghieri, both of Milan, Italy.
Cantor Raymond Smolover officiated at the home of the bride's parents.
Mrs.
Fulghieri, a graduate of Smith College, is an assistant treasurer at the Bank of New York in New York.
Her father is a neurosurgeon in Bay Shore.
Her mother, Barbara Bloom, retired as a reporter in New York for National Public Radio.


Melissa Schiff, Robert D. Soros
Melissa Robin Schiff, the daughter of Marlene S. Schiff of New York and the late Dr.
Haskel Schiff, was married May 5 to Robert Daniel Soros, a son of Annaliese Soros and George Soros, both of New York.
Rabbi Dr.
David Posner performed the ceremony at Temple Emanu-El in New York.
Mrs.
Soros, 28 years old, graduated from New York University.
She is a freelance photographer and film maker in New York.
Her father was a renal specialist at the Duke University Medical Center in Durham, N.C.
Her mother is the chairwoman of the advisory board of the entrepreneurial center at the Wharton School.


Holiday Tomorrow
Memorial Day will be observed tomorrow. Here are holiday schedules. NEW YORK
GOVERNMENT OFFICES: Closed.


And Baby Makes Two
Faithful television viewers may have been surprised last week by Vice President Dan Quayle's attack on the CBS sitcom character Murphy Brown for "mocking the importance of fathers by bearing a child alone and calling it 'just another life style choice.' " Unwed motherhood in prime time, however, wouldn't have shocked them; Ms.
Brown, played by Candice Bergen, may be single but she's not singular.
Unmarried television characters who have had babies, or tried to, include Mary Jo on "Designing Women," Carla on "Cheers," Maddie Hayes on "Moonlighting," Susannah on "Thirtysomething," Molly on "The Days and Nights of Molly Dodd," Hannah on "Anything But Love," Maggie on "Baby Talk," K.C. on "China Beach," Jenna on "Dallas" and Emma on "Falcon Crest."


Sarah Paddock, Ed Wright
Sarah Elizabeth Paddock, a daughter of Maj.
Geoffrey J. Paddock of Kent, England, and Helen Paddock of Huish Champflower, England, was married yesterday to Charles Edward Wright Jr., the son of June E. Wright of Denver and the late Mr.
Wright.
Vicar Jerry Bird performed the Anglican ceremony at St.
Peter's Church in Huish Champflower.
The bride is an immigration officer at the Australian Consulate in New York.
She graduated from West Kent College in Tunbridge Wells, England.
Her father, who is retired, was in the Indian Army.
Her mother, also retired, was a primary-school teacher in Huish Champflower.


South African Foes Struggle to Be Partners
THE negotiations on the future of South Africa, launched in the glow of high hopes last December, seemed to unravel last week in the wake of failure to agree on guidelines for a new constitution.
The impasse developed over ostensibly minor issues, but it was rooted in a far more basic gulf between blacks and whites: competing visions of post-apartheid democracy.
The African National Congress wants a government of clear majority rule, meaning predominance of the now-disenfranchised black majority.
The National Party, which has run the Government since 1948 on behalf of the white minority, is determined to obtain a bargain in which significant amounts of power would be shared by the whites.


Snow-White Insect Is Hemlock Poison
THE woolly adelgid is starting to sound like the insect that ate Long Island -- and Connecticut, too.
This tiny insect, a brownish-red oval creature no longer than one thirty-second of an inch, is sucking the life from the hemlocks of backyards and wild forests alike.
A single female can lay 50 to 300 eggs, and there are two generations produced every year.
So it's small wonder, that if left uncontrolled, the adelgid can kill a tree in a single year.


Claudia Abitbol, Michael Freeman
September wedding plans have been announced for Claudia Michele Abitbol and Michael Alan Freeman, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Noel Freeman of Commack, L.I., by her parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Marcel Abitbol of Rochester.
Miss Abitbol, 25 years old, graduated magna cum laude from the State University of New York at Binghamton and from Albany Law School of Union University in New York..
She is an associate at the law firm of Kaye, Scholer, Fierman, Hays &amp; Handler in New York.


Read This!
THE corner newsstand, as visually dense and jumbled as MTV or a news reporter's desk, is perhaps the second mirror we look into each morning.
As one bends over to pick up the morning paper, the eye roves over the serious headlines of the day, as well as snack food for the brain: the eclectic assortment of magazines that blasts your sensibilities and yanks at your self-esteem.
The pitches range from the simple, upbeat "Be an Optimist in 2 Weeks" (Self), to the highly specialized "How to Beat a Buck's Nose" (Bowhunter, a magazine for archers), to the fiendishly direct "Why Luke Perry's Name Makes You Want to Buy This" (Sassy, a magazine whose title was originally a popular cover word).


Wilder Draws Support on Execution
Like her Governor, L. Douglas Wilder, Jan Alpert says she has changed her mind about the death penalty.
"I grew up in the 60's, and I used to be very much against capital punishment," she said.
"But now it doesn't bother me. Maybe I'm more realistic than idealistic now."


Melanie Klein? She Shrunk Her Kids
I'm fairly sure that the British playwright Nicholas Wright intends for us to be of several minds about Melanie Klein, the controversial Viennese psychoanalyst who is the central character of his 1988 drama, "Mrs. Klein."
A disciple of Freud, she was, it would appear, something of a tyrant who lay down her pioneering theories of child development as if they were law.
But her combative temperament and her keen mind made her a fascinating tyrant, and she was not easy to ignore.
For much of her adult life, which she spent in London beginning in 1926, she seems to have been at the center of one professional storm or another.


MAY 17-23: Dropouts; Truant Officers or Jobs Are Keeping Them in School
So much fretting goes on over the state of the nation's schools and the ignorance of American students that it's easy to miss the good news that sometimes comes along.
Last week, New York City, the nation's largest school system, reported a sharp drop in its dropout rate.
And the Council of Great City Schools, comprising the 47 largest systems, said New York was leading a nationwide revival; two-thirds of its members also kept more students in school.
New York did particularly well in comparisons of how many students quit last year: 6.8 percent versus 16 percent in Los Angeles and 13.2 percent in Chicago.


Corrections
An article in the Real Estate section on April 19 about the expansion of research space at the Stevens Institute of Technology in Hoboken, N.J., misidentified a company moving to the campus.
It is Engineering Information Inc., not Business Information Inc.
A letter from Engineering Information dated April 20 pointed out the error, but it was misdirected and received only recently.


At Georgetown, a Speech on Education's Ills
The decline in American education can be traced to the way in which colleges and universities increasingly are run like businesses, Robert N. Bellah, a sociology professor at the University of California at Berkeley, told graduates of the College of Arts and Sciences at Georgetown University yesterday.
"When education becomes merely a means to an end, it loses its integrity and fails in its own deepest vocation," Professor Bellah said at the university's 193d commencement in Washington.
"Since American business is not obviously superior to other major American institutions, it is not clear why it should provide a model for education."


Donna Eplett, Casey Keller
Donna Elizabeth Eplett, a daughter of Mary Jane Coughlin Eplett of Lexington, Mass., and Dr.
James D. Eplett of Nashua, N.H., was married yesterday in Osterville, Mass., to Kenneth Charles Keller Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Keller of Cincinnati.
The Rev.
Clarence Murphy performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at Our Lady of the Assumption Church.
The couple work in advertising at Procter &amp; Gamble in Cincinnati, she as a brand assistant and he as an assistant brand manager.
Mrs.
Keller graduated from Princeton University and was a Rotary scholar at the University of Louvain in Belgium.
She and her husband received M.B.A. degrees from Harvard University.
Her father retired as a staff physician in geriatrics at Tewksbury (Mass.) Hospital.
Her mother is a teacher at the Wyam School in Woburn, Mass.
Mr.
Keller, who is known as Casey, graduated from Cornell University.
His father and his mother, Martha B. Keller, own the Kelmar Corporation, a real-estate development company in Cincinnati.


Put on the Dog (The Fish, Too)
Tote bags in the shape of tropical fish and cuddly cats and dogs are giving today's fashion look a dash of humor -- just as in the mid-1930's, when the designer Elsa Schiaparelli and her artist friends in Paris enlivened the Depression era with Surrealistic accessories.
During the 50's, bland gray flannel suits were offset with raffia straw summer tote bags.
One memorable example was a life-sized macaw, now part of the costume collection at the Metropolitan Museum of Art.
The craft movement of the 70's and 80's carried on the tradition of distinctive accessories.


A Bank Shows It Can Profit And Follow a Social Agenda
Nearly 20 years after the South Shore Bank in Chicago started an ambitious plan to revive an economically depressed black neighborhood, it has proved that a determined lender can reverse the process of urban decay and simultaneously make a profit.
The formula sounds simple: buy a local bank, create a for-profit real estate development company and a nonprofit community development company that works closely with the bank.
The bank provides an opportunity for people to support the program's social goals without risk, by investing in federally insured deposits.
The real estate company offers the possibility of profits, with some risks; the community development company seeks government and private grants.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: New Jersey; Perot, Little Known, Is a Wild Card in New Jersey
With Bill Clinton and George Bush apparently assured of their parties' nominations, the only political wild card in New Jersey is Ross Perot, the independent candidate from Texas.
Mr.
Perot is not on the June 2 primary ballot.
At this point, however, it is all but certain that Mr.
Perot will be on the November ballot.


Ethnic Battles Flaring In Former Soviet Fringe
All along the southern fringe of the former Soviet empire, ethnic brush fires that sprang up with the collapse of central authority have resisted all efforts at mediation and control.
On the contrary, some now threaten to turn into major conflagrations, and new regions are beginning to smolder.
The roll call of warring nationalities invokes some forgotten primer on the Dark Ages -- Ossetians, Georgians, Abkhazians, Dagestanis, Azeris, Armenians, Moldovans, Russians, Ukrainians, Gagauz, Tatars, Tajiks.


Abroad at Home; The Frozen President
Something has happened to President Bush.
In recent weeks and months he has ducked and vacillated on issues, seemingly unwilling to take decisive positions, unable to lead.
It is as if he were immobilized.
His supporters have noticed.
They are more and more openly expressing concern, discontent, bewilderment at his performance.
They are starting to look elsewhere for leadership.


Lucky Pennies, Luckless Silver
CONSIDER the lowly cent.
Today, it's barely worth picking up off the ground.
But in the middle of World War II, it was regarded a little differently.
During the war, a severe shortage of copper forced the Treasury to use zinc-coated steel for all one-cent coins instead of the normal bronze.
But rumors abounded that a few bronze 1943 cents were produced.


Update; A Slight Stirring On Plans for Hoboken Port
With spring sliding into summer, the cool breezes off the Hudson River would make Hoboken's waterfront an enticing prospect -- if only it were open.
The historic port is still shut, its future still a question mark, a decade after the city entered into negotiations with the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey to redevelop the milelong strip just opposite Manhattan's financial district.


Lea Ward, Age Hollander
Lea Richardson Ward, the daughter of James S. Ward of Dublin, N.H., and the late Jennifer R. Ward, was married yesterday in New York to Age Hollander, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Jan Hollander of Rotterdam, the Netherlands.
The Rev.
Robert Gentile performed the ceremony at All Souls Unitarian Church.
Mrs.
Ward Hollander, 27 years old, graduated magna cum laude from Yale University.
She is studying for an M.B.A. at Insead, the French business school, in Fontainebleau, France.
Her father, who had a graphics design firm in New York, is a painter.


Q and A
Atlanta Black Arts Festival
Q.
Will the National Black Arts Festival, last held in 1990, be held again? -- Kimberly A. Rohm, Atlanta


Survey Finds Support for the Arts
THE recession has taken its toll on the arts.
Public and private donations are way down, and one organization after another has been forced to cut back operations.
Many have been forced to shut down.
But there is a brighter side to the artistic picture, delivered in a nationwide survey conducted for the American Council for the Arts by Louis Harris and Associates and underwritten by Philip Morris Companies Inc.


Jazz Victory an Inside Job
The first two games of the National Basketball Association's Western Conference final seemed to be played from 3-point range, but on Friday night in Game 3, everything moved inside.
If Utah's Karl Malone wasn't much of a factor early, he is now.
Malone, the muscle-bound Jazz forward, finally established himself as a pivotal player in the four-of-seven-game series that had belonged to the Portland Trail Blazers until Friday.
Now the Blazers must find a way to slow him down.


LIKUD TRIES HAND AT SLINGING MUD
While always gritty and bruising, Israeli politics has had scant experience with an American-style focus on a candidate's character, as defined by who may have slept with whom and who did or did not inhale what.
But that has changed dramatically in the last few days with a no-holds-barred assault by the governing Likud Party on the front-running opposition Labor leader, Yitzhak Rabin.


PENTAGON DROPS GOAL OF BLOCKING NEW SUPERPOWERS
The Pentagon has revised a draft of its post-cold-war strategy, dropping language from an earlier document advocating the perpetuation of a one-superpower world in which the United States would work to prevent the rise of any "competitors" to its primacy in Western Europe and East Asia.
The new document, approved by Defense Secretary Dick Cheney on Friday, sharpens the American commitment to collective military action as a "key feature" of United States strategy and looks forward to the decline of military investment as the principal means of balancing power among nations.


RECORD BRIEFS
Shirley Horn: 'Here's to Life -- Shirley Horn With Strings'
Verve 314 511 879-2; CD and cassette.
TXT&gt;
Because she has always been a voice of quiet in a pop-jazz climate of vivid, competing personalities, Shirley Horn has had to wait longer than most for popular recognition, which finally arrived last year with her album "You Won't Forget Me." Her latest album, "Here's to Life," a subdued collection of ballads beautifully arranged by Johnny Mandel, is likely to expand the reputation of this Washington-based singer and pianist, who recently turned 58.
Unlike such distinguished peers as Abbey Lincoln and Betty Carter, Ms.
Horn projects little overt passion.
Instead, her singing conveys a calm, meditative wisdom deepened by a dreamy, understated sensuality.
That reflectiveness is underscored by impressionistic pianism that makes expressive use of pauses and empty spaces.
The voice is so intimately attached to the piano that the two often seem to be engaged in a private musical dialogue.
Mr.
Mandel, an arranger known for his artful diffusion of orchestral colors, has been careful not to obscure the individual voices in Ms.
Horn's trio, which besides her own piano includes Charles Ables on bass and Steve Williams on drums.
Two cuts feature silvery trumpet solos by Wynton Marsalis.
The result is an album that is as languid as it is lush, with 8 of its 11 cuts running more than five minutes.
The inclusion of two Dmitri Tiomkin film themes, "Wild Is the Wind" and "Return to Paradise," plus the Edith Piaf ballad "If You Love Me," tilts the record's emotional center of gravity toward the 1950's.
At the same time, the inclusion of ruminative ballads like Artie Butler and Phyllis Molinary's "Here's to Life," and "Where Do You Start?" by Mr.
Mandel and Alan and Marilyn Bergman, give the album a serene, retrospective mood.
Or as the opening lines of the title cut put it: "No complaints and no regrets/ I still believe in chasing dreams and placing bets."


2 Companies Wooing Rochester On Lake Ontario Shuttle Service
Two Canadian companies, one using jet-powered catamarans, the other Soviet-built hydrofoils, are racing to start a ferry shuttle service across Lake Ontario to western New York.
"There's been an interest in this for quite some time, but the reason I think you're seeing it pushed now is that nobody wants to play catch-up," said Stefan Seles, operations manager for Canadian Lake Express Limited.


Reservations For Versailles
The chateau of Versailles in France, in an effort to reduce the often long wait for tours, has installed a reservation system.
Under the new system, which went into effect early this month, visitors reserve specific times for guided tours when they arrive at the chateau.
They can get the tour schedule in English by calling ahead to 30.84.76.18.
In the past, tourists could not make reservations and sometimes had to stand in line up to three hours before tours began.
A spokesman for the chateau said waits for reservations were expected to be shorter and that arriving 90 minutes before a desired tour should be sufficient.


Art and Honorables
Outstanding women, canine art and new graduates line up in the limelight.


Prospectors Delite Pans Out Beautifully in the Acorn
Prospectors Delite, who was so big and awkward that she didn't even go to the races last year, went to the races at Belmont Park with style and speed yesterday and won the 62d Acorn Stakes, the first jewel in the Triple Tiara for 3-year-old fillies.
It was her sixth victory in seven starts this year, and it shot her to the head of the class against the fanciest fillies in the land.
And she got there with a commanding move at the head of the homestretch to win by two lengths over the fast-closing Pleasant Colony, who won last year's juvenile championship while Prospectors Delite was still back on the farm in Kentucky trying to get untangled.


From the Stone Age to Tiananmen Square
CHINA
A New History.
By John King Fairbank.
Illustrated. 519 pp.
Cambridge, Mass.: The Belknap Press/ Harvard University Press.


Sports of The Times; Don King's Desperate Disclaimers
ONLY a few steps from the boutiques on the corner of Madison Avenue and East 69th Street, the crown logo of Don King Productions perches above a closed-circuit camera that peers down at anybody ringing the bell.
Hung over the sidewalk like an arched eyebrow, the camera was installed several years ago after the boxing promoter's offices were firebombed.
Uneasy lies the head that wears the crown of Don King's fright-wig hair.


Currency; Dollar Mixed In Busy Week
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen
129.21
129.75
138.35
per Dollar
German Mark
1.6165
1.6095
1.7037
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar
1.1960
1.2021
1.1496
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound
1.8177
1.8235
1.7350
U.S. Dollar per British Pound
Gold
$337.75
$338.50
$356.25
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


On Sunday; Rikers Fights An Epidemic Cell by Cell
DR.
MOHAMMAD AKHTAR has battled the tuberculosis epidemic at New York City hospitals and at its biggest jail, Rikers Island.
The other day, standing among dozens of contagious inmates, he said, "Oh yeah, I feel much safer here at Rikers than the hospitals. Very chic here."
"You go to a city emergency room, you see TB people lying everywhere, coughing their brains out. "This," he said, gesturing, "is a marriage of engineering and medicine."


Given an Inch, Irises Will Win Over the Yard
THE irises are in bloom.
These stately border flowers with their regal presence are a sure cause for admiring pauses.
Even the flat rather bold iris foliage makes a decorative statement.
But for many gardeners, the iris season has already gone by.
Or for others, the best is yet to come.
This is thanks to the huge size of the clan itself.
There are zillions of irises, or so it seems.
And while one gardener may favor one type, another gardener favors another.
Some gardeners devote their entire grounds to the iris clan.
This is one flower it is quite easy to become goofy about.


Clamps Often Have a Pivotal Role
CLAMPS are valuable in any collection of home-improvement tools.
Besides holding together pieces for gluing, they can secure materials safely when working with power tools and sharp hand tools.
C-clamps and their variants are the most versatile.
Conventional C-clamps, which are the least expensive, are made entirely of metal.
Their name derives from their shape, which resembles the letter C. They are commonly available with jaw openings ranging from 3 to 12 inches.
For home repairs, C-clamps with 4- or 6-inch openings, which cost about $5 each, are usually the most practical.


Visiting Disney's French Kingdom
SOMEWHERE deep inside the pirate's cave, beneath a jagged ceiling of simulated stalactites, we were marooned.
After plunging down pitch-black flumes and dodging grapeshot and curses from angry French sea rovers, the little parade of mechanical boats curling through Euro Disney's Pirates of the Caribbean had thumped, quite suddenly, to a stop.
On one side of us, a pirate's skull, covered in cobwebs, grinned wickedly.
On the other, a ghostly harpsichord played over and over and over again the opening bars of the same agonizingly familiar Disney shanty.
"Yo ho, yo ho, it's a pirate's life for me," we hummed along helplessly, as the seconds stretched to minutes and Euro Disneyland's French technicians plotted our rescue from a mechanical failure.


At Work; Is the American City Obsolete?
There seems to be very little good news coming out of America's cities these days.
First, a flood in Chicago, then fire in Los Angeles, events that seemed to bring the prophecy from an old slave song -- "God gave Noah the rainbow sign, no more water, the fire next time" -- perilously close to reality.
Cities, some social critics contend, are obsolete -- vestigial remnants of an era earlier in this century when proximity was critical to commerce.
New York, for example, was a hub through which money and people, immigrants, for example, were sped into the flourishing national economy.
At the very least, goes the argument, cities are now a reminder that the country has lost its edge in manufacturing and has been unable to solve the problems of structural poverty.
Urban jobs have flowed offshore and to places with more enticing, dependable infrastructure.
The future is in a white-collar service economy that can be conducted in so-called "edge cities" far from an urban core.


Another Agenda in the Hit on 'Murphy'
To the Editor:
Vice President Quayle's recent comment that the television character Murphy Brown's choice to have a baby out of wedlock was destructive of traditional American values is one more demonstration that the current Republican Administration in Washington is engaged in a campaign to force women out of the workplace and back into the home (news article, May 20).


Elizabeth Adams, Clifford Lasser
Elizabeth Willard Adams, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William R. Adams Jr. of Bethesda, Md., was married yesterday in Washington to Clifford Adam Lasser, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Jerry J. Lasser of New York.
The Rev.
S.
Neale Morgan performed the Episcopal ceremony at the Washington Cathedral.
Mrs.
Lasser, 31 years old, is a strategic planning analyst at the Boston Company, an investment management firm in Boston.
She graduated cum laude from Harvard University and received an M.B.A. from Northwestern University.
Her father is a vice president of Merrill Lynch, Pierce, Fenner &amp; Smith in Washington.
Her mother, Millicent Adams, who is retired, was a production associate for the CBS News program "Face the Nation" in Washington.


Syracuse Lifted Into Final Behind 7 Straight Goals
It was not that the Syracuse lacrosse team needed time to warm up this afternoon.
After all, the temperature in the stands was 93 degrees, and it was close to 100 on the artificial turf of Franklin Field.
The Orangemen needed to stop turning the ball over, win a face-off for a change and get going in Coach Roy Simmons's up-tempo style.


Tie-Dye With Gravy Strains
Ben &amp; Jerry's is repackaging the 1960's.
In the fall, the Vermont ice cream company plans to introduce a flavor called Wavy Gravy, after the master of ceremonies at the Woodstock Festival in 1969.
The ice cream will be sold in containers with a tie-dye design.
"This is only the second living flavor, as we call it, named after a living human being," said Lee Holden, a spokesman for Ben &amp; Jerry's, which created Cherry Garcia in 1987 in honor of Jerry Garcia of the Grateful Dead.
"The flavor is going to be a Brazil-nut base with caramel fudge, chocolate chunks and Rainforest Crunch tidbits, which is a Brazil and cashew nut brittle."


Turtle Bay
To the Editor:
Your article on Turtle Bay on April 26 neglected to cite a venerable cultural institution in Turtle Bay, the Turtle Bay Music School at 244 East 52d Street.
Since 1925. the school has taught music to thousands of people who live and work in the area.
At present, over 500 children and adults take private lessons and classes at the school.


IN SHORT: FICTION
A GOOD MAN TO KNOW A Semi-Documentary Fictional Memoir.
By Barry Gifford.
Clark City Press, 109 West Callender Street, Livingston, Mont. 59047, $21.95.


Karen Anne Manzo, Paul Gisbert Auwaerter
Karen Anne Manzo, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Louis V. Manzo of Ruxton, Md., was married yesterday in Baltimore to Dr.
Paul Gisbert Auwaerter, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Gisbert P. Auwaerter of Bayport, L.I.
The Rev.
Frank Nash performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at Loyola College Memorial Chapel.


Airport's Ill Winds
In the wreckage of an ambitious but ill-fated plan to rebuild Kennedy International Airport lies at least $100 million in waste, a handful of half-finished and now mostly useless construction projects and plenty of attempts to lay blame at someone else's door.
In a report to Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo last week, Stanley Brezenoff, the executive director of the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey, which runs the airport, places responsibility for the plan on his predecessors, who began the program and eventually killed it.


Another Ethnic Battlefront


Homage to the Discreet Charm of Dieppe
At any given time there is in France a little town somewhere by the sea in which painters feel especially at home.
Boudin was at home in Honfleur, Monet in Etretat, Gauguin in Pont-Aven, Seurat in Gravelines, Signac in St.-Tropez and Matisse in Collioure.
After them, the magic went elsewhere for major painters, even if the places in question still had their charms.


L.A. Police Were Tried by a Jury of Their Peers
To the Editor:
I am writing to correct a small but critical error that continues to appear in discussions concerning recent events in Los Angeles.


A Blueprint of the Future Along the Hudson River
In the three decades since the West Side piers bristled with waterborne commerce, New York City has been trying to revive the decaying Hudson River shoreline.
For the most part, the efforts have produced one failed plan after another, seemingly as numerous as the stark pilings that mark the voids where piers once stood.
But in the last few weeks, a series of proposals and decisions have come forth that have the potential for remaking much of the West Side waterfront, from Battery Park City to West 72d Street.


MAY 17-23: J. F. K. Autopsy; After 29 Years of Silence, The Pathologists Speak Up
In 1963, the two U.S.
Navy pathologists who performed the autopsy on President John F. Kennedy concluded that he was hit by only two bullets, fired from above and behind, and killed when one exploded in his skull.
Through the storm of conspiracy theories raised since then, the pathologists, Dr.
James J. Humes and Dr.
J.
Thornton Boswell, have remained silent, even when it was said that they had lacked enough experience with gunshot wounds.


Vegetable Time
Inspect hemlocks for the white cottony egg cases of the woolly adelgid.
Spray the entire tree -- the tops and bottoms of all leaves -- with horticultural oil.
If the tree is large, hire an arborist with a hydraulic sprayer.
Continue to plant beets, carrots and lettuce for continued harvest throughout the summer.
Sow warm-weather crops, like corn and beans, and don't wait much longer to plant zinnias, cosmos, cleome and other annual flowers.


BEST SELLERS: May 24, 1992
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
2
JEWELS, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $23.) From New York schoolgirl to doyenne of a French chateau: the life of a woman who becomes rich by dealing in precious stones.
2
2
5
ALL AROUND THE TOWN, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $22.) The plight of a college student accused of killing her professor.
3
3
11
THE PELICAN BRIEF, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $22.50.) A woman law student seeks to discover the truth about the murder of two Supreme Court justices.
4
4
5
"I" IS FOR INNOCENT, by Sue Grafton. (Holt, $18.95.) Kinsey Millhone investigates the case of a man once charged with murdering his rich wife.
5
7
109
OH, THE PLACES YOU'LL GO! by Dr. Seuss. (Random House, $12.95.) Verse and pictures.
6
5
6
JAZZ, by Toni Morrison. (Knopf, $21.) A couple in the Harlem of the 1920's learn again and again that life does not keep its promises.
7
1
SAHARA, by Clive Cussler. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) On a mission to Africa, Dirk Pitt uncovers secrets from the past and a plot that may extinguish all life in the world's seas.
8
14
33
SCARLETT, by Alexandra Ripley. (Warner, $24.95.) The sequel to "Gone With the Wind."
9
6
4
FRENCH SILK, by Sandra Brown. (Warner, $18.95.) The ordeal of a New Orleans woman suspected of killing a television evangelist.
10
9
5
FOR LOVE ALONE, by Ivana Trump. (Pocket, $22.) The experiences of a Czechoslovak-born skier married to a wealthy entrepreneur from an old Newport, R.I., family.
11
8
15
RISING SUN, by Michael Crichton. (Knopf, $22.) The mysterious death of a young woman leads to an investigation in which technology and the American-Japanese rivalry play major roles. (LP)
12
12
2
THE LIVING, by Annie Dillard. (HarperCollins, $22.50.) Four decades in the lives of the motley residents of the 19th-century Washington Territory.
13
15
22
DISNEY'S BEAUTY AND THE BEAST. (Gallery Books/Penguin USA, $6.98.) A retelling of the classic fairy tale in words and pictures.
14
1
TURTLE MOON, by Alice Hoffman. (Putnam, $21.95.) Two damaged adults and a troubled child strive valiantly to achieve happiness.
15 *
12
THE ROAD TO OMAHA, by Robert Ludlum. (Random House, $23.95.) A retired general and a lawyer scheme to take possession of Nebraska on behalf of an obscure Indian tribe. (LP)
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
2
17
REVOLUTION FROM WITHIN, by Gloria Steinem. (Little, Brown, $22.95.) The reflections of a feminist on the struggle to achieve self-esteem.
2
1
5
GIVE WAR A CHANCE, by P. J. O'Rourke. (Atlantic Monthly, $20.95.) Satirical essays.
3
4
10
ROGUE WARRIOR, by Richard Marcinko with John Weisman. (Pocket, $22.) The memoirs of the retired commander of a counterterrorist unit.
4
5
4
TWO NATIONS, by Andrew Hacker. (Scribners, $24.95.) How racism affects American life.
5
3
27
BACKLASH, by Susan Faludi. (Crown, $24.) A journalist describes a war against women's rights.
6
11
2
THE WAY I SEE IT, by Patti Davis. (Putnam, $22.95.) A memoir by Ronald Reagan's daughter.
7 *
6
3
HEAD TO HEAD, by Lester Thurow. (Morrow, $25.) The upcoming economic battle among Japan, Europe and the United States.
8
30
ME: Stories of My Life, by Katharine Hepburn. (Knopf, $25.) The actress's memoirs. (LP)
9
1
ELEANOR ROOSEVELT, by Blanche Wiesen Cook. (Viking, $27.50.) From childhood in New York to the White House: the first 49 years of a pre-eminent First Lady.
10
7
3
WHO WILL TELL THE PEOPLE, by William Greider. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $25.) How powerful monied interests dominate the Government.
11
13
2
MIRACLE MAN, by Nolan Ryan with Jerry Jenkins. (Word Publishing, $18.99.) The autobiography of the record-breaking pitcher.
12
4
HIGH TREASON 2, by Harrison Edward Livingstone. (Carroll &amp; Graf, $25.95.) Charges of a cover-up after the death of John F. Kennedy.
13
12
26
MOLLY IVINS CAN'T SAY THAT, CAN SHE? by Molly Ivins. (Random House, $23.) Political essays.
14
9
8
THE DISUNITING OF AMERICA, by Arthur M. Schlesinger Jr. (Norton, $14.95.) A historian considers the current emphasis on ethnicity.
15 *
10
32
DEN OF THIEVES, by James B. Stewart. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $25.) Plunderers on Wall Street.
16 *
8
7
REINVENTING GOVERNMENT, by David Osborne and Ted Gaebler. (Patrick/Addison-Wesley, $22.95.) How government should operate.
17 *
16
2
PLAYING IN THE DARK, by Toni Morrison. (Harvard, $14.95.) A call for literary scholars to bring the black experience to all Americans.
18 *
15
25
MEMORIES, by Ralph Emery with Tom Carter. (Macmillan, $19.95.) A broadcaster's memoirs.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
2
5
THE JUICEMAN'S POWER OF JUICING, by Jay Kordich. (Morrow, $15.) A program for staying healthy and trim by consuming fresh fruit and vegetable juices.
2
1
14
A RETURN TO LOVE, by Marianne Williamson. (HarperCollins, $25.) Inspirational advice about ways to replace feelings of fear with feelings of love in daily life.
3
5
25
MORE WEALTH WITHOUT RISK, by Charles J. Givens. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) An updated and expanded volume of financial advice.
4
4
25
HOW TO SATISFY A WOMAN EVERY TIME, by Naura Hayden. (Bibli O'Phile/Dutton, $14.95.) Sexual counsel for married couples.
5
1
BORN FOR LOVE, by Leo F. Buscaglia. (Slack/ Random House, $19.) Why and how to turn love into the centerpiece of one's life.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,050 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 28,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.
And Bear in Mind
(Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)
I'M DYSFUNCTIONAL, YOU'RE DYSFUNCTIONAL: The Recovery Movement and Other Self-Help Fashions, by Wendy Kaminer. (Addison-Wesley, $18.95.) The author, a lawyer and journalist, offers a witty, occasionally harsh account of people who call their troubles diseases and blame other people for them.
AFTER HENRY, by Joan Didion. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $22.) Reports and meditations, affording the pleasures of literature, on phenomena like Patricia Hearst, brush fires, Ronald Reagan.
ALL THE PRETTY HORSES, by Cormac McCarthy. (Knopf, $21.) The first volume of a planned trilogy, this dark, uncomfortable, magnetically attractive novel projects its 16-year-old hero's activity on a world too vast and alien to be much affected.
TIME AND TIDE, by Edna O'Brien. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $21.) A brilliant product of its author's imagination for disaster, this harrowing novel concerns a woman, called Nell, whose loss of a child is only the worst of the tactics with which life defeats her.
DREAMING IN CUBAN, by Cristina Garcia. (Knopf, $20.) A fine first novel about the mysteries of place and the passions carried into exile, grounded in the life of a family of the Cuban diaspora.
BLACK WATER, by Joyce Carol Oates. (William Abrahams/ Dutton, $17.) A 26-year-old woman drowns when a senator's car goes off a bridge; but the point of view in this powerfully imagined novel belongs to the victim, whom we are made to know and whose tragedy we are made to comprehend.
VERY OLD BONES, by William Kennedy. (Viking, $22.) The sixth novel in the author's Albany cycle is a sort of excavation into the past of his own career as a writer, where the undoing of gloom and the reconciliation of family members are central themes.


Read This!
THE corner newsstand, as visually dense and jumbled as MTV or a news reporter's desk, is perhaps the second mirror we look into each morning.
As one bends over to pick up the morning paper, the eye roves over the serious headlines of the day, as well as snack food for the brain: the eclectic assortment of magazines that blasts your sensibilities and yanks at your self-esteem.
The pitches range from the simple, upbeat "Be an Optimist in 2 Weeks" (Self), to the highly specialized "How to Beat a Buck's Nose" (Bowhunter, a magazine for archers), to the fiendishly direct "Why Luke Perry's Name Makes You Want to Buy This" (Sassy, a magazine whose title was originally a popular cover word).


Italy Summons 20 Players for U.S. Tour
GIANLUCA VIALLI, who transferred Friday to Juventus of Turin from Sampdoria of Genoa for a $21 million fee, was among 20 players called up by Italy's coach, ARRIGO SACCHI, yesterday for the United States Cup '92 tournament.
Italy, eliminated during qualifying for the European championship next month in Sweden, will play Portugal next Sunday at New Haven,; Ireland on June 4 at Foxboro, Mass., and the United States on June 6 at Chicago. (AP)


Hilary S. Kayle, Peter A. Crist
Mr. and Mrs.
Milton P. Kayle of New Rochelle, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter Hilary Sue Kayle to Dr.
Peter Alan Crist, a son of John Crist of Beaverton, Ore., and the late Varley Crist.
A June wedding is planned.
Ms.
Kayle, 39 years old, is the author of two novels, "Winners and Lovers" and "Players," published by Berkley.
She graduated from the University of Michigan.
Her father is of counsel to the New York law firm of Gilbert, Segall &amp; Young.


Correction
A picture caption on May 3 with an article about craft galleries in San Francisco misattributed the table and candleholder shown at Cedanna.
They were made by Ivan McLean, not his brother Jason McLean.


2 Paths, One Goal: Taking First Place
GARY KASPAROV of Russia, the world champion, and Vasily Ivanchuk, a Ukrainian grandmaster, tied for first place in the Dortmund International, which finished at the end of April, but got there in different ways.
Kasparov sought wild complexity but went too far against Grandmasters Gata Kamsky of Brooklyn and Robert Hubner of Germany and was soundly punished.
He compensated by winning five games.


Public &amp; Private; The Boob Tube
THE DAYS AND NIGHTS OF DANNY QUAYLE: Danny triumphs over another blooper with George's help; Marlin makes Danny give away the anatomically correct doll.
Marilyn is supportive.
As this past silly and tumultuous week drew to a close, I had to keep reminding myself that Dan Quayle is a fictional character.


Night Games: $75
Forget the barbecue sauce.
What your next backyard cook-out really needs is 1,000 watts of pure unadulterated halogen light.
Regent's portable lighting system holds twin floodlights atop a stand that can be extended to seven feet.
Regent's Lighting of Burlington, N.C., suggests you use the lights nocturnally on the boat or to paint the garage.
But if you really want the neighbors to love you, why not hook a few of these babies together and play a little night baseball?
In yellow, $75, at Home Depot stores.


World Markets; The Very Careful British Market
Is the British stock market too efficient?
That might seem an odd notion, since the market took off after the Conservative Party victory in national elections on April 9.
The Financial Times index of 100 leading stocks is up 13.5 percent and has set new highs, closing at 2,715.0 on Friday.
Moreover, many analysts contend that the market will rise even more, making it a good bet even after the 322 point rally so far.
Paul Walton, the British strategist at James Capel Inc. in London, is so bullish he thinks the F.T. 100 can reach 3,000 by the end of the year and even 3,500 by mid-1993.
Goldman Sachs in London also sees it at 3,000 by the end of the year.


A Battle From Hope To Glory
When he finished "A Midnight Clear" last year, Keith Gordon hoped that his film about the futility of war "might get a few good reviews and give 10 people images they would never forget."
Selling audiences a film about six young American soldiers in the snowy Ardennes forest at Christmastime 1944, just before the last awful European battle of World War II, is not easy.
But nearly all the reviews that greeted its recent opening have urged audiences to treasure this $5 million movie for the understated power of its antiwar sentiments.
And they have sent the Hollywood flies buzzing around the ears of its 31-year-old writer-director.


Talking: Eviction; Facing Up To Arrears In the Rent
AFTER being laid off and having problems getting unemployment compensation, a medical technician at St.
Raphael's Hospital in New Haven found herself threatened with eviction from her $550-a-month apartment a few months ago.
Such tales are becoming common as the recession touches the lives of a growing number of people, many of whom never dreamed of facing such a predicament.
And landlords, worried about cash flow, are taking action as fast as possible.


John Gates, 78, Former Editor of The Daily Worker, Is Dead
John Gates, who quit as a top American Communist official and chief editor of The Daily Worker after losing a campaign to democratize the party and free it from Moscow's control, died yesterday at the Miami Heart Institute in Miami Beach.
He was 78 years old and lived in North Miami Beach.
He died of heart disease and a stroke, his family said.


'American Dream' Charts Labor's Loss
When Florence Reece wrote the labor anthem "Which Side Are You On" back in the 1930's, her question was rhetorical.
Four decades later, when she sang it in Barbara Kopple's paean to labor, "Harlan County, U.S.A.," the song title was still listed in the credits without a question mark.
But by the mid-1980's, when Ms.
Kopple filmed "American Dream," about a protracted meatpackers strike against Hormel, the nation had grown more ambivalent about organized labor.
Few union leaders would risk asking such a sweeping question of the public -- or even of their own members.


Corrections
A classical music listing last Sunday in Summer Arts, section 2A, placed the South Mountain Concerts festival incorrectly.
It is in Pittsfield, Mass., not Maine.


'Night in Catskills,' a Revue
"A NIGHT IN THE CATSKILLS" is not a bad title for the makeshift revue at the Forum Theater Group, but "Claire Barry's Floor Show" would be better.
That's because a small-time mishmash of warmed-over sketches and routine variety acts is singlehandedly remade into a warming combination of hominess and slickness when Miss Barry takes over.


When Racial Barriers Die Hard
Charlie Sifford carries the lost years with the resignation and the insurgence of a former exile.
At age 69, he is still haunted by a prime he was never allowed to fulfill.
In the 50's, he was blocked by the institutionalized racism in professional golf.
In the 60's, when he was finally allowed to compete against the best, suppressed anger over past indignities and the desire to prove people wrong made the most difficult game even harder.


Put on the Dog (The Fish, Too)
Tote bags in the shape of tropical fish and cuddly cats and dogs are giving today's fashion look a dash of humor -- just as in the mid-1930's, when the designer Elsa Schiaparelli and her artist friends in Paris enlivened the Depression era with Surrealistic accessories.
During the 50's, bland gray flannel suits were offset with raffia straw summer tote bags.
One memorable example was a life-sized macaw, now part of the costume collection at the Metropolitan Museum of Art.
The craft movement of the 70's and 80's carried on the tradition of distinctive accessories.


Not a Single Throwaway In the Litter
Brooke Astor's dachshunds now have some competition from a pack of pugs.
In the last few months, the snub-nose dogs have been feted, fawned over and fought over by some of the city's top social lions.
Pugs haven't been this celebrated since the Duke and Duchess of Windsor made the breed popular.


A Summer Preview -- or So Many People Are Hoping


Mutual Funds; The Thrill Is Gone for Junk Bonds
Because they are riskier, junk-bond funds yield more than A-rated corporate bond funds.
In 1988, when the junk market was strong, the yield spread between the two types of funds averaged about three percentage points.
As the junk market began falling apart in late 1989 and 1990, yields on junk funds rose sharply, peaking at nearly seven percentage points more than high-quality corporate bond funds in late 1990.
Because of the uncertain economy in early 1991, yields remained fairly high.


Different Paths Lead To N.C.A.A. Final
Alex O'Brien of Stanford and Wade McGuire of Georgia will meet in Sunday's final of the men's National Collegiate Athletic Association tennis championships after winning contrasting semifinals today.
O'Brien, a Stanford senior who is seeded third in the tournament, easily upset second-seeded Jose Luis Noriega of the University of San Diego, 6-0, 6-3, in one hour.
McGuire, seeded sixth, struggled through three sets against Pepperdine's unseeded Howard Joffe to win, 7-5, 3-6, 6-3, in 2 hours 20 minutes.


Arms Accord Recognizes New World
Following are excerpts from the text of the protocol to the strategic arms treaty, signed here today by Belarus, Kazakhstan, Russia, Ukraine and the United States:


Federal Environmental Oversight Is Limited; The Oil Industry Likes to Keep Regulation Close to Home
WHEN drilling rigs were plentiful across America's oil patch, state governments fought to keep revenues and regulatory control close to home, minimizing Washington's role.
Even as domestic oil and gas production are at the lowest levels in decades, Congress will soon decide whether this fading industry should be compelled to pay more for environmental cleanup or continue its longstanding exemption from Federal environmental laws.
At issue is a delicate calculation applicable to many environmental dilemmas at a time of scarce government resources and a stalled national economy.
If an industry is not pushed hard enough, environmental damage piles up, but if it is pushed too hard, businesses simply shut down, abandoning polluted sites.


The View From: Mount Vernon; Celebrating 100 Years of Struggling Toward a Better Life
WHEN Ronald A. Blackwood arrived in Mount Vernon from Jamaica in 1955 "to bunk in with a friend" while he looked for work, the 28-year-old Caribbean immigrant was following a path that others had traveled -- and would continue to travel -- for a century.
"There was an apartment waiting for me in Brooklyn, but I liked what I saw in Mount Vernon," he said.
"So I stayed." Thirty years later he became the city's first black Mayor, and this year he will preside over Mount Vernon's centennial.


North Korea Denies Border-Clash Reports
North Korea today denied reports of a border clash Friday that was said to have left three North Korean infiltrators dead and accused Seoul of fabricating the incident to try to derail peace talks.
In a report carried by North Korea's official news service, the Korean Central News Agency, the Government in Pyongyang said that some South Koreans had fired on a northern police post, but that there had been no injuries.


Godzilla, Sharon and 'X' Meet in the Kaleidoscope
Random thoughts are the only thoughts left to anyone who has spent two sleepless weeks here, making feverish, futile attempts to keep up with the dozens of films that are shown every day.
Here are a few of those free-floating observations, conveying a hint of how dizzying, exhilarating and unimaginably petty the Cannes International Film Festival can be:
"Please don't think I'm becoming an egomaniac, because I
am"
: a remark by a suddenly world-famous participant in one of the festival's best-liked films.


In the Region: New Jersey; Recent Sales
Bridgewater 193,000
821 Country Club Road
3-bedroom, 2-bath, 32-year-old ranch; patio, 2-acre plot, fireplace; taxes $3,521.
Hazlet 115,000
584 Beers Street
3-bedroom, 2-bath, 10-year-old ranch; oak cabinets in eat-in kitchen, full basement; taxes $3,700.
Maplewood 226,000
38 Courter Avenue
5-bedroom, 2-bath, 2-half bath, 42-year-old colonial; 2-car garage, porch, w/w carpeting; taxes $5,852.
Millburn 226,000
11 River Lane
3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 38-year-old colonial; marble fireplace, 2-car garage, deck; taxes $4,079.
Somerville 167,218
28 Fairmont Avenue
3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 39-year-old colonial; screened porch, eat-in-kitchen, full basement; taxes $4,282.
West Orange 184,000
11 Glen Road
4-bedroom, 2-bath, 57-year-old colonial; full basement, washer/dryer, refrigerator included; taxes $4,222.
OTHER AREAS West Hartford, Conn. 134,000
61 Knollwood Road  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 42-year-old ranch; enclosed porch, hardwood floors, 0.25 acre; taxes $2,619.
Armonk, N.Y. 1.175 million
6 Wampus Lakes Drive
5-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, year-old frame brick; 2 fireplaces, formal dining room, library, deck, Jacuzzi, 3 acres; taxes not yet assessed.
Commack, L.I. 160,000
6 Byron Road  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 32-year-old ranch; dining room, eat-in kitchen, den, family room, basement, 1-car garage; taxes $3,900.


Videotaping Trials Could Help Jurors
The recent proposal by the New York State Office of Court Administration to replace stenographers with electronic recorders in 32 Surrogate Courts and the Court of Claims  [ "Court Reporters Upset by Plan for Recordings," May 3 ] , while a step toward efficiency and cost reduction, does not go far enough.
Why not explore videotaping trials in place of merely recording them?
Moving to the more robust technology of videotape has manifold advantages.


Happy Birthday
UP in a side room of the executive offices of the New York Stock Exchange, the photo session was almost finished.
"Can we
do
it, please?" Matthew Rich, a publicity agent, was saying to two dozen men in black tie and one woman in a blue dress who stood around a cake and smiled as the bulbs started flashing.
"Don't block other faces and don't touch the cake," Mr.
Rich told the stock-exchange chiefs who had come from around the world to celebrate the Big Board's bicentennial and to help initiate its foundation to benefit public education in New York City.
They shuffled demurely on the beige carpet, hands at sides.


Dealer Sues U.S. Over Seized Tyrannosaur Bones
In the latest twist in a tortuous legal battle for custody of a 65-million-year-old dinosaur skeleton, a South Dakota fossil dealer has filed a lawsuit against the Federal Government that lawyers believe might eventually reach the Supreme Court.
The suit was filed in a United States District Court on Friday by the Black Hills Institute of Geological Research to recover a priceless Tyrannosaurus rex skeleton that was seized from the company on May 14 by about 50 National Guardsmen and agents of the Federal Bureau of Investigation.


U.S. ATTORNEY ROLE RAISED IN IRAQ CASE
Members of Congress are questioning whether the office of a United States Attorney who used to represent a company owned by Iraq is the best agency to investigate an Atlanta bank accused of making illegal loans of $5 billion to that country.
They have suggested that to avoid any appearance of impropriety, the investigation should be conducted by either an outside prosecutor or another United States Attorney's office.


A LA CARTE
First Licks on Dessert
THE comedian Alan King, who lives nearby, loves them.
Restaurant critics have praised them unanimously.
They are the desserts at the commonly owned Navona in Great Neck and Il Tulipano in Huntington.
But none of the cascade of desserts offered at the two restaurants are made by their talented chefs.


'85 Killings Cast Shadow Over South Africa Talks
Nearly seven years after the unsolved slayings of four black South Africans who actively resisted apartheid, the deaths have returned to haunt the Government of President F. W. de Klerk at a delicate time in its negotiations with the African National Congress.
Matthew Goniwe and three colleagues in the United Democratic Front, a coalition of anti-apartheid groups that served as a sort of surrogate for the congress, were killed in the eastern region of Cape province in June 1985.
This was a time of spreading black rebellion, suppressed under nationwide emergency rule imposed in 1986.
The four killings coincided with the mysterious deaths or disappearances of some other apartheid foes.


Parties Join to Cap Campaign Donations
IN an atmosphere of harmony seldom seen in Trenton these days, the Legislature is moving rapidly to put a cap on campaign contributions, spurred by public concern that state lawmakers are becoming increasingly beholden to special-interest groups.
The Assembly State Government Committee has unanimously approved a measure that, if enacted and signed into law, will be one of the most comprehensive and restrictive campaign finance statutes in the nation.
And legislative leaders believe that it will have overwhelming support in both the full Assembly and the Senate and will receive the Governor's blessing.


Rodgers Set for Surgery in California
California Angels Manager BUCK RODGERS was admitted yesterday to Centinela Hospital Medical Center in Inglewood, Calif., where he will undergo surgery for injuries sustained in a crash involving the team's bus.
Rodgers, who broke his right elbow and left knee, was flown from Thomas Jefferson University Hospital in Philadelphia back to California in a Lear jet with three other team members who had been hospitalized in New Jersey.


My Father the Crook
THE ELEPHANT
By Richard Rayner. 289 pp. New York: Turtle Bay Books/ Random House.


Messed-Up Families
THREE CHILDREN
By Lori Toppel. 207 pp. New York: Summit Books. $20.
THIS WAY MADNESS LIES
By Thomas William Simpson. 388 pp. New York: Warner Books. $19.95.


For Troubled Co-ops, the Workout Rx
THREE years after sponsor defaults began undermining the financial health of hundreds of New York City's converted co-ops and condominiums, the pace of new defaults has slowed considerably and many troubled buildings are working their way back to stability.
Last June, the New York State Attorney General's office said that sponsors had defaulted on maintenance payments and carrying charges in about 400 co-ops and condominiums, or about 10 percent of the 4,000 buildings converted since 1980.
A year later, the number of troubled buildings remains at 400.


Skewed Political Count
To the Editor:
You should be ashamed for blindly accepting the U.S.
Park Police crowd estimate for the Save Our Cities!
Save Our Children! march on Washington (news article, May 17).


MAY 17-23: Capital Punishment; One Prisoner's Life Ends With the Headlines
Roger Keith Coleman was executed in Virginia's electric chair Wednesday night, ending the media-age death row drama that saw Mr.
Coleman pleading his case on "Larry King Live" and "The Phil Donahue Show" as he tried to stave off execution.
Mr.
Coleman, who was convicted of the 1981 rape and murder of his sister-in-law, died proclaiming his innocence.
His supporters say recent court rulings kept him from challenging his case in Federal court.
Skeptics say the evidence against him -- including DNA matching never seen by the 1981 jury -- was overwhelming, and the public relations barrage at the end was an attempt to win in the media what he could never win in the courts.


Corrections
The Wall Street column on the Money page last Sunday about the Reichmann family's stake in publicly traded companies referred incompletely to Donald J. Trump's investment in Alexander's Inc.
Mr.
Trump pledged 1.35 million shares in Alexander's as collateral for a loan from Citibank.
In April the bank took possession of the shares after Mr.
Trump failed to repay the loan.


Teases That Backfire
To the Editor:
I was disappointed that the article "Today's Trailers: Big and Costly, but Still a Tease"  [ May 3 ]  did not focus more on the resulting diminished experience of the moviegoer.


Quebec Sticker Says 'Bilingual'
Along with the familiar credit card stickers on hotel, restaurant and storefront windows, American visitors to Quebec this summer may notice a decal saying simply F/E.
The symbol means that both French and English are spoken in the establishment.
Until now, businesses have been unable to make it known that they have a bilingual staff because Quebec's laws mandate that exterior commercial signs must be in French only.
Because the decal has no wording on it, it was deemed acceptable by the Commission de Protection de la Langue Francaise.


Corrections
The Wine column in The Times Magazine on May 3, about the Hermann J. Wiemer winery in upstate New York, misidentified its architects.
The company was UKZ Design Inc., not UZK Architects.


Quotation of the Day
"When you've got a gun you just feel untouchable. You feel if you get into problems, you could always solve it with a gun." -- DWAYNE, a 15-year old serving time for murder in the Harlem Valley Secure Center.  [ 42:5. ]


RECORD BRIEFS
Curve: 'Doppelganger'
Anxious/Charisma 92108; cassette and CD.
TXT&gt;
Curve's first album, "Doppelganger," is an aural deluge: surging, echoing guitars, booming drums and Toni Halliday's voice, breathy and implacable.
An avenging siren, Halliday sings about love as siege and obsession.
She threatens, "Don't step over my head/ 'Cause I will wish you dead"; later, she vows, "I've come to mess with your head/ It'll make you feel good."
Curve arrives on the trailing edge of a trend, in the wake of British dream-pop bands like My Bloody Valentine, Lush, Ride and others with sanguine female voices amid howling guitars.
Halliday and her co-composer, Dean Garcia (bass, guitar, keyboards, drum machines), have been knocking around British rock since the mid-1980's, collaborating on various projects in various styles before releasing Curve's first EP, "Blindfold," in 1991.
From the beginning, Curve had figured out its own proportions of structure and sonic chaos and its attitude, guarded and accusatory but never cold.
While Garcia and three other band members' guitars crackle and billow and screech, Halliday sings tersely memorable melodies and backup vocals that make pop syllables like "ooh-la-la-la" seem eerie and seductive.
She can sound like Blondie's Deborah Harry, floating unconcerned through the tempest, but she can also bear down until her voice breaks like Sinead O'Connor's leaping wail.
Curve may be a band of opportunists, working variations on a formula.
But great rock can emerge where formula meets private visions and demons, and for Curve, the pop end of dream-pop is a magnificent niche.


A Computer Wish List
To the Editor:
With respect to "Slogging Up PC Hill at I.B.M." (May 10), would you like to hear from one of their potential customers?


POSTINGS: Air France Takes Flight; Au Revoir, Fifth Avenue
For decades, Fifth Avenue was the location of choice for airline ticket offices.
But the number has declined in recent years as some air carriers, like Pan Am, went out of business, and others, like Finnair and KLM, moved their ticket offices to other midtown spaces.
Air France, the latest defector, will move its Manhattan ticket office next month from 666 Fifth Avenue at 52d Street, to space in the building at 125 West 56th Street, near Seventh Avenue.
A spokesman for Air France said the move was prompted, in part, by the need for more space.
The airline's options may have been limited by a 1971 zoning rule, designed to preserve the retail character of Fifth Avenue, that limited space leased to airlines, banks and travel agencies -- no more than 15 percent of the ground-floor space.


At 32, Aouita Gets Back on Track
For much of the 1980's, he was as dominating as any runner ever.
His mere presence in a race caused others to plot strategy how to finish second.
First was his domain alone.
Said Aouita of Morocco set world records at four distances -- 1,500 meters, 2,000 meters, 3,000 meters and the 5,000 -- and also ran the fastest time at two miles, reflecting a versatility almost unknown in these days of specialization.
For now, it would seem impossible that a single runner could replace him as the world's fastest at the same range of events.


Despite Continued Cuts, Arts Remain a Priority
THE recession has taken its toll on the arts.
Donations -- personal, corporate and governmental -- are way down, and one organization after another has been forced to cut back operations.
Many have gone out of business.
On this Memorial Day weekend, however, let us look at the brighter side of the picture, which comes from a nationwide survey prepared for the American Council for the Arts and underwritten by Philip Morris.
The American people, the report said, care about the arts in far greater numbers than one might have supposed.
They attend concerts, support artistic training in public schools and are willing, up to a point, to trade higher taxes for government financing of arts programs.


Convention Details Plans for Security
Madison Square Garden will be sealed off to pedestrians with a metal security fence before the Democratic National Convention begins on July 13, and any homeless people living on the sidewalks within the square-block area will have to move, the city's convention planners say.
The officials say the fence is part of a security plan, not an effort to sweep away one of New York's most visible problems.
But the question of whether the city would take steps to clear the area of homeless people before the convention has created a delicate situation for the Dinkins administration.


Intourist Lives
To the Editor: "In New Ukraine, Bad Old Ways" (April 5), Henry Kamm quotes a guide who said that as far as the individual traveler was concerned Intourist and its services had ceased to function because it has collapsed along with the Soviet Union.


Melissa Beville, J. A. Breckenridge
Melissa Ann Beville, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
R.
Harwood Beville of Annapolis, Md., was married yesterday in Baltimore to James Andrew Breckenridge, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
James A. Breckenridge of St.
Louis.
The ceremony was performed by the Rev.
Ernest Smart at the Second Presbyterian Church.
Mrs.
Breckenridge, 25 years old, graduated from Colgate University.
She is the director of international advertising for Polo/Ralph Lauren in New York.
Her father is the executive vice president of the Rouse Company in Columbia, Md.


In Difficult Times, Church Attempts to Build Spiritual Bridges
THE signs are clear, not only in the burning cities but in posh suburbs, where neighbors are often strangers to each other.
For growing numbers of people, there is a sense that America has lost its sense of community.
While political candidates offer their strategies for change, and scholars put the nation's plight in context, the religious community is doing its own soul searching.
One local church will offer a timely program next weekend, although the event was planned long before the recent turmoil in Los Angeles.


Votes in Congress
Tally Last Week in Connecticut, New Jersey and New York  Senate


Barbecuing Returns, With Twists
MEMORIAL DAY weekend marks the beginning of one of summer's great pleasures: eating outdoors.
In the last few years, though, the standard scene -- Dad grilling hamburgers while Mom tosses a salad -- has altered.
The barbecue has become the place for cooking anything from tofu to frogs' legs.
And instead of ball-park mustard and ketchup, salsas, cold sauces or compound butters are served on the side.
The standard tools for the barbecue chef have also changed.
In California it is now against the law to use lighter fluid as a fire starter because of its contribution to air pollution (not to mention the bad taste it can impart to food).
Instead, people are using kindling.
But a useful new product for lighting charcoal easily has just been produced by Griffo Grill.
Called Cob Lites, it consists of corn cobs that have been dipped in food-grade paraffin.
They produce an intense heat when burned, and they don't smell.
They are available at Williams-Sonoma stores and from their mail order catalogue, from the Chef's Catalogue and at Crate and Barrel stores.


2,914 Reasons For Latest Yank Loss
Frankie Frisch was recently sighted in Robin Yount's rear-view mirror.
Zack Wheat was spotted soon after, and Al Simmons could be there before summer comes.
With each hit in his 19th major league season, Yount moves closer to becoming the 17th player in the history of the game to reach 3,000.
But the one that came late yesterday afternoon was much more than No. 2,914.
On a cloudless, warm afternoon in the Bronx, along the way to Cooperstown, Robin Yount won a game.
His 10th-inning home run dropped just beyond the right-field wall to give the Milwaukee Brewers a 5-4 victory over the Yankees.


Kristen Minor and Nathan Corser
Kristen Minor, a daughter of Susan Miranda and Michael Minor, both of Los Alamos, N.M., was married yesterday in San Juan Pueblo, N.M., to Nathan Clark Corser, a son of Elizabeth B. and Dallas L. Corser of Katonah, N.Y.
The Rev.
Dale Arnink performed the Unitarian ceremony at Swan Lake Ranch.
The bride, 26 years old, who is keeping her name, graduated from Rice University.
She is an architect with Kohn Pedersen Fox Associates in New York, as his her husband.


Herley Industries reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


When Dreams Turn to Winning
The clay is red, the roses are pink, it's springtime in Paris, and the sense of romance is not lost on the phalanx of last-minute practicers lobbing and serving at Roland Garros Stadium here.
At least until Monday, when real competition begins and hopefuls start turning into has-beens, everybody still thinks he or she can win the French Open.
"During a Grand Slam anything can happen in those two weeks: you can get sick, you can get better, you can go for it much more mentally and emotionally," said Monica Seles, who has gone for this one with enough gusto to amass a 19-1 record, including titles in 1990 and '91 and a semifinal finish in her 1989 debut.


Call Pitch, Catch It, See Cone Sparkle
It is the 10th game of a 10-game road trip.
The Mets are exhausted, distracted.
Nine innings on the field and then 3,000 miles in the air loom before them.
Energy is a scarce resource.
Enthusiasm is hard to manufacture.
Hope, though, is present.
David Cone is on the mound, and on top of his form.


Dividend Meetings


Books of The Times; Nixon's Enemy in 1950 Had the Last Laugh in '74
Center Stage Helen Gahagan Douglas: A Life By Ingrid Winther Scobie Illustrated. 369 pages.
Oxford University Press. $24.95.


Darling Throws 2-Hitter As A's Shut Out Red Sox
Athletics 4, Red Sox 0
BOSTON, May 24 (AP) -- Ron Darling pitched a two-hitter for his first shutout since 1988 as the Oakland Athletics beat the Boston Red Sox, 4-0, today for their fifth victory in six games.


Czar Resources reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Dataram Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Two Steamrollers Get Set To Meet at Center Ice
After a promising start, the Stanley Cup playoffs have been losing momentum.
But they may enjoy a strong finish when two powerful, streaking teams -- the defending champion Pittsburgh Penguins and the Chicago Blackhawks -- meet in the final round, which begins tomorrow night in Pittsburgh.
The Blackhawks have won 11 consecutive playoff games, a National Hockey League record for a single playoff season, and the Penguins have won seven in a row.
The Blackhawks' best player is a rising star, Jeremy Roenick, while Pittsburgh's biggest gun is Mario Lemieux, the best player in the game, who has dazzled recently with a series of spectacular goals.


Books of The Times; Nixon's Enemy in 1950 Had the Last Laugh in '74
Center Stage  Helen Gahagan Douglas: A Life  By Ingrid Winther Scobie  Illustrated. 369 pages.
Oxford University Press. $24.95.
An amusing campaign button that appears in a photograph in "Center Stage," a biography of the late Helen Gahagan Douglas, actress and Democratic Congresswoman, is a reminder of one of the dirtiest campaigns in American political history.
It reads: "Don't Blame Me. I Voted for Helen Gahagan Douglas."
In the 1950 race for United States Senator from California, Representative Richard Milhous Nixon soundly defeated Representative Douglas.
Mr.
Nixon's victory and his hard-hitting campaign lifted him into national prominence and the Vice Presidency in 1952.


Goal Systems International reports earnings for Year to March 31


Duplex Products reports earnings for Qtr to April 25


Bad News: Fuel Is Cheap
Energy prices are so low that the going is rough for scientists hoping to limit global warming by encouraging people to burn less fuel.
Page 35.


Mary Beth Neraas, Jeffrey Chasnow
Mary Beth Neraas, an associate with the Washington law firm of Hyman, Phelps &amp; McNamara, and Jeffrey Bruce Chasnow, a prosecutor with the Justice Department's office of consumer litigation in Washington, were married yesterday at their home in Silver Spring, Md.
Cantor Judi Porecki performed the ceremony.


Abby F. Conrad, Mark G. Smith
Abby Francesca Conrad, a daughter of Dr.
Edward H. Conrad of Freeport, L.I., and Rona H. Conrad of Mount Vernon, N.Y., was married yesterday to Mark Gordon Smith, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Peter G. Smith of Somerville, Mass.
Rabbi Shohama Wiener, an aunt of the bride, officiated at the Fountainhead in New Rochelle, N.Y.
Mrs.
Smith, 26 years old, is a project manager at the N.P.D.
Group Inc., a market-research company in Port Washington, L.I.
She is a cum laude graduate of Union College in Schenectady, N.Y., and received her M.B.A., also cum laude, from Boston University.
Her father, a psychologist, is a director of the Whitman Institute for Counseling and Psychotherapy in Brooklyn.
Her mother is a school psychologist in the Mount Vernon public school system, where she is chairman of the Committee on Preschool Special Education.


Agreed. Peru Needs Democracy.
Peru's strongman President, Alberto Fujimori, bristled with his usual truculence when he appeared unexpectedly last week at a meeting of the Organization of American States in the Bahamas.
But he also announced an accelerated timetable for new elections.
That, and the O.A.S.'s cautiously encouraging response, raise new hopes for resolving the crisis ignited by Mr.
Fujimori's dismissal of Congress, the judiciary and constitutional rule last month.
Mr.
Fujimori continues to offend democrats and insult diplomats with belligerent words and deeds.
His latest proposal would create a presidential dictatorship seductively disguised as "direct democracy." His plan excludes Peru's strongly rooted political parties and offers no effective checks against executive power.


Eastern Environmental Services Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Autodesk Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


New Head Is Selected For Renault
The French Government named a new chairman for Renault S.A. yesterday, selecting the company's managing director, Louis Schweitzer, to head the state-controlled auto maker.
He succeeds Raymond Levy, whose term expired on Wednesday.
Mr.
Levy will turn 65 next month, the mandatory retirement age.
Mr.
Schweitzer's promotion, which was expected, was announced by the Industry Ministry in Paris.


Cheap Fuel Hurts Goal For Climate
The scientists who will gather at the United Nations Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro next month say that action is needed now to limit global warming.
Their science may be right, but their timing could not be worse.
Taking the most important step in slowing climate warming -- burning less fuel to cut heat-retaining carbon emissions into the atmosphere -- will be extremely difficult because fuel prices are now so low.


Dance in Review
JoAnna Mendl Shaw
Bessie Schonberg Theater
Although life can be mystifying, people may nevertheless feel that it somehow makes sense.
The dances that JoAnna Mendl Shaw presented on Tuesday night at the Bessie Schonberg Theater resembled life, for they both mystified and made sense.
And their obscurities and clarities were equally exciting.
In "Rules/Chaos," Ms.
Shaw contrasts order with disorder.
The work's eight dancers are costumed like schoolgirls, and their behavior is unpredictably angelic and impish.
But Ms.
Shaw is interested in more than children in this piece to a taped collage, which includes original music by Scott Killian.
She makes order look simultaneously comforting and oppressive.
And the states of disorder appear liberating as well as terrifying.


Embrace Systems reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


New York's Carriage Drivers Are Getting an Unfair Rap
To the Editor:
Everyday when I go to work, driving my horse-drawn carriage, I meet people with hate-filled faces who scream at me how cruel I am to my horse.
They have probably never brushed a horse in their lifetime, and dare to tell me how to work with it.
I brush my horse every day, assure myself that it has no sore, give it a shower after every hot summer day, massage its legs and shoulders with alcohol, feed it, water it, call the vet if it's sick, give it a day off if it's tired.
The horse is my partner not only in my economical subsistence but also emotional: it is a friend.


Machine Tool Orders Off 9.4% in April
Orders for American-made machine tools fell 9.4 percent in April, compared with March, according to the latest monthly report by an industry trade association.
The report, prepared for release today, indicated that demand from foreign buyers had sagged.
But orders rose from a year earlier, leading some analysts and industry executives to predict increased spending to modernize factories.
Machine tools are used to cut and form metal parts for a huge number of goods, from household appliances to supersonic jetliners.
Because the auto industry accounts for about a third of the machine tool makers' output, Detroit's slump has hurt those companies.


Where Plaques Will Honor Pluck
Why not a senior athletes hall of fame?
JACK FONES, a 74-year-old former Time magazine editor, popped the question, found an amenable site -- Shorewalk Vacation Villas in Bradenton, Fla. -- and plans to open the hall soon.


Books of The Times; Nixon's Enemy in 1950 Had the Last Laugh in '74
Center Stage  Helen Gahagan Douglas: A Life  By Ingrid Winther Scobie  Illustrated. 369 pages.
Oxford University Press. $24.95.
An amusing campaign button that appears in a photograph in "Center Stage," a biography of the late Helen Gahagan Douglas, actress and Democratic Congresswoman, is a reminder of one of the dirtiest campaigns in American political history.
It reads: "Don't Blame Me. I Voted for Helen Gahagan Douglas."
In the 1950 race for United States Senator from California, Representative Richard Milhous Nixon soundly defeated Representative Douglas.
Mr.
Nixon's victory and his hard-hitting campaign lifted him into national prominence and the Vice Presidency in 1952.


On Global Warming; Why No Carbon Tax?
The threat of global warming raises two salient questions: What's the economic cost of inaction?
And what's the cost of action -- taking steps to stop further warming?
The models for studying these questions are primitive, yielding little more than educated guesses.
In the face of such numbing uncertainty, the sensible course is a policy of "no regrets." The U.S. would take measures -- including a tax on carbon-based fuels -- to reduce emissions of greenhouse gases as part of an overall strategy to reduce pollution to desirable levels.


First Central Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


THAILAND PREMIER QUITS OVER UNREST
Prime Minister Suchinda Kraprayoon resigned Sunday over his role in the worst political violence in Thailand's modern history, but tens of thousands of Thais took to the streets of Bangkok to make clear that his resignation was not punishment enough.
With broad support from outraged Thais who now see a chance to end six decades of military domination of their government, opposition parties announced they would seek to overturn a royal decree preventing the prosecution of General Suchinda over last week's bloodshed in the streets of Bangkok.


Austrians Elect Rightist as President
Thomas Klestil, the chief of Austria's diplomatic corps and a former Ambassador to the United States, was elected today to succeed President Kurt Waldheim, whose record as an officer in Hitler's Army isolated the country diplomatically for six years.
In a runoff between the top two candidates to emerge from initial voting last month, Mr.
Klestil, the 59-year-old candidate of the conservative People's Party, received more than 56 percent of the votes, against about 43 percent for Rudolf Streicher, the Social Democratic candidate and a former minister of transport and state industries.


Haitians Still Determined to Get Out
Despite new measures aimed at discouraging Haitians from fleeing, this town's beaches, like the bays and coves elsewhere in the south, are teeming with Haitians determined to leave their country and builders readying boats to carry them.
Citing increasingly heavy repression by the military and the suffocating grip of a hemisphere-wide trade embargo imposed on Haiti last October in the hope of reversing a military coup against the elected President, Haitians said that nothing could dissuade them from leaving.


Business Digest
TUESDAY, MAY 26, 1992 The Economy
The Bush Administration is promoting enterprise zones as the centerpiece of its plan to revive inner cities, but the zones that have sprouted under state programs have made only a slight dent in urban blight.
Still, after a decade of criticizing the White House for neglecting the cities, many state and local officials and urban experts applaud the Administration's proposal, saying every little bit will help.  [ Page 1. ]


SWITCHING POLICY, U.S. WILL RETURN REFUGEES TO HAITI
The White House significantly toughened its efforts today to discourage a flood of Haitian refugees to the United States, saying it had authorized the Coast Guard to halt all boats carrying the refugees from their homeland and to escort them back to Haiti.
The decision, issued in the form of an executive order by President Bush, departs from a policy adopted only on Thursday to stop picking up Haitians from boats unless the vessels were in imminent danger of sinking.


Excel Energy Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Nokes's Hit Completes Comeback
Things looked awfully bleak for the Yankees for an awfully long time at Yankee Stadium yesterday.
The Brewers bounced Scott Sanderson around like a basketball and the team that could not lose at home last week was perilously close to its third setback in a row in the Bronx.
The Yanks were down, 7-1, and it looked awful.
But any fans who sneaked away to the concession stands in the bottom of the sixth inning missed the resilient Yankees' transforming awful into awesome.
The team hammered back with six runs in the sixth to tie the score, then ended up winning the game in the ninth as Matt Nokes ripped a one-out, bases loaded single over a shallow outfield that boosted the Yankees to an 8-7 victory over Milwaukee.


U.N. May Widen Yugoslav Sanctions
The United Nations Security Council is likely to approve mandatory, step-by-step sanctions on Serbia and Montenegro on Wednesday or Thursday, according to diplomats and United Nations officials.
Diplomats said that the new measure was being drafted by the United States, Britain and France, and that while details were still being worked out, the first step would probably be a call to follow the United States example by cutting civilian air links by banning all flights by JAT, the Yugoslav national airline.


Donaldson Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


NEWS SUMMARY
International 2-6  BUSH ORDERS RETURN VOYAGE  In another change in policy, President Bush ordered the Coast Guard to escort all Haitian refugees picked up at sea back to their country.  1  Haitians say nothing can dissuade them from fleeing.  4  BAKER LASHES OUT AT EUROPE  Using his harshest words yet, Secretary of State Baker criticized European nations for not punishing Belgrade or trying to stop the fighting in Bosnia and Herzegovina.  1  U.N.
TO MOVE AGAINST YUGOSLAVIA  The Security Council is working out the details of sanctions against Yugoslavia that are expected to be enacted this week.  6  A 48-DAY REIGN ENDS IN THAILAND  Gen.
Suchinda Kraprayoon resigned as Prime Minister, then vanished.
Yet many local officials and urban experts hope the Administration's proposal will provide a nucleus to build around.  1  LEFT OUT OF LAS VEGAS'S BOOM  Much of Las Vegas boomed with the gambling industry in the 1980's, but the poor, overwhelmingly black neighborhoods a few miles from the Strip remained mired in decay and hopelessness.
But her campaign was a tour de force for a young lawyer in her first criminal appeal.  7  A professor and a librarian made the works of Houdini reappear.  9  Royal Oak Journal: Burying a priest's legacy of bigotry.  7  Metropolitan Digest, 21  TOUGH CHOICES AT COLUMBIA  Columbia, like many elite universities, is suffering under the weight of reduced government spending, a sagging economy and increasing demands on its services.
The rings of memory.
Peru needs democracy.
Letters 18  Leslie H. Gelb: Shazam defense.  19  William Safire: Crimes of Iraqgate.  19  Holly Burkhalter: Put the squeeze on Beijing.  19  Mitchell Davis: The foie gras factor.  19


Biospecifics Technologies reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


A Time of Remembrance


First City Trustco reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Going Is Slow, Exits Are Quick
Although the average qualifying speed of the 33 starters in today's Indianapolis 500 created the fastest lineup in the race's history, the drivers had so much trouble getting the horsepower to the ground that the final average speed of the race made it the slowest Indy 500 since 1958.
The Indianapolis Motor Speedway was cold, windswept and littered with debris from painful crashes.


Nathaniel S. Colley, 74, Lawyer Who Was a Leader in N.A.A.C.P.
Nathaniel S. Colley Sr., a retired lawyer and a leader in the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People, died Wednesday at his ranch in Elk Grove, Calif., near Sacramento.
He was 74 years old.
He died of brain cancer, his family said.


Alicia Carew, P. Hammarskjold
Alicia Brooke Carew, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Michael G. Carew of Weston, Conn., was married yesterday on Block Island, R.I., to Philip Ulfsson Hammarskjold, a son of Ulf G. Hammarskjold of Philadelphia and Helga Hammarskjold of Haverford, Pa.
The Rev.
Raymond D. Kehew officiated at St.
Andrew's Roman Catholic Church.
Mrs.
Hammarskjold, 27 years old, graduated from Smith College.
She and her husband are to receive M.B.A. degrees from Harvard University next month.
Her father is a vice president of the Equitable Life Assurance Society in New York.
Her mother, Alicia B. Carew, owns Carew Travel Consultants in Westport, Conn.


CHRONICLE
EDMUND G. BROWN Jr. won the most applause at the Gay and Lesbian Press Association awards, but the most awards went to a San Francisco paper that inadvertently brought down the city's police chief.
The G.L.P.A. and its educational foundation, the Media Fund for Human Rights, gave out 35 awards to individuals and publications on Saturday in San Francisco, The Associated Press reported.
The association's membership includes 140 newspapers across the nation.


Kustom Electronics Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Either-Oar Situation For Olympic Crew
The United States' recently selected men's heavyweight Olympic crew is new and different because it will have one head coach on shore and two coaches in the boat rowing.
KRIS KORZENIOWSKI, the coach, chose the eight-oared crew after a rugged training camp in Princeton, N.J.
The eight survivors included MIKE TETI, 35 years old, and JOHN PARKER, 24.
Teti, a veteran international oarsman, happens to be the freshman heavyweight coach at Princeton, and Parker, a former Tiger stroke, the lightweight freshman coach.


Germany's Main Parties Rebuffed By a Third of Berlin's Electorate
Voters in Berlin delivered a sharp reprimand to Germany's two major parties today, giving about a third of their support to insurgent parties of the right and left in the first citywide election since 1946.
With nearly all the ballots counted, the center-left Social Democratic Party led with 31.7 percent in the voting for seats on 23 borough councils.
The center-right Christian Democrats, who govern the city in a coalition with the Social Democrats, finished second with 27.1 percent.


Ms. Postelnek, Rabbi Freedman
Deborah Beth Postelnek, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Stephen A. Postelnek of East Hills, L.I., was married yesterday in Lawrence, L.I., to Rabbi Lawrence Glen Freedman, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Henry K. Freedman of Plattsburgh, N.Y.
Rabbi Aaron Panken officiated at Temple Israel.
Mrs.
Freedman, 28 years old, is an assistant district attorney for Kings County.
She is a cum laude graduate of Brandeis University and earned her law degree at St.
John's University.
Her father is a senior partner in the New York law firm of Wilson, Elser, Moskowitz, Edelman &amp; Dicker.
Her mother, Natalie Postelnek, is the educational director of the Special Kids Intervention Program, a school in Howard Beach, Queens, for developmentally handicapped children.


No Money to Burn In Olympic Flame
Madison Avenue sources say that NBC still has almost $100 million of advertising time to sell for the Summer Olympics. . . .
What happened to sports seasons?
The
football
team of the State University of New York at Stony Brook, L.I., is to play the Amsterdam Crusaders, the current Eurobowl champions, in
the Netherlands
on June 7. . . .
A panel of 10 was asked by Collegiate Directories, a publishing house, to rank favorite nicknames of college teams.
The California-Santa Cruz Banana Slugs were the first choice, the Oglethorpe Stormy Petrels second. . . .
A running-shoe survey in Consumer Reports magazine cites a sleeper as No. 1 for both men and women, the Saucony Jazz 3000, about $68.
That will come as a surprise to Nike and Reebok, who dominate the $600 million market and annually spend $75 million each in advertising.
The results were based on 10,000 miles run by 56 recruits.


Cecile Callan, Brian Rooney
Cecile Callan, a daughter of Helen S. Callan of Glen Cove, L.I., and the late Lester L. Callan, was married yesterday in Rensselaerville, N.Y., to Brian S. Rooney, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Andrew A. Rooney of Rowayton, Conn.
The Rev.
Robert C. Lamar performed the ceremony at the First Presbyterian Church.
The bride is an actress on television and in the theater.
Her mother, now retired, was a dental hygienist in Forest Hills, Queens.
Her father was an electronics sales representative in the New York area.


Janet Wolf Levy; Arts Patron, 82
Janet Wolf Levy, a patron of the arts, died yesterday at her daughter's home in Manhattan.
She was 82 years old and lived in Manhattan and Armonk, N.Y.
Mrs. Levy died of lung cancer, her family said.


Gencor Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Odds and Arrows
When the 1992 Summer Games open at Barcelona, Spain, on July 25, an archer is scheduled to light the Olympic flame.
He will shoot from a stage and the fiery arrow is to ignite a gas burner that will feed the flame throughout the Games.
If he misses, anybody got a match? . . .
The odds of making a hole-in-one are 1 in 15,000; of being hit by a ball at a major league baseball game, 1 in 300,000.
These and more are in a new book, "What the Odds Are," by Les Krantz (HarperPerennial, $14).


Sports of the Times; War Comes to the High Jumper
It is hard to get the war out of his mind when he is standing at a distance comtemplating his leap over the high-jump bar, he said.
It is hard for him, for Dargutin Topic of Yugoslavia, to put aside the "horrifying" images he had heard about at home in Belgrade, like stories of people making necklaces out of children's fingers.
Or seeing on television the towns outside Belgrade that have bodies lying in streets, machine-gunned by soldiers or their throats cut by neighbors.
It is hard to obliterate for the moment the stories of friends and relatives in the civil war who have had to leave their homes, and "everything they had worked for and earned," and flee to safety into the mountains or across some border.
More than 10,000 people have died in the last few months and an estimated 1.5 million have been left homeless.
Property damage is in the billions of dollars.
The United Nations High Commission for Refugees has described this situation as Europe's worst refugee crisis since World War II, and one of the worst anywhere in decades.


California Dynasty Puts Brown in the Back Seat
Ask Jerry Brown about his family and he bristles, even more than usual.
"These personal matters are not the stuff of historic change," he observes, riding in a small plane over the Sierra Madre.
"How much do you know about Mao Zedong's personal life? Or Churchill's? Or Julius Caesar's?"


Booksellers Reassert Their Role in Publishing
Magic Johnson is here, and so is Judith Krantz and Gen.
H.
Norman Schwarzkopf and P. J. O'Rourke and Jimmy Carter and Stephen King.
And the publishers who bring out books by these celebrities and celebrity authors are out here, too, throwing fancy parties and cocktail cruises and dinners.
But illustrious as they are, these stars are not the reason that nearly 2,000 publishers and even more staff members have come here.
No, they have come because of John Valentine and Christy Meisner and Bob Bresee and Roz Parr and Fern Jaffe and Lew Rosenbaum.
Who?


Essay; Crimes of Iraqgate, II
On or about July 1, 1989, Joe D.Whitley Associate Attorney General at the Bush Department of Justice, supervising the 93 U.S.
Attorneys -- left to practice law in Atlanta.
On July 18, 1990, another Atlanta attorney tipped the local U.S.
Attorney about a huge bank fraud being committed at the Atlanta branch of Italy's Bank Lavoro.


New York City Fighting to Keep 4 U.N. Agencies From Moving
Four United Nations agencies are considering offers to move out of New York City later in the decade -- three of them to Germany -- and Mayor David N. Dinkins and his top economic aides have mounted a major counteroffensive to stem the loss of thousands of jobs and millions of dollars to the city's hard-pressed economy, officials in New York and Bonn said yesterday.
City officials said the departure of the agencies could mean the loss of 2,300 jobs, more than a third of the United Nations work force in New York, and up to $200 million in salaries, rents, supplies and other spending in New York -- a fifth of the $1 billion the United Nations contributes annually to the local economy.


Corruption Charge Taints Brazil Leader
Two weeks before President Fernando Collor de Mello is to welcome 100 national leaders to an environmental conference here, his domestic prestige has been damaged by a brother's charges of corruption and past drug use.
Pedro Affonso Collor de Mello, the President's younger brother, charged in interviews published today that Mr.
Collor introduced him to cocaine in the early 1970's and that the President uses his former campaign treasurer as a "front man" for illicit deals netting millions of dollars.


Review/Rap; Beastie Boys: Rebellion Continues
The big musical genres to arrive as commercial forces in the 1980's, punk and its various subgroups and rap, have been amazingly limited in live performance.
Money hasn't really been spent on shows to make them visually sophisticated, but more importantly, groups haven't been able to figure out a way to seem expansive.
The music was exclusionary, either intentionally or not: those who didn't like that one sound weren't welcome.
Whatever their values, punk was limited by its anti-professionalism, and rap was limited by its canned quality, by the lack of onstage musicianship.
The Beastie Boys' show at Roseland on Saturday night mixed rock and funk played by the band with rap from turntables.
In its own wildly sloppy way, the choices the band made seemed both democratic and logical.
Democratic because it was inclusionary both racially and musically, and logical because in the use of real instruments, the band had found a way through the problems offered by the genres.
The result was one of the more exciting shows of the year, even if the band rambled, even if the words were unintelligible and even if the show was uncomfortably packed.
By the end of the concert, the band had played and done just about everything that post-punk and rap can do.


The Rings of Memory
Memorials speak in different ways.
On the west side of Central Park at 67th Street, a thoughtful Union soldier stands in bronze, with hands on his rifle.
Clear across the park, soldiers of World War I thrust their bayonets out in a charge.
"Pro patria," says the one.
"Pro patria et gloria," call the others.
Inside the park, between the two, a memorial speaks with another eloquence of bravery and sacrifice in World War I. It is a grove of trees planted, says an inscription scratched on a big boulder, "To the dead of the 307th Infantry AEF."


New Head Is Selected For Renault
The French Government named a new chairman for Renault S.A. yesterday, selecting the company's managing director, Louis Schweitzer, to head the state-controlled auto maker.
He succeeds Raymond Levy, whose term expired on Wednesday.
Mr.
Levy will turn 65 next month, the mandatory retirement age.
Mr.
Schweitzer's promotion, which was expected, was announced by the Industry Ministry in Paris.


Baker Puts Pressure on Europeans For U.N. Penalties Against Serbs
Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d called today for United Nations sanctions against the Serbian nationalist Government of Yugoslavia, using his toughest language yet in criticizing European nations for not trying to stop the fighting or punish Belgrade.
"Anyone who is looking for reasons not to act, or arguing somehow that action in the face of this kind of nightmare is not warranted at this time, I think in the view of all of us in the civilized world is on the wrong wavelength," Mr.
Baker said.


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Monday  None  Tuesday Consumer Confidence May  Auto Sales Mid-May  Wednesday  Durable Goods April  Thursday  Weekly Jobless Claims  Friday
G.D.P. Revision 1st Qtr.


2,146 Students Graduate in Ceremonies for 122d Commencement at St. John's
St.
John's University conferred 2,146 undergraduate degrees at three graduation ceremonies held over the weekend.
The Rev.
Donald J. Harrington, president of the university, gave the keynote address at all ceremonies for the 122d commencement exercises.


AudioScience Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Recovery, Not Medal, Is Starks's New Priority
Last year, Llewellyn Starks was the fourth-ranked long jumper in the world behind three other Americans -- Mike Powell, Carl Lewis and Larry Myricks.
He was a strong contender to make the United States Olympic team and win a medal.
Instead, there will be no Olympics for the 25-year-old Starks, of Jonesboro, La.
Yesterday, in the New York Games at Columbia's Wien Stadium, he suffered a compound fracture of the right tibia and a non-compound fracture of the fibula, the two major bones in the leg.
He underwent surgery for two hours last night.


Pittsburgh Newspaper Drivers Continue to Strike


A.P. Indy Gets Back In Picture
How good is A.P.
Indy, the $2.9 million son of Seattle Slew and grandson of Secretariat, and the missing ingredient in the Triple Crown races this year?
He was second choice to Arazi in the Kentucky Derby, but was scratched on the morning of the race with a bruised hoof.
Two weeks later, he missed the Preakness for the same reason.
Yesterday at Belmont Park, he finally got his chance, and he soared.


Miss Friedberg, Greg Stephen
Alanna Dawn Friedberg, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Eugene A. Friedberg of Alpine, N.J., was married in New York yesterday to Greg Michael Stephen, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Philip L. Stephen of Woodmere, L.I.
Rabbi Joel Y. Zion performed the ceremony at the Pierre, assisted by Rabbi Charles Familant and Cantor David Benedict.
Mrs.
Stephen, 26 years old, and her husband, 27, graduated from American University.
She is a broker in Englewood Cliffs, N.J., for Lenk-Friedberg Properties, a Cresskill, N.J., real-estate concern that her mother, Marlyn S. Friedberg, helped found.
The bride's father is a psychiatrist in Englewood, N.J., and an assistant clinical professor at the Columbia University College of Physicians and Surgeons.


Bulls Not Seeing Red Against Cavaliers
Asked if playing the Cavaliers was more enjoyable than playing the Knicks, Michael Jordan didn't dodge the question.
"The only enjoyable thing is that you know you're not going to be killed going to the basket," Jordan said today after practicing with the Chicago Bulls, who lead Cleveland by 2-1 in the four-of-seven-game Eastern Conference final of the National Basketball Association playoffs.
"You don't risk a career-threatening injury if you go to the basket. It's a thinking man's series."


Cat Shrier, Lawrence Bivins
Catherine Jane Shrier, a daughter of Drs.
Adam L. and Diane K. Shrier of Upper Montclair, N.J., was married in Richmond yesterday to Daniel Lawrence Bivins, a son of Daniel E. Bivins 3d of Baton Rouge, La., and the late Patricia A. Bivins.
The Rev.
John H. Wilbur performed the Episcopal ceremony at the Capitol Club.
Mrs.
Bivins, 23 years old and known as Cat, is an administrative assistant to Virginia's Director of Health Enforcement in Richmond.
She graduated from Dartmouth College.
Her father is the managing partner of Specialty Technology Associates, an investment firm in New York.
The bride's mother, a child psychiatrist, is a professor at the Newark campus of of the University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey.


Churches Joining Green Movement
For more than a century, the Hamburg Presbyterian Church has stood just a few hundred yards from Eighteen Mile Creek, which gently wends its way through this town on the outskirts of Buffalo, providing nourishment, commerce, recreation and a habitat for rabbits, deer, waterfowl and spawning fish.
But it was just a few months ago that the Hamburg congregation "adopted" the creek as a project, monitoring its waters for pollutants, documenting its wildlife and fighting further development along its shores.


Books of The Times; Nixon's Enemy in 1950 Had the Last Laugh in '74
Center Stage Helen Gahagan Douglas: A Life By Ingrid Winther Scobie Illustrated. 369 pages.
Oxford University Press. $24.95.


Live Entertainment reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Memorial Day Observed
NEW YORK GOVERNMENT OFFICES Closed.
POST OFFICE Express Mail and special delivery only; main post office open at 33d Street and Eighth Avenue.
BANKS Closed.
PARKING Sunday rules in effect.
SANITATION No pickups or street cleanings.
SCHOOLS Closed.
FINANCIAL MARKETS Closed.
TRANSPORTATION Buses and subways on Sunday schedule.
Long Island Rail Road on weekend schedule.
Metro-North on holiday schedule.
NEW JERSEY GOVERNMENT OFFICES Closed.
POST OFFICES Express Mail and special delivery only.
BANKS Closed.
SCHOOLS Local option.
TRANSPORTATION N.J.
Transit on Sunday schedule.
CONNECTICUT GOVERNMENT OFFICES Closed.
POST OFFICES Express Mail and special delivery only.
BANKS Closed.
SCHOOLS Closed.
TRANSPORTATIONMetro-North on holiday schedule.
Traffic Alert SECOND AVENUE FAIR Second Avenue between 42d and 53d streets will be closed from 10 A.M. to 6 P.M.


A. R. Mottola, 75; Led Polar Bear Club
Alexander R. Mottola, a retired businessman and longtime president of the Polar Bear Club, died on Saturday at Staten Island University Hospital.
He was 75 years old and lived on Staten Island.
He died of cancer, his family said.
For 27 years, Mr.
Mottola led the Polar Bears, the intrepid men and women who met every Sunday to plunge in the Coney Island surf, even in the depth of winter, with water temperatures as low as 30 degrees.
For a beer commercial, he performed this feat in December in a Minnesota lake, where the air temperature was 25 degrees below zero and workers chopped through ice to reach the water, his wife, Irene, said.


Bridge
The start of the Greater New York Bridge Association's Eastern Regional Championships on Friday at the New York Hilton saw a major departure from precedent: For the first time at any American Contract Bridge League tournament, play was for substantial cash prizes.
Thanks to the vision and energy of Bob Blanchard, the "Green-Point Pairs" was a great success.
It was a high-level event, with table screens and simultaneous play of each deal, involving vast preparations.
A total of 52 pairs paid $200 each in entry fees, and one quarter of the field collected cash prizes.
Slightly more than $2,000 went to the winners, Richard Schwartz of Floral Park, L.I., and Michael Polowan of Secaucus, N.J.


Lisa Eisenberg, John L. Merrill
Lisa Fara Eisenberg, the daughter of Sondra Eisenberg of Woodbury, L.I., and the late Stanley Eisenberg, was married yesterday to John Locke Merrill, a son of the late Bonnie and Richard Merrill.
Cantor Richard Benedict officiated at Harrison House in Glen Cove, L.I.


What's the Call, Ref? Dublin-Dribbling
Basketball is a sport of growing popularity in Ireland, where there is a 16-team "major" league that also embraces Northern Ireland.
"But you should see where they play," said DANIEL E. DOYLE Jr., president of the Irish-American Sports Foundation of West Hartford, Conn.
"Church halls mostly, with the stage under one basket and pillars in the way. There is not one sports arena in all of Ireland comparable even to a junior high gym in America."


Income Trustco Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Review/Music; Madagascar's Delicate Folk Sounds
In the flush, stable mid-1980's, it seemed as if musically the world was genuinely shrinking.
Groups from Africa were performing in the United States with a full complement of the latest musical technology.
Records from all over the world were available in New York City, and the nooks and crannies of subcultures around the world could easily be explored.
That all seems to be slowing down as economies crumble, divisiveness takes over, and the the United States Government becomes more and more stringent about admitting foreign musicians.
When Rakoto Frah and Rossy, two musicians from Madagascar, appeared at Washington Square Church on Friday night in a program put on by the World Music Institute, their appearance seemed almost precarious.
The guitarist Henry Kaiser, who performed with them, had spent almost a year organizing a trip to go to Madagascar to record musicians for a recently released album, "A World Out of Time" (Shanachie).
Neither Rossy nor Rakoto Frah had been to the United States before.
Madagascar used to have a recording industry, albeit a small one, but economic troubles have left the country with no pressing plants for records; few Malagasy albums, if any, are available in the United States.


Fab Foursomes,Courtesy of Chi Chi
CHI CHI RODRIGUEZ will play one hole with each foursome at the Winged Foot Club in Mamaroneck, N.Y., on June 15 in a celebrity tournament.
The event, sponsored by Toyota and Time Inc., and benefiting the New York Special Olympics, will be out to exceed the $40,000 raised last year. . . .
DICK SCHAAP will conduct the third of four seminars on sports journalism, with WALT FRAZIER and FRANK GIFFORD as guests, on Thursday at the Museum of Television and Radio in Manhattan at 52 West 52d Street.
The public is invited.
Call (212) 621-6600 for details. . . .
The Internal Revenue Service is including with its refund checks order cards from the United States Mint for Olympic commemorative coins, priced from $9.50 for the copper half dollar to $200 for the proof gold five dollar.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Senate Races; Women's Issues Draw Attention In Two Contests
Californians will elect two United States Senators this year, and increasingly it appears that one, possibly both, will be a woman.
There are only two women in the 100-member Senate -- Barbara A. Mikulski, a Maryland Democrat, and Nancy Landon Kassebaum, a Kansas Republican.
But if the latest statewide polls here are on the mark as the June 2 Democratic and Republican primaries draw near, Dianne Feinstein, a Democrat and former Mayor of San Francisco, is well on her way to becoming a Senator.


Central Holding reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


The Road To Rio -- Setting an Agenda for the Earth; Difficult Algebra for China: Coal = Growth = Pollution
China's economic revolution may be dotting the countryside with new factories and electricity plants, but it may also be having an unintended effect: its contribution to global warming may be rising more quickly than that of any other major country.
Most countries have become increasingly aware that warming of the earth could cause climate changes and rising sea levels.
Even the United States, which many scientists say contributes more to the greenhouse effect than any other country, is considering curbs on gases thought to cause global warming.
The Centrality of Coal
But here there is little awareness of the problem.
China burns increasing amounts of coal and is expected to surpass the United States and the former Soviet Union to become the single greatest contributor of greenhouse gases in coming decades.


Review/Dance; Benefit Brings Together Opposites In Training and in Popular Appeal
Mikhail Baryshnikov is a highly trained Russian classical dancer.
Moses Pendleton, a co-founder of Pilobolus, is largely self-taught, a model of American do-it-yourself ingenuity.
Yet now that Mr.
Baryshnikov has decided that he is a modern dancer, they are apt to appear on the same program, as they did on Friday night.
The occasion was a benefit for Friends in Deed, a support group for people with life-threatening illnesses.


CHRONICLE
It may not be as well known as some of his creations, but a song called "The Brooklyn Bridge" is one of SAMMY CAHN's favorites.
His fondness for it is fortunate: he will be singing it on Saturday at the opening of a film series focusing on Brooklyn.
The lyricist will speak at the Brooklyn Museum, at the opening of a festival of 19 movies set in or shot on location in Brooklyn.


Child Welfare Bill Won't Ease Adoptions
To the Editor:
In your May 7 news article about the Democratic strategy for a child welfare plan, you report that Representative Thomas Downey "believes that increased spending on preventive programs like counseling and drug abuse treatment and on facilitating adoptions would lessen the need to put children into foster care." Who could argue with that?
I'm sure it's what Mr.
Downey believes his bill does and why he calls it the family preservation and adoption bill.
However, a reading by those familiar with the child welfare bureaucracy shows that facilitating adoption will be the last thing that happens.


Artists Are Learning How to Win Notice and Money
Scattered around this troubled city are dozens of artists, all busy with the process of creation.
They are people like Julius G. Johnson, who tries to draw teen-agers into photography or painting as an alternative to violence.
Another is Lamont Saunders, who photographs subjects ranging from contented thoroughbreds in paddocks to the simmering pile of illegally dumped debris, known as Mount Trashmore, that long plagued the city's East End.
Another is Kwan Prakuson, a teacher's aide who teaches English to Laotian children in the city's public schools, sometimes using native dance steps to break the routine.


Price of Success for a Top Hispanic Ad Agency
Growth came steadily over the last decade to Mendoza, Dillon &amp; Asociados, the nation's largest Hispanic advertising agency.
With the Spanish-speaking population in the United States expanding rapidly, companies like Johnson &amp; Johnson, Ford, Sears, Levi Strauss and General Foods flocked to the agency and allocated small but increasing portions of their advertising budgets to peddling their products to the Hispanic market.
But now Mendoza, Dillon and other Hispanic agencies are confronting a problem born of their own success: There are no longer many new big clients out there that are not already advertising in Spanish.


When Fun Becomes A Serious Matter
Lincoln Center's sixth annual Serious Fun festival of experimental performances is to open on July 7 with the director Robert Wilson's version of the Gertrude Stein play "Dr. Faustus Lights the Lights," it was announced today.
The production, featuring a company of 12 actors and 12 technicians from the Hebbel Theater in Berlin, where the work received its world premiere recently, will be the most elaborate and expensive production in the history of Serious Fun, said Jedediah Wheeler, whose company, International Production Associates, puts on the festival in association with Lincoln Center.
It is to have three performances at Alice Tully Hall, July 7, 8 and 9.


Review/Music; Outdoor Mozart Festival With Schubert as the Star
In weather that must have impelled throngs to nearby beaches, the Long Island Mozart Festival attracted a respectable crowd to the Planting Fields Arboretum here today for its first two concerts.
The intimidating heat made it easy to find a good, close seat in the sunny courtyard of the Hay Barn for the afternoon concert, and a lovely breeze made the location bearable.
Others settled for amplified sound in shady spots at the back of the courtyard or on the lawn, venturing forward only for the evening concert.
The Sea Cliff Chamber Players, presenting a Mozart festival for the seventh time, did well by their hero today.
Yet it was Schubert who ultimately lingered in the ear and held the mind.
To some extent, this outcome was inevitable, since the evening ended with Schubert's monumental and gripping String Quintet in C (D. 956).
But in addition, the performances of the quintet and of Schubert's Arpeggione Sonata (D. 821), even where not ideally polished, had a poetic depth sometimes lacking in lesser works by Mozart and Beethoven.


Royal Oak Journal; Bitter Memories of Anti-Semitism Live On in Michigan Parish
Driving past the low-slung houses and shops along Woodward Avenue just north of Detroit, motorists are momentarily distracted by an imposing five-story limestone structure adorned with an enormous bas relief of Jesus Christ.
The tower is part of the Shrine of the Little Flower, a Roman Catholic church that earned notoriety as a scene of vivid, mass bigotry during the Depression.
A half century after the fact, the bigotry is just a dim memory to most everyone but its targets.
Indeed, younger parishioners do not know much about the church's history.


Diversified Human Resources reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Shuttle Voyage Sparks Faith in Space Program; Robots Can't Respond
To the Editor:
Editorially, you have consistently spoken out for remote-robotic space exploration and against virtually all manned space exploration ("Heroes, and Murphy, in Space," editorial, May 15).
I have written time and again in favor of manned space, pointing out that robots have no "curiosity bump" (and thus ignore anything they were not programmed and equipped to perceive and investigate) and that they are disastrously unadaptable when things go wrong.


Maverick, Facing Fraud Case, Quits Paris Cabinet
Just seven weeks after he was named to a Cabinet post in the hope of buoying the popularity of France's new Government, a maverick millionaire-turned-politician resigned Saturday night amid reports that he will soon be charged with fraud in a dispute with a former business partner.
Bernard Tapie, who owns the Adidas sporting goods company as well as France's top soccer club, said he was stepping down as Urban Affairs Minister to dedicate himself entirely to proving his innocence.
He said he was the victim of a "political plot" and of "manipulation" of the judicial system.


Centennial Group reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Dresser Industries reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Markets Closed
All financial and commodity markets in the United States will be closed today for Memorial Day.
Government offices, banks and many businesses will also be closed.
Most overseas markets will be open.


Exten Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29


Letter: On Defense Spending; A Budget for New World Realities
To the Editor:
I applaud "The War Democrats, 1992 Style," your editorial of May 13 on defense spending.
Let me apprise The Times and its readers of an effort to achieve precisely the dramatic and justifiable reductions in military spending for which you call, an effort that was debated on the House floor for seven hours on March 5.
Recognizing that the cold war was over, the Warsaw Pact had disbanded and the former Soviet Union had significantly receded as a military threat, the Congressional Black Caucus, in alliance with the newly formed House Progressive Caucus, introduced "A Budget for New World Realities and for Rebuilding America." The proposal, lauded on both sides of the aisle for its technical excellence, rested on four cornerstones.


TV Commercials Chase Supermarket Shoppers
The National Enquirer is facing some serious competition at supermarket checkout counters, and not because a rival tabloid is displaying exclusive photos of Leona Helmsley modeling prison garb.
Instead, the competition is coming from some of the biggest and most innovative operators in television broadcasting.


American Health Services Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


International Murex Technologies Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Coniagas Mines reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Hudson's Bay Co. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Maverick, Facing Fraud Case, Quits Paris Cabinet
Just seven weeks after he was named to a Cabinet post in the hope of buoying the popularity of France's new Government, a maverick millionaire-turned-politician resigned Saturday night amid reports that he will soon be charged with fraud in a dispute with a former business partner.
Bernard Tapie, who owns the Adidas sporting goods company as well as France's top soccer club, said he was stepping down as Urban Affairs Minister to dedicate himself entirely to proving his innocence.
He said he was the victim of a "political plot" and of "manipulation" of the judicial system.


Interphase Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Friday about new Federal rules setting limits on bank interest rates and brokered deposits misstated the amount of brokered deposits held at the end of the year by the First Union National Bank, of Charlotte, N.C.
It was $319.3 million.
A table with the article, listing the two groups of banks that face regulation of their brokered deposits and interest rates under the new rules, included two banks incorrectly in the group that would be prohibited from accepting brokered deposits or paying unusually high rates.
The York Bank and Trust Company and the Massachusetts Company should not have been listed.


Sara Lord, Robert Storch
Sara Matilthe Lord and Robert Phillip Storch, prosecutors in the Justice Department's public-integrity section in Washington, were married in Albany yesterday.
The Very Rev.
Gary W. Kriss, an Episcopal priest, was assisted by Rabbi Alvin J. Roth in performing the interdenominational ceremony at the Shaker Meeting House, a historic home.
Ms.
Lord, who is keeping her name, is a summa cum laude graduate of Yale University, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
A Rhodes scholar, she earned an honors degree in politics, philosophy and economics at Oxford University.
She received her law degree from Harvard University.


Clinton: Disappointed in Both Parties
Television script: "The American people ought to be mad. The middle class is collapsing, poverty is exploding. Only the rich are doing better, because for 12 years we've been domiinated by selfishness and greed and the concern for the short run. And, frankly, both parties in Washington have let us down. "We've got to invest in our people again, in our jobs, in our education, in our health care.
We've got to try some ideas that neither party has embraced.
We've got to pull this country together again.
We can turn it around.
But only if we put our people first." On the screen: Bill Clinton talking to the camera, and to an off-camera interviewer. An "800" numberf appears at one point on the scren, with the words "Join Us Today!" Scorecard: The Clinton campaign appears to be trying to present its candidate, a Democrat, as a man who has scorn for both major parties. In California, a state where Ross Perot, the likely independent candidate, is leading in the polls, this is probably a good idea. '


Mexico Reporting the Arrest Of a Top Medellin Trafficker
A Colombian narcotics trafficker who is believed to have shipped more than 100 tons of cocaine to the United States for the Medellin drug cartel has been arrested in Mexico City, the authorities said today.
Mexican anti-narcotics officials identified the Colombian, Javier Pardo Cardona, as an agent of the Medellin cartel in Mexico and a broker for cocaine distributors in the United States.


Diane Robinson, Philip Lakritz
Diane L. Robinson, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
A.
Stanley Robinson of New York, was married yesterday to Dr.
Philip S. Lakritz, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Herman Lakritz of Wyckoff, N.J.
Rabbi David Lincoln officiated at the Union League Club in New York.
Mrs.
Lakritz, 26 years old, is an executive engineering and systems recruiter at the Omni recruiting agency in New York.
She graduated from Vassar College.
Her father is a senior partner in the New York law firm of Robinson, Brog, Leinwand, Genovese &amp; Gluck.
Her mother, Lynn Robinson, is a learning therapist in New York.


Lawyer Relives Sorrow of Execution
Two days after her client, Roger Keith Coleman, was executed in Virginia, Kathleen A. Behan was still disbelieving, and occasionally tearful, as she discussed her belief that Mr.
Coleman had been put to death for a murder he did not commit.
"The last two hours I spent with Roger were the hardest two hours of my life," the 28-year-old lawyer said in an interview on Friday, before leaving her Washington office to attend a memorial service for Mr.
Coleman in Grundy, Va., his hometown.


Dance in Review
'Full Circle'  Joyce Theater
"Full Circle," a two-program benefit that opened on Tuesday night, was just about a model of its kind.
The event raised $104,000 for Women in Need, an organization that helps homeless women and their families.
The money is to be used to train women to provide day care for other working mothers.
And the benefit, organized by women at Conde Nast Publications, just as ingeniously offered experimentalists in the financially hard-pressed world of dance an opportunity to show their work to new corporate audiences.
Ann Carlson got things off to a provocative start with her "Flag," in which nine dancers race back and forth across a huge American flag, babbling and collapsing as they go.
The effect is of a communal tic, with Ms.
Carlson's calm reading of part of the Declaration of Independence running like a clear stream through a tumbled desert at the end.


Lawyer Relives Sorrow of Execution
Two days after her client, Roger Keith Coleman, was executed in Virginia, Kathleen A. Behan was still disbelieving, and occasionally tearful, as she discussed her belief that Mr.
Coleman had been put to death for a murder he did not commit.
"The last two hours I spent with Roger were the hardest two hours of my life," the 28-year-old lawyer said in an interview on Friday, before leaving her Washington office to attend a memorial service for Mr.
Coleman in Grundy, Va., his hometown.


No Magic in Uncovering Houdini Data
A professor and a librarian have performed the astonishing act of phenomenal prestidigitation, hitherto unimaginable, right before the very eyes of startled onlookers: they have made the works of the amazing Houdini reappear.
Not that the papers of the nation's greatest magician had actually disappeared.
Rather, they had been misplaced, which is as good as having disappeared since they had lain mismarked for years somewhere among millions of other objects in a warehouse of the Library of Congress.


Boston Pacific Medical reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Discovery Technologies reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Once Again, Trevino Cleans Up Nicely
Lee Trevino did what he has been doing better than anyone in golf today -- closing the deal -- to win his fifth tournament of the year at the Bell Atlantic Classic.
With more than half the season left, the 52-year-old Trevino has a realistic opportunity to break Peter Thomson's 1985 Senior Tour record of nine victories in one year.


Foreign Affairs; Shazam Defense
By speaking the magic word "shazam," a comic strip character could transform himself from a 15-year-old newsboy into superhero Captain Marvel.
And by rewriting their controversial defense strategy paper, Pentagon leaders have metamorphosed from globocops into milomats, military mavens who appreciate the calming power of diplomatic words.
The February draft of the paper caused a furor.
It aimed U.S. planning guns at former enemies like Russia as well as friends like Germany and Japan, and it reeked of unilateral U.S. military action.
Then shazam: A revised draft extends a less paranoiac hand to almost all and puts new emphasis on collective security.


THAILAND PREMIER QUITS OVER UNREST
Prime Minister Suchinda Kraprayoon resigned Sunday over his role in the worst political violence in Thailand's modern history, but tens of thousands of Thais took to the streets of Bangkok to make clear that his resignation was not punishment enough.
With broad support from outraged Thais who now see a chance to end six decades of military domination of their government, opposition parties announced they would seek to overturn a royal decree preventing the prosecution of General Suchinda over last week's bloodshed in the streets of Bangkok.


Robin Stenzler, James Post
Robin Lynn Stenzler, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Morton Stenzler of Fair Lawn, N.J., was married in Verona, N.J., yesterday to Dr.
James Robert Post, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Arthur S. Post of Merrick, L.I.
Rabbi Simon Glustrom performed the ceremony at the Richfield Regency.
Mrs.
Post, 27 years old, is a graduate of the University of Florida.
Her father, a pharmacist, owns Saddle Brook Pharmacy in Saddle Brook, N.J.


Joyner-Kersee Leaps Onto Center Stage
The last time Jackie Joyner-Kersee had the world's attention in a major meet, she left the stadium in an ambulance.
Rounding the turn in the 200-meter event of her specialty, the heptathlon, at the World Championships in Tokyo, she strained her hamstring.
That was eight months ago.


American Realty Trust reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


World Economies


New Support but Few Gains For Urban Enterprise Zones
The Bush Administration is promoting enterprise zones as the centerpiece of its plan to revive the nation's inner cities, but the more than 600 zones that have sprouted under state programs have made only a slight dent in urban blight.
Still, after a decade of criticizing the White House for neglecting the cities, many state and local officials and urban experts applaud the Administration's proposal, saying every little bit will help.
They see a Federal enterprise zone program not as a panacea but as a catalyst, or perhaps a nucleus to build around.


INSIDE
Competing for U.N. Agencies
Four United Nations agencies are considering offers to move out of New York City -- three to Germany -- and City Hall has mounted a major counteroffensive, officials said.
Page 21.
New President for Austria
A former Ambassador to the United States will succeed President Kurt Waldheim, ushering in a new era after years of diplomatic isolation under the former U.N. chief.
Page 3.


Labor's True-Blue-Collar Union
Their 24th-floor headquarters here gives the leaders of the United Electrical, Radio and Machine Workers of America a panoramic view, much like that enjoyed by the powerful chief executives, influential bankers and wealthy lawyers in nearby skyscrapers.
But the U.E., as the union is known, goes out of its way to make sure its top officers are not too tempted to identify with their neighbors in the skyline.
The union's constitution limits executive salaries to $32,494, helping to make sure that the U.E.'s president, John H. Hovis Jr., its secretary-treasurer, Amy R. Newell, and its director of organization, Edmund L. Bruno, do not lose the perspective of the union's 40,000 members.


Dance in Review
Dance Africa  Brooklyn Academy of Music
Dance Africa celebrated its 15th anniversary with performances that were home grown in the best kind of way.
This year all the participating companies were based in New York.
And the dance presented on Saturday afternoon was a smooth blend of style and cultural attitudes that suggested the rewards of knowing other cultures well enough to make traditions of one's own.
Chuck Davis, founder and director of Dance Africa and master showman, got things off to an exuberant start.
Malaki Ma Kongo presented a story-dance called "Passages," choreographed by Thelma Martin and Elombe Badila.
Drawing on traditional dances from the Congo and Central Africa, "Passages" told a tale of a young boy who is reluctant to go through the circumcision central to his village's male initiation rites.
War has decimated the village's population of men, but a kindly male traveler coaxes the boy to accept his fate, then slyly stays on to accommodate the women.


Tough Choices On Campus -- A special report.; Short of Money, Columbia Weighs How Best to Change
Columbia University's 238th year may have ended officially earlier this month with a regal commencement graced by the presence of Katharine Hepburn.
But it was clear from the fliers that students handed out near Delacorte Gate on 116th Street afterwards that the troubles that rocked the university this year are far from over.
"Do you know where your money goes?" read the flier given to proud parents and future alumni donors still in their caps and gowns.
It stated that after increasing President Michael I. Sovern's salary and benefits to over $400,000, and stenciling the foyers of faculty housing in gold, Columbia's administration "had the audacity" to limit student financial aid and make other cuts to help close a $50 million budget shortfall.


This Uniform Is Out of Here!
Over 21 major league seasons, TIM McCARVER wasn't a Hall of Famer, but his hometown of Memphis treats him like Babe Ruth.
In 1978, the Memphis Chicks of the Class AA Southern League named their stadium after him and today the team will retire the number 9 McCarver wore in 1960 when he hit .347.
The retirement fete will feature an appearance by STEVE CARLTON, McCarver's former Cardinals and Phillies battery mate.
The notoriously silent southpaw is scheduled to speak, said DAVID HERSH, the team's president.


Results Plus
GOLF Lietzke Emerges in Sudden Death Bruce Lietzke, a playoff loser a week ago, overcame some nagging fear and a spike mark yesterday to become a playoff winner in the Colonial tournament in Fort Worth.
The 40-year-old Lietzke broke a four-year nonwinning string when he used his elongated putter to rap in a 12-foot birdie on the first extra hole and beat Corey Pavin.
Moments later Pavin, a former winner of this title, missed from shorter range, about 8 feet, and Lietzke had the 12th victory of his 18-year PGA Tour career. (AP)


Quotation of the Day


A Holiday Weekend That Was Hard to Trump


An Israeli Girl Is Slain, And Mobs Beat Arabs
A Palestinian from the Gaza Strip was arrested in connection with the stabbing death today of a 15-year-old Israeli girl in Bat Yam, the authorities said.
The killing touched off attacks on Arabs, including random beatings and vandalism by a mob led by the far-right Kach movement.
At least six Arabs were wounded in the attacks, and the police arrested 30 Jews.


Wynton Marsalis Premiere
The premiere of Wynton Marsalis's work for jazz septet, "In This House/ On This Morning," will end the season's Jazz at Lincoln Center series, Wednesday at 9 P.M. at Avery Fisher Hall.
The piece, which is based on spiritual themes and Southern church music, will be performed by Mr.
Marsalis on trumpet, Todd Williams and Wes Anderson (saxophones), Wycliffe Gordon (trombone), Eric Reed (piano), Reginald Veal (bass) and Herlin Riley (drums).
The work was commissioned by Lincoln Center.
Tickets: $25 to $40.
Information: (212) 721-6500.


Lisbeth Levine, Scott Evan Saef
Lisbeth Levine, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Jerry Levine of Cranbury, N.J., was married in Chicago yesterday to Scott Evan Saef, a son of Dr.
Edward Saef of Carlisle, Mass., and Toby Saef of Concord, Mass.
Rabbi Peter S. Knobel officiated in the Levy Mayer Hall courtyard of Northwestern University.
Ms.
Levine, who is 29 years old and is keeping her name, is the fashion editor of The Chicago Sun-Times.
She is a graduate of the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill.
Her father is a marketing-communications consultant in Cranbury.


Corrections
A listing of Memorial Day activities in Weekend on Friday referred incorrectly to an event in Manhattan.
A ceremony will be held at 10:30 A.M. at the Soldiers' and Sailors' Monument, at Riverside Drive and 89th Street; it will not be preceded by a parade.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Magazine Notes; The Advocate's Makeover for Madison Ave.
FOR years, gay publications complained that Madison Avenue was too skittish to advertise in their magazines.
The big obstacle?
The personal ads, which advertisers considered to be, well, too personal.
Two new publications, Genre and Out, are trying to prove that a gay magazine can succeed without sexually explicit ads.
But the 25-year-old Advocate, the oldest and largest gay publication, has come up with a solution (costing $150,000 a year) that it hopes will satisfy its 75,000 subscribers and Madison Avenue.


Russian Says Communists Still Resist Reforms
Russia's Foreign Minister warned today at an international conference on aid to the former Soviet republics that a determined Communist resistance movement was threatening economic reforms.
In remarks that appeared to be aimed in part at the other republics, the Foreign Minister, Andrei V. Kozyrev, said hard-line Communists bent on revenge often allied themselves with nationalist movements to obscure their true goals.


Nazareth Blitzes Its Way To First Division III Title
The Nazareth lacrosse team gave a good imitation of mighty Syracuse today as the Golden Flyers from Rochester routed Roanoke of Salem, Va., 22-11, to win the Division III national championship.
As with the Orangemen, who will play Princeton for the Division I title here Monday, Nazareth scored goals in bunches.
The Golden Flyers had a string of eight in a row in the fourth period as did Syracuse on Saturday in defeating Johns Hopkins, 21-16, in a semifinal contest.


Lifetime Products reports earnings for Qtr to March 30


The Homeless Issue
There are few stratagems in government older than appointing a commission -- blue ribbon, of course -- to deal with something that an elected official does not want to look in the face all alone.
But there is an art to doing it well.


Beira Journal; Refugee Corridor in a Land of Tears
The flight from war and starvation brought Alban Manuel to a bleak transit camp for refugees at Nhamatanda, a district town in the Beira corridor.
Mr.
Manuel, an emaciated dirt farmer who looked about 30 years old though he didn't know his age, lived three years under the yoke of the Mozambique National Resistance, an insurgent movement better known by its Portuguese acronym Renamo.


Jury Begins Deliberations in Case Against Sect
From its start five months ago, the twin themes in the murder and racketeering trial of Yahweh ben Yahweh and 15 disciples have been race and religion.
That was especially apparent Saturday as Judge Norman C. Roettger Jr. of Federal District Court gave the case to the jury with these instructions:


Firing 15 Strikeouts, Smoltz Halts Expos
Braves 2, Expos 1
MONTREAL, May 24 (AP) -- John Smoltz set a team record today with 15 strikeouts and the Atlanta Braves beat Montreal, 2-1.
Smoltz struck out 9 of the first 13 batters.
The loss was the first in three games for Felipe Alou, the new Expos manager.


Unser Jr. Aces Indy 500's Crash Course
The next time you have trouble getting your car going in cold weather, take comfort in the fact that chilly temperatures can stop the best drivers in the fanciest race cars, as the Indianapolis 500 proved today.
Al Unser Jr. won his first Indy 500 in the closest finish in the 76 runnings of the event, holding off Scott Goodyear of Canada by .043 seconds.
That margin broke the record of .16 seconds in 1982, when Gordon Johncock beat Rick Mears.


Groupe Harricana Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


A Fatal Shooting by Police Ignites Protest in Bushwick
On the streets of Bushwick, where anger gave way to calm yesterday, the fatal police shooting of a robbery suspect on Wednesday night and the fiery demonstration that followed two nights later have again exposed residents' deep distrust of the police.
"The police consider this a drug slum," Juan Gutierrez said as he stood on Knickerbocker Avenue yesterday.
"It's not like that. A lot of people sell drugs here. A lot of people live here and work here too. But they treat everybody the same. They have no respect."


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: New Jersey; A Signature Is Not a Vote, but on Perot Petitions, It Comes Close
After leaving the supermarket with some holiday groceries today, Leonard Orr and his daughter Danae stopped by the table where people were signing petitions to get Ross Perot, the billionaire Texan, on the presidential ballot in the New Jersey primary this November.
Mr. Orr, 50-year-old owner of a construction company, signed eagerly.


In Closest Finish Ever, the Unser Clan Claims Its 8th Indy 500


Only Violent Pornography Is Harmful
To the Editor:
The letters (May 7) responding to your editorial on the pornography victims compensation bill ("A Damaging Remedy for Sex Crimes," April 13) display both some unusual perspicacity and some serious errors.
Gary L. Bauer incorrectly asserts that the bill sponsored by Senator Mitch McConnell applies only to the "most violent and horrendous subsets of pornography," referring to material that has been found legally obscene.
In fact, such material need contain no violence whatever and, indeed, much that has been found obscene in the United States under present Supreme Court standards has been completely free of violence.


Consensus Is a New Westway Route
ROBERT MOSES -- whose favorite aphorism was, "If the ends don't justify the means, what does?" -- once described the nexus between planning and politics this way: "There isn't a project I've been connected with in 40 years that would have been built if I had consulted prior to announcing it."
Mr.
Moses, the builder of parks, bridges, expressways and world's fairs who for decades was the most powerful unelected official in New York, stubbornly stuck with that strategy in 1966 when he revealed his blueprint to renovate the West Side Highway in Manhattan.
But the game plan no longer worked.
Fed up with Mr.
Moses's dogged bulldozing of whole neighborhoods, some of the people who had never been consulted before finally got to be part of the process.


Shuttle Voyage Sparks Faith in Space Program; What's a Heaven for?
To the Editor:
"Heroes, and Murphy, in Space" (editorial, May 15), suggesting that the difficulties encountered by astronauts of the space shuttle Endeavour in rescuing the Intelsat satellite were reasons to halt such missions and the assembly of large space structures like the space station, underscores all that's wrong with United States government and industry today.
It perpetuates the attitude that we should only engage in those endeavors in which immediate success is guaranteed, short-term payoff is likely and no personal risk is involved.
American industry has become averse to investing in research and development unless a return on investment can be shown on the next quarterly bottom line.


First Cash Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


California Dynasty Puts Brown in the Back Seat
Ask Jerry Brown about his family and he bristles, even more than usual.
"These personal matters are not the stuff of historic change," he observes, riding in a small plane over the Sierra Madre.
"How much do you know about Mao Zedong's personal life? Or Churchill's? Or Julius Caesar's?"


Ms. Albert, Howard Kleinman
Elizabeth Albert, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Harvey D. Albert of Massapequa, L.I., was married last evening to Howard Mark Kleinman, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Gerald Kleinman of Fair Lawn, N.J.
Rabbi Martin Freedman officiated at the Water's Edge restaurant in Long Island City, Queens.
Ms.
Albert, who is 30 years old and keeping her name, is a lawyer in the investment firm of Morgan Stanley &amp; Company in New York.
She graduated cum laude from Radcliffe College, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and received a law degree from Yale University.
Her father is an owner of Albert Brothers Hardware in Bellmore, L.I.


Shuttle Voyage Sparks Faith in Space Program
To the Editor:
The critical attitude toward the space program assumed by many newspapers and non-NASA "space experts" is completely unwarranted based on what the National Aeronautics and Space Administration is accomplishing ("Heroes, and Murphy, in Space," editorial, May 15).
In the Apollo era, America sat anxiously in front of the television, hanging on each word downlinked by the crew, awestruck by the presence of man in an unexplored world.
The shuttle program, on the other hand, is taken for granted.
A shuttle launch is often buried on page 5 unless a contingency situation arises (e.g., front page, May 11 and 12).


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY COLUMBIA PUTS TOUGH YEAR BEHIND IT
Columbia University's 238th year may have ended officially last month with a regal commencement graced by Katharine Hepburn, but the internecine battles and money troubles that made the last year among the rockiest in memory persist.
Page 1.


Jazz Make It a New Series as Blazers Go High-Tech
Their reputation was built on the cool and calm efficiency of their style, but today the Portland Trail Blazers simply self-destructed at the worst time.
Now, a Western Conference final that seemed likely to end routinely has become a three-game playoff.
The Trail Blazers, who figured to end this series quickly, lost their collective composure and then lost Game 4 of their four-of-seven-game National Basketball Association series, 121-112, to the revived Utah Jazz, who tied it at two games each.


Amerihost Properties reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Munich Biennial and New Music: Different Drummer in a 3-Piece Suit
Munich, the capital of Bavaria, is a conservative city both politically and operatically.
In 1988 the composer Hans Werner Henze set out to change that with the first Munich Biennial, a monthlong "International Festival for New Music Theater" performed in theaters all over the city.
Curiously, however, to judge from several of the offerings at this year's Biennial, the third, he has created a conservative festival that reflects the city it is trying to transform.
The Biennial's intentions are excellent and their realization even more so.
Mr.
Henze believes, as he put it in an interview recently, that composers can be encouraged to transcend the narrow strictures of modernism by immersing themselves in the theater.


Celina Financial reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Las Vegas's Hopes Leave Blacks Bitter
When gambling boomed in the 1980's, this flamboyant city dangled the promise of thousands of jobs for those without college diplomas or special skills, as factory towns once did, but with a lot more glitter.
If any place in America could lend hope to the jobless of its inner city, it seemed to be Las Vegas, which led the nation in job and population growth through the decade.


Sandra Grant, Stephen Silver
Sandra Grant, a nurse anesthetist at New York University Medical Center, and Stephen Michael Silver, an associate with the New York law office of Coudert Brothers, were married last evening in Milwaukee.
Rabbi Herbert Panich performed the ceremony at the Beth Israel Congregation.


Church Group Contributes to Environmental Movement


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Political Memo; Perot's Popularity Sends Clinton Into Frustration
For Gov.
Bill Clinton, these days have been deeply frustrating.
He had planned to use the coasting period between the time that his nomination became inevitable and the Democratic National Convention in New York to hone his message and raise his national profile for the fall election campaign.
But he and his strategists have been blind sided by evidence of Ross Perot's popularity.
And if their panic has been less visible than that in the White House, they seem just as baffled.


Deborah Cooper, Kenneth Schapiro
Deborah Sidonia Cooper, a daughter of Herbert W. and Marianne A. Cooper of Jericho, L.I., was married yesterday in King's Point, L.I., to Kenneth Martin Schapiro, a son of Jerome B. and Edith K. Schapiro of Wurtsboro, N.Y.
Cantor Marvin Antosofsky performed the ceremony at Temple Emanuel.
Mrs.
Schapiro, 26 years old, is a magna cum laude graduate of Columbia University, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa and received a master's degree in political science.
She is a doctoral candidate there.
Her father is the president of Dynalytics Corporation, an engineering consulting company in Hicksville, L.I.
Her mother is an associate professor and the director of the Graduate School of Library and Information Studies at Queens College.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Campaign Finances; Lobbyists Favor Senator By Financing Son's Race
Tens of thousands of dollars of political donations are pouring in to Bennett Johnston from lobbyists for the energy, pipeline, utilities and nuclear power industries, according to reports at the Federal Election Commission.
That would not be surprising if the donations were to Senator J. Bennett Johnston, the chairman of the Senate Energy and Natural Resources Committee, who has solicited and received political donations from these groups for years.
But Senator Johnston, a Louisiana Democrat, is not up for re-election this year.


Kate Brooks, Ranald Hay
Kate Margaret Brooks, the daughter of Frederic H. and Dr.
Jane P. Brooks of Old Greenwich, Conn., was married there yesterday to Ranald Joseph Hay, a son of Ranald L. Hay of Etobicoke, Ontario, Canada, and Lorraine M. Fecteau-Scott of Fenelon Falls, Ontario.
Rabbi Andrew Sklarz, a cousin of the bride, performed the ceremony at the Hyatt Regency Greenwich.
Mrs.
Hay, 27 years old, is a sculptor and the manager of Breadspreads Restaurant in Toronto.
She is a cum laude graduate of Temple University and has a master's degree in fine arts from Columbia University.
Her father is president of Connecticut Economics Corporation, a financial consulting company in Old Greenwich.
Her mother is a psychologist in the Stamford, Conn., public schools.


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Wednesday about direct-dial telephone service to former Soviet republics omitted one carrier that provides it.
In addition to the American Telephone and Telegraph Company, with 421 long-distance circuits, the Sprint Corporation has supplied 23 international direct-dial circuits since January in conjunction with the IDB Communications Group.


A Blessing for Gardens Where Green Is So Rare
THE Spirit of Fire shook his staff at Joe Overstreet, who in turn smiled nervously in the small garden that he and friends had planted in a lot once overrun with bricks, garbage and drug dealers.
The ritual yesterday called for Mr.
Overstreet, a 59-year-old painter, to hand over a rose, the first in bloom at his makeshift garden on the Lower East Side.
But he had trouble concentrating amid the elaborate procession: a troupe of more than 30 artists was on hand.
There were people dressed as Earth, Air, Water and Fire, as well as an Earth Goddess, a pair of Mudpeople and two gatemen bearing totem-like towers of recyclable bleach bottles.


John Gates, 78, Former Editor Of The Daily Worker, Is Dead
John Gates, who quit as a top American Communist official and chief editor of The Daily Worker after losing a campaign to democratize the party and free it from Moscow's control, died on Saturday at the Miami Heart Institute in Miami Beach.
He was 78 years old and lived in North Miami Beach.
He died of heart disease and a stroke, his family said.


Jane Zeller, Scott Howard
Jane Ellen Zeller, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Fred Zeller of New York, was married in York Harbor, Me., yesterday to Dr.
Scott Alan Howard, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Fred W. Howard of Boca Raton, Fla.
Rabbi Robert Goldstein performed the ceremony at the Stage Neck Inn.
Ms.
Zeller, who is keeping her name, is a clinical social worker at the Family and Children's Service of Greater Lynn, Mass.
She graduated from the University of Massachusetts and received a master's degree in social work from Simmons College.
Her father is a medical-book publishing consultant.
Her mother, Bertha W. Zeller, retired as the director of the Retired Seniors Volunteer Program at the Jewish Community Centers of Philadelphia.


Hills Department Stores reports earnings for Qtr to May 2


New Jersey Faces Pressure To Allow Use of Gasohol
Prodded by the grain-alcohol lobby, the Federal Environmental Protection Agency is considering whether to force New Jersey to permit the sale of an ethanol fuel mixture commonly called gasohol.
While the lobbyists say ethanol can reduce emissions of carbon monoxide from motor vehicles, New Jersey says it can increase other pollutants, including ground-level ozone, or smog.
And that's just about the last thing New Jersey wants to do.
The whole state is out of compliance with Federal standards for ozone, and 18 of the state's 21 counties have severe problems.
Only Los Angeles is worse.


Detroit and&amp; Canada Tunnel Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Detection Systems Inc. reports earnings for Year to March 31


Barfield Injured in Sauna Fall
Jesse Barfield hurt more than his left wrist and left elbow when he slipped and fell in his sauna Saturday night.
The struggling Barfield damaged his chances of regaining his starting right-field spot and may have hurt any chances the Yankees had of trading him in the near future.
Barfield burned his left wrist and suffered contusions and swelling on his left elbow and wrist in what he described as a bizarre accident at his New Jersey home.
The Yankees said that preliminary examinations did not reveal a fracture and that Barfield's condition would be re-evaluated today.


Kyle Holt, Dwight Hopkins
Katherine Kyle Holt, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Hamilton B. Holt 2d of Mansfield Center, Conn., was married there yesterday to Dwight Douglas Hopkins Jr., a son of Elizabeth B. Hopkins of Westport, Conn., and the late Mr.
Hopkins.
The Rev.
Phil Rider performed the ceremony at the First Church of Christ, Congregational.
Mrs.
Hopkins, 28 years old, is a graduate of Smith College.
She is a cabaret singer and an actress in New York and performs as Kyle Holt.
Her father is the chairman of Moldex Inc., a plastics engineering and molding firm in Putnam, Conn.
Her mother, Katherine K. Holt, is a choral conductor and composer.


Sports of the Times; War Comes to the High Jumper
It is hard to get the war out of his mind when he is standing at a distance comtemplating his leap over the high-jump bar, he said.
It is hard for him, for Dargutin Topic of Yugoslavia, to put aside the "horrifying" images he had heard about at home in Belgrade, like stories of people making necklaces out of children's fingers.
Or seeing on television the towns outside Belgrade that have bodies lying in streets, machine-gunned by soldiers or their throats cut by neighbors.
It is hard to obliterate for the moment the stories of friends and relatives in the civil war who have had to leave their homes, and "everything they had worked for and earned," and flee to safety into the mountains or across some border.
More than 10,000 people have died in the last few months and an estimated 1.5 million have been left homeless.
Property damage is in the billions of dollars.
The United Nations High Commission for Refugees has described this situation as Europe's worst refugee crisis since World War II, and one of the worst anywhere in decades.


Dr. Nachtigall, Dr. Giordano
Dr.
Margaret Joy Nachtigall, a chief resident in obstetrics and gynecology at Bellevue Hospital-New York University Medical Center, was married yesterday in Kent Cliffs, N.Y., to Dr.
Anthony Joseph Giordano, an anesthesiologist at Lenox Hill Hospital in New York.
Cantor Doris Cohen officiated at the home of the bride's parents.
Mrs.
Giordano, 30 years old, is a cum laude graduate of Princeton University and received her medical degree from New York University.
She is a daughter of Drs.
Richard H. and Lila E. Nachtigall of New York.
Her father is the medical director for Pepsico Inc. in Purchase, N.Y., and a professor of clinical medicine at New York University.
Her mother, an associate professor of obstetrics and gynecology at the university, directs the Woman's Wellness Center there.


Ghanaians Hail a Surrogate King
In the final moments of his life as a regular guy, Nana Kwabena Brobbey Dankwa of Staten Island flung his black silken robe across his left shoulder and solemnly vowed before tribal elders to defend his people to the ends of the earth.
Then, amid the rhythmic pounding of African drums, he was doused with talcum powder to symbolize victory and joy, lifted into the air and carried into the arms of hundreds of cheering, handkerchief-waving subjects.


Picketing Drivers Say Van Hit a Man
Drivers on a picket line at a wholesale newspaper distribution center in New Rochelle, N.Y., that is at the center of a labor dispute said yesterday that a member of their union had been hit by a security guard's van.
A spokeswoman at New Rochelle Hospital, who declined to give her name, said that the man, Billy O'Keefe, had been treated for bruises on his hip and released.


Alissa Smith, John Piwowarski
Alissa Marie Smith, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
David T. Smith of Montville, N.J., and John M. Piwowarski, a son of Marie Piwowarski of Farmingdale, N.J., and the late Joseph Piwowarski, were married yesterday in Butler, N.J.
The Rev.
Peter Brophy performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Anthony's Church.
Mrs.
Piwowarski, 25 years old, and her husband, 26, are 1988 graduates of Pace University.
She is the treasurer of Marco's, a department store in Pompton Plains, N.J., of which her mother, Marie Smith, is president.
The bride's father is the controller of the Gulf State dairy division of Borden Inc. in Columbus, Ohio.


Artra Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31





LITHUANIA LEADER FAILS TO WIN VOTE
A referendum to give the chairman of the Parliament sweeping new powers as the republic's first chief executive failed here on Saturday when too few voters turned out.
The chairman, Vytautas Landsbergis, said today that he now saw little immediate hope of breaking the political gridlock that has seized the Government of Lithuania, which won independence from Moscow after the coup in Moscow last August that led to the breakup of the Soviet Union.


At P.S. 19, Bilingual Is Not Enough
In Janina Juszczak's fourth-grade math class, where English is the second, and occasionally third, language, teaching is rarely as simple as putting chalk to blackboard.
With 35 students who come from 15 nations and speak 7 languages, Ms.
Juszczak -- herself an immigrant from Poland -- resorts to nods and winks, prodding nudges and friendly smiles to make plain a world of plus, minus and division signs.
Welcome to Public School 19, Corona, Queens.


Austrians Elect Rightist as President
Thomas Klestil, the chief of Austria's diplomatic corps and a former Ambassador to the United States, was elected today to succeed President Kurt Waldheim, whose record as an officer in Hitler's Army isolated the country diplomatically for six years.
In a runoff between the top two candidates to emerge from initial voting last month, Mr.
Klestil, the 59-year-old candidate of the conservative People's Party, received more than 56 percent of the votes, against about 43 percent for Rudolf Streicher, the Social Democratic candidate and a former minister of transport and state industries.


Haley Ruderman, Lonnie Klein
Haley Dawn Ruderman, an assistant corporation counsel in Brooklyn for the New York City Department of Law, and Lonnie Todd Klein, , who expects to receive a medical degree next month from New York Medical College, were married yesterday by Cantor Martin Antosofsky at the Old Westbury (L.I.) Hebrew Congregation.
Mrs.
Klein, 25 years old,is a University of Michigan graduate and holds a law degree from Brooklyn Law School.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Herbert Ruderman of Jericho, L.I.
The bride's father is an architect in Brooklyn.


Fonar Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Puck Overboard!
While thousands of sailors celebrated the Memorial Day weekend touring Manhattan's streets, a handful of men from the U.S.S.
John F. Kennedy spent a portion of their shore leave on ice.
On Saturday, 16 sailors showed up at the Sky Rink on West 33d Street and showed a makeshift civilian team that, despite the lack of a home rink, they can really skate.
They defeated the civilians, 16-4.


For Small Nations, Tough Currents
Alejandro Moncada is the coach of the Honduran Olympic swim team.
There is no functional 50-meter pool in his homeland at the moment, but he takes his job very seriously.
Moncada can be seen, and heard, pacing all the cement pool decks that lead to the Summer Games in Barcelona, Spain.
Here, there, everywhere, he is blowing harsh notes simultaneously from two cachos, hollowed bull's horns, to encourage his three Olympic swimmers as they turn for home.


No Magic in Uncovering Houdini Data
A professor and a librarian have performed the astonishing act of phenomenal prestidigitation, hitherto unimaginable, right before the very eyes of startled onlookers: they have made the works of the amazing Houdini reappear.
Not that the papers of the nation's greatest magician had actually disappeared.
Rather, they had been misplaced, which is as good as having disappeared since they had lain mismarked for years somewhere among millions of other objects in a warehouse of the Library of Congress.


John Gates, 78, Former Editor Of The Daily Worker, Is Dead
John Gates, who quit as a top American Communist official and chief editor of The Daily Worker after losing a campaign to democratize the party and free it from Moscow's control, died on Saturday at the Miami Heart Institute in Miami Beach.
He was 78 years old and lived in North Miami Beach.
He died of heart disease and a stroke, his family said.


Flagship Financial reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Dance in Review
American Ballet Theater
Metropolitan Opera House
"Coppelia" is a sunny story ballet about a nasty trick.
But Marianna Tcherkassky, Johan Renvall and Gil Boggs managed to soften the nastiness and play up the charm when American Ballet Theater presented "Coppelia" on Thursday night.
Ms.
Tcherkassky was enchanting as Swanilda, the village girl who penetrates the workshop of the mad old Dr.
Coppelius and makes him believe one of his mechanical dolls has come to life.
Her dancing was of a very high order technically, controlled yet playfully expansive and filled with daring ritards and balances and witty embellishments woven well into the fabric of the choreography.
This Swanilda grew from a sturdy lass who lapsed into an occasional determined waddle to a woman secure enough in love to shrug away the bravura demands of the ballet's culminating wedding pas de deux.


Cards Edge Dodgers As Jose Gets a Break
Cardinals 6, Dodgers 5
ST.
LOUIS, May 25 (AP) -- Felix Jose found it easy to forget a day of struggling after he got the game-winning hit.
"That's the way to do it," Jose said after his two-out, ninth-inning single gave the St.
Louis Cardinals a 6-5 victory over the Los Angeles Dodgers today.


Debate Continues On Indy Accidents
Dr.
Terry Trammell, the orthopedic surgeon here who operates on injured Indy-car drivers, was relaxing at a reception at Bobby Rahal's race shop last Saturday night, a couple of miles from the Indianapolis Motor Speedway, where the Indianapolis 500 would take place the next day.
"I'm hoping for a quiet weekend," Trammell said as he got up to leave.
It wasn't.


Strongest U.S. Environment Law May Become Endangered Species
The American bald eagle sits on one side of the dollar bill and in tall trees of every state in the union but Hawaii.
It was not always so, of course.
A series of Government actions that gave legal protection to animals on the verge of extinction has been largely responsible for bringing the national symbol back to the skies of America.
By contrast, a rare California songbird that lives in the scrub brush around Los Angeles is virtually unknown outside of birdwatcher circles, but it has given fits to the faltering house-building industry.
If anything, the bird, the gnat catcher, is a symbol of a law that protects birds at the expense of subdivisions.


Icky Yellow Ooze Brings Opera In Munich to a Screeching Halt
If the idea of proliferating, unstoppable yellow slime bringing the most modern machinery to a halt seems like something out of a science-fiction horror film, welcome to the Bavarian State Opera, where exactly that is happening.
For months, the slime has spread through the hydraulic system of the National Theater in this Bavarian capital, where the State Opera performs -- or tries to perform.


Reynolds Speeds Up His Struggle to Return
With a little luck on one runner's part and continued good health by another, the men's 400-meter event at the Barcelona Games could have a familiar look to it.
Lawyers for Butch Reynolds, the world-record holder who has failed in his attempts to have a two-year suspension for drug use overturned, intend to ask the International Amateur Athletic Federation this weekend to commute his sentence.


Newark Offers a Model For Saving the Cities
In the fresh surge of attention to the plight of inner-city businesses, Katie Selikoff may have clues to how the government can help.
It was here on the blocks surrounding Mrs.
Selikoff's small furniture store that the Newark riots of 1967 and 1969 left an inner city in ruin.
Her building was nearly destroyed by fire, and several merchants across the street were firebombed into extinction.


Fleming Gets 6th in Row
Mariners 7, Orioles 3
SEATTLE, May 25 (AP) -- Rookie Dave Fleming won his sixth straight decision and Pete O'Brien hit his 11th homer and drove in three runs as the Seattle Mariners beat the Baltimore Orioles, 7-3, tonight.
Fleming (6-1), who leads all rookies in victories, gave up two runs on seven hits and five walks in seven innings.
He retired Glenn Davis on a popup and fanned Randy Milligan for his only strikeout with the bases loaded in the seventh.


CHRONICLE
The Olympic gold medal skater VIKTOR PETRENKO is planning to move to Las Vegas, Nev., and train at an ice rink in a resort hotel.
One of his coaches, KARIN DOHERTY , moved there in February to become skating school director for the Santa Fe Hotel's ice rink.


End Cruel and Too Usual Anthem Punishment
To the Editor:
In "Get It Right. Privatize Executions" (Op-Ed, May 8), Arthur Miller assures us that, "as with all sports events," before his privatized executions, a soprano would belt out "The Star-Spangled Banner." Presumably in Canada, our "O Canada" would also assail our ears.
What has always puzzled me is why our national anthems are played before sporting events and virtually no other times.


Bias by I.L.G.W.U. Proved Unfounded
To the Editor:
In "Labor Case From '62 Strains Black-Jewish Ties" (letter, May 9), Herbert Hill, former labor secretary of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People, referring to the International Ladies' Garment Workers' Union, stated that the New York State Human Rights Commission "found the union guilty of racial discrimination. . . ." His statement is false and irresponsible.


With the Income Tax Achieved, a Legislator Leaves Hartford
Even as Irving J. Stolberg prepares to return to private life at a time of intense anti-tax sentiment, the longtime income-tax advocate, one of Connecticut's most powerful politicians in the 1980's, remains an unabashed liberal and defender of public service.
"Others are packing it in because of the low pay and the aggravation," said Mr.
Stolberg, referring to the rash of politicians in Connecticut and throughout the country who have opted not to seek re-election this year.
But that is not his cause for announcing that he will not run for his 12th term as a state House member.


Sudanese Rebels Are Reported to Be Near Defeat
The Sudanese armed forces, strengthened by an infusion of Chinese weapons and Iranian military advisers and taking advantage of disarray in the ranks of the southern rebel movement, have pushed the rebels to the brink of defeat, diplomats here say.
When rebel leaders from the Sudan People's Liberation Army sit down for peace talks with the Government on Tuesday in the Nigerian capital, Abuja, they will find themselves at the nadir of their struggle, cornered by some 80,000 Government troops in a small pocket in the eastern Equatoria Province.
Rebels 'in a Rout'
"This cycle of rebellion by the southerners against the north appears to be ending," a senior Western diplomat said.
"The S.P.L.A. is in a rout. The Government is determined to prosecute this war to an end."


Prep Schools Weigh Issue Of Condoms
The question of giving condoms to students, which provoked a bitterly emotional struggle in New York's public schools last year, is now being taken up by the city's elite private schools.
In the last year at least four schools -- Brearley, Dalton and Friends Seminary in Manhattan and St.
Ann's in Brooklyn -- have agreed to make condoms available.
Several others are reviewing the issue.


Preparing for Yeltsin's Visit, U.S. Weighs Limits on Nuclear Testing
In preparation for a summit meeting next month with President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia, the Bush Administration is considering plans to limit American testing of nuclear weapons, a senior Government official said today.
The official, who insisted on anonymity, said an "options paper" of possible limitations on the testing of nuclear weapons was completed earlier this month by high ranking officials.
The Defense Department has long opposed restrictions on American testing, while some limitations are now being endorsed by State Department officials.


CHRONICLE
"The law is a wonderful field," Dean JOHN D. FEERICK of Fordham Law School said yesterday.
"It gives you an opportunity to make a difference in people's lives."
Dean Feerick, a Bronx-born former labor lawyer who will be inaugurated tonight as president of the City Bar Association in New York, said in an interview that as president he would work to increase the association's work in "providing volunteer lawyers to help the oppressed and hopeless deal with the legal system."


Books of The Times; Sad Life, Sad Writer: A Base in Shame and Pain
The Interior Castle  The Art and Life of Jean Stafford  By Ann Hulbert  Illustrated. 430 pages.
Alfred A. Knopf. $25.
Jean Stafford's body of work was small but distinguished: three completed novels, "Boston Adventure" (1944), "The Mountain Lion" (1947) and "The Catherine Wheel" (1952), and a series of short stories, published mainly in The New Yorker.
Although the style shifted from book to book -- Henry James and Proust curiously alternated with Mark Twain as the dominant influences -- the fiction consistently attested to Stafford's unforgiving eye, her gift for lapidary prose, and what she called her "peculiar genius for the uncomfortable."


Review/Theater; In the Impressionist Era, Women Were Artists, Too
They were wives, models and mistresses and they were also artists, but the women who were among the early Impressionist painters were often slighted by their peers.
In her new play, "Dream of a Common Language," Heather McDonald scrutinizes this disparity in French culture in the 1870's, when artists like Berthe Morisot and Mary Cassatt were allowed to exhibit their work but were not invited to take part in the decision-making process.
This is a fascinating idea for a play and Ms.
McDonald arouses one's concern for the problems of her characters, fictionalized representations of real people.
But Ms.
McDonald never fully confronts the important subjects she raises, questions of art as well as feminism.
Wendy Wasserstein, for one, was far more revealing dealing with related matters in passages of "The Heidi Chronicles."


The Rev. Jude Mead; Queens Priest Was 72
The Rev.
Jude Mead, a Roman Catholic priest who was a preacher, lecturer and author, died on Saturday in his room in the Passionist Monastery in Jamaica, Queens.
He was 72 years old and lived at the monastery.
Father Mead died of an apparent heart attack, said the rector of the monastery, the Rev.
Justin Kerber.


Who's on First? Who Isn't as Yankees Go Wild
It was an inning that did not want to end in a series that could not stop producing wild outcomes between two teams that shook their heads in wonder at the wackiness prevailing for four straight days at Yankee Stadium.
Though the Yankees and Milwaukee Brewers each snared two victories on a holiday weekend when comebacks, extra innings and amazing plays were normal, it was New York's nine-run eighth inning yesterday that gave the series the finale it deserved.


Sun and Fun Yield to a Day of Reflection
As a time to remember Americans fallen in battle, Memorial Day was fittingly gray and somber in the New York region yesterday.
Temperatures seldom reached 60 degrees, and the sun played peek-a-boo in overcast skies.
But as a day off from work, as a day to celebrate the traditional, if unofficial, first day of summer, the holiday offered as chilly a reception as did the area's parks and beaches.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League
CLEVELAND INDIANS -- Optioned Dave Rohde, infielder, to Colorado Springs of the Pacific Coast League.
Recalled Denis Boucher, pitcher, from Colorado Springs.
MILWAUKEE BREWERS -- Traded Edwin Nunez, pitcher, to the Texas Rangers for a player to be named later.
Activated Darryl Hamilton, outfielder, from the 15-day disabled list.
Optioned William Suero, infielder, to Denver of the American Association.


There Were Different Ways to Spend the Weekend in Kennebunkport


Baker Visits Georgia to Help a Friend
Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d kept a promise today and came to this troubled capital to give a boost to an embattled old friend, Eduard A. Shevardnadze.
In one of those moments that happen mostly in films -- in this case, a 1950's movie set at a decrepit Stalinesque airport -- a heavy shower ended just as the Secretary's plane taxied toward a waiting crowd in dark suits.


Thai Legislators Curb Role of Military
Parliament moved quickly today to amend the Constitution to end the military's stranglehold on Thai politics as politicians began back-room discussions of possible candidates to be the next Prime Minister.
Parliament convened a day after the Army-backed Prime Minister, Suchinda Kraprayoon, resigned in disgrace after troops under his control killed scores and perhaps hundreds of pro-democracy demonstrators.


2d Generation Anti-Bias Pitch
A new advertising campaign to promote racial harmony offers a bittersweet twist to the adage "like father, like son."
Earlier this month, two executives at Smith/Greenland Inc. in New York, Doug Raboy and Drew Greenland, introduced a series of posters that challenged racial prejudice.
The campaign prompted Mr.
Raboy's father, Dick Raboy, president of Raboy &amp; Associates in New York, to search his files for a campaign he produced in 1969.


Computer Feud Enters a New Phase
Once best friends, now quarrelsome enemies, Microsoft, the nation's largest software company, and I.B.M., the largest computer company, are edging toward a much wider war.
The battlefield is the heart of the International Business Machines Corporation's market: the data-processing centers of Corporate America.
The Microsoft Corporation, which dominates the personal computer business, has invested $400 million and spent five years developing an operating system -- the software that controls computer operations -- that may make it a force in commercial computing and the fast-growing work station business.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Undeclared Candidate; Perot Stresses Homey Image, But the Image Is No Accident
When Ross Perot talks of himself and his current position, he likes to conjure a picture of "a happy accident," an innocent abroad in the wilds and wiles of media-land.
"I don't have a handler," he says with pride.
"I don't have anyone who tells me what kind of suit to wear, what kind of tie to wear. I don't have any powder on my face."
He boasts of his unsuitability for television politics, poking fun at his Texas country-boy accent, his big, beaten nose, the great out-sticking ears that frame his face like cartilaginous quotation marks.
He generally ends his litany of curiously likable flaws with the same shrugging summary.
"What you see," he says, "is what you get."  Spinning Out a Hero
This is true, but it is also true that what you see of Mr.
Perot is by his own careful design.
He is a master salesman, and for 25 years, he has done much of his selling -- of causes, business ventures, ultimately of himself -- through the press.
The history of his dealings suggests Mr.
Perot understands the ways of news organizations considerably better than they understand the ways of Mr.
Perot.


On My Mind; A Devouring Monster
The monster tears apart his bleeding son with his teeth and devours him.
This was Goya's vision and cry of despair -- under tyranny, a nation eats its children alive, and in doing so consumes itself.


Lydia Joel, Former Chief Editor Of Dance Magazine, Dies at 77
Lydia Joel, the former editor in chief of Dance Magazine and head of the dance department at the School of Performing Arts, died on Sunday at New York Hospital She was 77 years old and lived in Manhattan.
She died of leukemia, said her husband, Edwin Miller.


Canada's No Medical Model
Infant mortality runs twice as high among the poor as the rich . . . rates of tuberculosis among tribe members run 40 times the national average . . . health care costs are rising faster than anywhere on the continent.
Snapshots of the failing U.S. health care system?
No.
These findings describe Canada's vaunted national health insurance system, findings that demand notice from Americans who glibly advocate adopting the Canadian approach.


Patterns
Convention Fashion
Mayor David N. Dinkins is scheduled today to announce plans for perhaps the largest outdoor fashion show ever in New York.
The show is to be held on July 14 in an enormous tent on the Great Lawn in Central Park.
The show, called "New York Is Fashion," is to take place on the second day of the Democratic National Convention and will feature 12 to 15 American designers, from established to emerging ones.


House Report Predicts Sharp Cuts Under Balanced-Budget Measure
A report prepared for the chairman of the House Budget Committee paints a picture of sharp changes in virtually every Government program if the proposed balanced-budget amendment is approved.
The chairman, Representative Leon E. Panetta, Democrat of California, is to release the report on Tuesday.
An account of it this evening in The Washington Post was confirmed by the committee's chief economist, Joseph J. Minarik.


A Plea to I.O.C. From Mandela
NELSON MANDELA has asked the International Olympic Committee to allow more South African athletes to participate in the Games this summer in Barcelona.
After talking to the I.O.C. president, JUAN ANTONIO SAMARANCH, for 45 minutes at Lausanne, Switzerland, yesterday Mandela said he received a "very positive" response to his request.


Heavy Schedule of Equity Issues Planned for This Week
The following equity offerings are expected this week: Alco Health Distribution Corp., 7.5 million common shares, 6 million in the U.S.
Smith Barney.


Q&amp;A
Yellow Cats  Q.  What makes a yellow cat yellow?
Is it true that 90 percent of yellow cats are male?
A.
Cat breeders used to call the gene responsible for the ginger or marmalade cat yellow, but now they call it orange, abbreviated O. The gene is sex-linked, simply meaning that it is on the X chromosome, said Thomas Dent, executive director of the Cat Fanciers Association.
The color it controls is usually called red in cat shows.
A male cat has an X and a Y chromosome and a female has two X chromosomes.
Males can normally carry only one O gene, and this is enough to produce overall red coloring.
A female must have two O genes to be completely red.
However, Mr.
Dent, whose organization says it is the largest registry of pedigreed cats, says there is no predominance of males among "yellow" show cats.


The Rev. Jude Mead; Queens Priest Was 72
The Rev.
Jude Mead, a Roman Catholic priest who was a preacher, lecturer and author, died on Saturday in his room in the Passionist Monastery in Jamaica, Queens.
He was 72 years old and lived at the monastery.
Father Mead died of an apparent heart attack, said the rector of the monastery, the Rev.
Justin Kerber.


Thai Unrest Does Harm To Economy
The Thai Army's attack on pro-democracy protesters last week not only filled Bangkok's hospitals but emptied its hotels and cast a shadow over an economy that in the last five years has been one of the world's most vibrant.
Yet in some ways, what is most striking about the mood among economists and business executives interviewed in Thailand last week is not their concern -- natural enough after bloody street fighting was televised around the world -- but their cautious optimism that the economy will be bruised but still buoyant.


Rappers Say the Riots Were No Surprise To Their Listeners
Long before the verdict in the Rodney G. King beating and the fires that engulfed South-Central Los Angeles, some black rap artists had been illuminating America's racial tensions.
"Police think they have the authority to kill a minority," railed the rapper Ice Cube on "Straight Outta Compton," the 1988 debut album of N.W.A. (Niggas With Attitude).
These rappers distilled blacks' anger and prophesied its eruption to anyone who would listen.
Millions of young blacks did.


Recovery Oratory Is Recycled
A year ago, as the nation returned to work from the Memorial Day weekend, officials in the Bush Administration and at the Federal Reserve, as well as a significant number of private economists, were trumpeting the end of recession and predicting steadily improving growth through the summer.
Twelve months later, the oratory sounds remarkably the same.
Michael J. Boskin, chairman of the President's Council of Economic Advisers, said last week, for instance, that the White House would soon raise the growth forecast of 2.2 percent it made in January.
Robert Parry, president of the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, predicted that growth into 1993 would be around 3 percent.
And through a leak to The Wall Street Journal last week, the Fed informed credit market participants that it felt further easing of monetary policy was not necessary for a moderate recovery.


Haitians Expected to Snub U.S. Rules
While the Administration and advocates for refugees wait to gauge the effectiveness of the latest American efforts to slow the exodus from Haiti, both groups agreed today that few Haitians would use asylum review offices being set up here to replace overcrowded offices at the Guantanamo Bay Naval Base in Cuba.
For American diplomats and other officials, the Administration decision on Sunday to intercept refugees and return them to Haiti, where claims for asylum will be reviewed, amounts to calling the bluff of the Haitians who have been clambering aboard small boats in unprecedented numbers in recent weeks in the hope of reaching the United States.


Nigeria Plans New Force to Deal With Unrest
Alarmed that Nigeria might be sliding into ungovernability, the country's military leaders pledged tonight to restore order to the West African country by setting up a national guard.
Speaking on a radio broadcast monitored here, Gen.
Ibrahim Babangida, Nigeria's President, said the guard would replace the armed forces and police in riots.
He stressed that any future unrest would be dealt with "using all means," including emergency powers.


Wary Recruits: Immigrants Vie for Day Jobs
The men begin to gather on the squalid Brooklyn street corner shortly after dawn.
Many wear the distinctive, shabby gray clothes of Eastern Europe, as drab as the landscape of battered cars, auto repair shops and parking lots.
Quickly, their numbers swell to more than 100.
Miles away in Queens, the Korean-run fruit markets are just beginning to open, the first of the shops to pull up their shutters.
But in a church parking lot, men in stained sweatshirts and baseball caps, mostly from El Salvador, are already assembled.


Advertising Pervades Poland, Turning Propaganda to Glitz
The fight is on for the hearts and minds of Poland's consumers.
Television viewers in central Europe's largest country are bombarded nightly with advertisements for Western laundry detergent, yogurt and candy bars.
Previously taboo items -- like women's sanitary napkins -- are being openly advertised for the first time.


Pieter A. Fisher, 61, A Wall Street Partner
Pieter A. Fisher, a partner in the Wall Street firm of Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company, died on Sunday in his home at his vineyard in Rutherford, Calif.
He was 61 years old and had a home in New York from 1957 to 1991.
Mr.
Fisher, a former general partner who was a limited partner in the firm at the time of his death, died of prostate cancer, said his wife, the former M. Helen Anderson.


New Life For 'Lost' Musicals In London
Who could forget a musical comedy lyric like "The Greeks have got the girdle, we have to get over that hurdle"?
Almost everybody, it seems, a fact that helps to explain the continuing popularity here of "Discover the Lost Musicals," a concert series that has just entered its fourth season.
On a recent Sunday evening, an enthusiastic audience watched 15 unpaid actors, wearing evening dress and wielding scripts, sing about the girdle, the hurdle and various mythological tussles between the Amazons and Greeks.
The occasion was a concert performance of "By Jupiter," the 1942 musical by Richard Rodgers and Lorenz Hart.
A neglected work, to be sure, but one created by what Ian Marshall Fisher, the series' impresario, calls the "creme de la creme of musical theater writers."


CHRONICLE
The 20-year-old daughter of Prime Minister JOHN MAJOR fell from a horse during a charity race yesterday in Huntingdon, England.
The Prime Minister and his wife, NORMA , were watching from the stands when their daughter ELIZABETH fell just after crossing the winning post next to last in the two-mile race.
A course spokesman described Miss Major as "shaken" but not seriously hurt.


Observer; Call Me Ishquayle
We journeyed from Manhattan over to Far Hills, N.J., the other day to look into Liberals for Quayle, the organization set up to rally liberals to the Vice President.
Its chairman, Basking Ridge III, said his phone banks had been swamped with calls, such is the excitement among liberals about, as he put it, "this chance to finally get with a winner."
Mr.
Ridge introduced us to several of the founders of Liberals for Quayle, including Hugh Highspire, who had the idea of locating in Far Hills, rather than the Upper West Side of Manhattan or Washington's K Street lobbying corridor.


28 Years After Dallas, A Doctor Tells His Story Amid Troubling Doubts
IN recent weeks, the conspiracy theories about the assassination of John F. Kennedy have been fueled by an unusual new source: an eyewitness account by a surgeon on the trauma team that tried to save the President's life in 1963 and who had not testified before the Warren Commission.
The surgeon, Dr.
Charles A. Crenshaw, broke a 28-year silence and was co-author of a book, "J.F.K. Conspiracy of Silence" (Signet).
It could have been a valuable contribution to the history of the assassination, as any eyewitness account should be.
But Dr.
Crenshaw's contribution to history is particularly hard to evaluate, largely because it was written so long after the event and because he now says the book exaggerated his role in Kennedy's care.


Artist Arrested for Sodomy
A 26-year-old Manhattan comic book artist was arrested yestgerday and charged with sexually abusing a 10-year-old boy whom he had met during a presentation that he gave at the boy's Upper West Side public school, the police said.
In a search of the apartment of the artist, Jan Harpes, the police recovered "numerous" still photographs and videotapes that show him sodomizing the boy, said a police spokesman, Detective Joseph Gallagher.
Mr.
Harpes, of 241 W. 15th Street in Chelsea, was charged with two counts of sodomy, eight counts of using a child in a sexual performance and 50 counts of promoting sexual performance by a child, the detective said.
Neither the boy nor his school was identified by the police yesterday.


Review/Fashion; Fur Finds a Silver Lining
The pedestrian cloth coat has sprung to life under fairly unusual patronage: fur manufacturers are giving it a strong push.
Fashion's stepchild for many seasons, the cloth coat occupied an inconspicuous rung in the style hierarchy.
It was upstaged for a while by quilted down coats, which may have been bulky, but were relatively inexpensive and certainly warm.
For warmth on another level, there was the fur coat, especially mink, gaining ground a few years back when women began buying their own instead of waiting for someone to buy furs for them.
Others chose an alternative way of keeping warm: wearing fake-fur coats, often made of acrylic fibers.
They could resemble authentic furs, but often did not.


Ziegler as President: Going, Going . . .
As is often the case in the National Hockey League, the announcement late in the week was vague, hedged with euphemism and subject to interpretation.
"It is time now," John Ziegler said in a news release, "to discuss with the Board of Governors the matter of succession in this office." It was an odd proposal for a man with four years left on his contract as president of the league.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-10  SNARES IN POLISH CAPITALISM
Viewers in Poland are now bombarded nightly with advertisements for Western detergent, yogurt and candy bars.
But there are snares for companies that court the Polish consumer.
Under the scarcities of Communism, the Poles were deprived of goods.
Now they are inclined to dismiss as propaganda almost any TV or newspaper ad.
A1  EUROPEANS PUSHED TO ACT
News Analysis: European governments, pushed by Secretary of State Baker, have decided to do sooner what they were thinking of doing later -- impose new economic sanctions against Belgrade in reprisal for the Bosnia attacks.
A6
Many fear Kosovo could become the next Yugoslav battleground.  A6  THAIS WASTE NO TIME
A day after the Army-backed Prime Minister resigned under pressure, the Thai Parliament amended the Constitution to end what has been a six-decade-long military stranglehold on politics.
The legislators began discussing who might be the next Prime Minister.
A3  POLITICAL SHOCK IS THERAPEUTIC
Italian politicians, seemingly spurred by the killing of an anti-Mafia crusader, closed ranks and elected a Christian Democrat, Oscar Luigi Scalfaro, as President.
A3  ONE POINT OF AGREEMENT
In the wake of President Bush's order to send back Haitian boat people, U.S. officials and advocates for the refugees agreed that few of the Haitians would use asylum-review offices being set up in Port-au-Prince, Haiti's capital.
A5  SKELETON IN A COMMUNIST CLOSET
At the peak of detente, the Soviet Communist Party ordered that arms be supplied to Palestinian guerrillas for use against Israelis and Americans, a Yeltsin adviser said.
Today, Russia's highest court begins deliberating on whether it was constitutional to ban the party.
A7
The U.S. is said be considering limits on nuclear weapons testing.  A6
Baker visits Georgia, fulfilling a promise to Shevardnadze.
A7  NIGERIAN RESPONDS TO RIOTS
Nigeria's military leader pledged to restore order after major Christian-Muslim violence in the north.
Gen.
Ibrahim Babangida said he would set up a national guard to replace regular soldiers and policemen in riot situations.
He said he would not be hurried out of office.
A8  NEW SITUATION IN SOUTHERN SUDAN
The Sudanese armed forces, strengthened by Chinese weapons and Iranian advisers, and taking advantage of disarray in the southern rebel movement, have pushed the rebels to the brink of defeat, diplomats in Khartoum say.
A9
Ingenio Journal: Peasant resistance to Peru's brutal insurgency.
A4  Israel again attacked Party of God bases in southern Lebanon.
A10 Two Afghan rivals agreed to hold elections within six months.
A10  National A11-15, B8-9  YALE PRESIDENT RESIGNING
Benno C. Schmidt Jr. is resigning the presidency of Yale University to head a new national private school system that its creator, the communications executive Christopher Whittle, intends as a model for major changes in education.
A1
Another key departure in a time of transition has left Yale reeling.  B8
Network of private schools is a risky and revolutionary venture.
B8  REPUBLICAN ABORTION BATTLE
A bruising battle over abortion rights will begin in the Republican Party at a platform hearing today, and advocates of changing the party's anti-abortion stance vow to carry the fight to the national convention.
A1  THE DEBATE ON SINGLE MOTHERS
In spotlighting single motherhood, Vice President Quayle has opened a debate over a complex issue of practical, emotional and spiritual choices that seldom has a straightforward moral answer.
A12  PEROT, MASTER OF THE MEDIA
As a master salesman, Ross Perot's skillful use of the press and broadcast news and has led to something extraordinary: a credible Presidential contender without a party or primaries, the first pure media candidate.
A1
On the Trail: Brown said Perot threatened Clinton.  A15  CALIFORNIA JUST DOESN'T COUNT
California, with the biggest and potentially most meaningful of the Presidential primaries, finds itself again this year as the contest that doesn't count.
A14  A SPECIES ACT ENDANGERED
In the emotional conflicts over spotted owls and snail darters, it is often forgotten that most of the protection of the Endangered Species Act, which faces a stiff challenge for renewal, provokes no debate at all.
A1  A FEW MEN AND THE SEA
A few Americans ventured from Florida across the sea to Cuban waters for a fishing tournament, in the name of good will and Ernest Hemingway, but when they returned, they found themselves facing a gauntlet of Federal agents.
A12  Metropolitan Digest, B1 URBAN GRAPES OF WRATH
Across the New York metropolitan region, migrant workers -- most of them immigrants, nearly all of them desperate -- line up for hours, waiting for trucks or vans to pick them up for unskilled bottom-dollar jobs.
Often undocumented, unable to speak English and willing to work for less than the minimum wage, they are members of a vast underground army seeking a foothold in a city where their American dream has been punctured by the faltering economy.
A1  Business Digest, D1  Science Times C1-11  RULES FOR HIGH-TECH FOOD
The Government plans to announce that foods developed through genetic engineering should not require extraordinary testing and regulation in most cases.
A1  Infertility treatments bring a surge in premature, multiple births.
C1  Men and women use different approaches to navigate.
C1  Physicists step up search for universe's missing mass.
C1  Arts/Entertainment C12-16  New life for 'lost' musicals.
C13  Rappers on the riots.
C13  Ooze halts operas in Munich.
C13  Theater: "Dream of a Common Language." C12  Fashion Page B9  Fur finds a silver lining.
Obituaries D16  Sports B10-16  Baseball: Yanks win another wild one.
B11  Reds shut out Mets.
B13  Basketball: Cavaliers beat Bulls, 99-85.
B11  Columns: Anderson on Dave Stockton.
B11  Editorials/Op-Ed A16-17  Editorials A16  Canada's no medical model.
Forgotten Central America.
Get courts back on camera.
Letters A16  Russell Baker: Call me Ishquayle.
A17  A. M. Rosenthal: A devouring monster.
A17  David K. Shipler: Khaki, blue and blacks.
A17  Marvin Liebman: The gay-bashing Republicans.
A17


Key West Journal; Defying U.S. in Spirit of Hemingway
Last week two dozen Americans steered their boats across the 90 miles of ocean between Key West and Havana to compete for prizes like "The Old Man and the Sea Trophy" in a fishing tournament named for Ernest Hemingway.
By doing so, they defied a United States embargo against Cuba, in the spirit of another Hemingway work, "To Have and Have Not." In that novel, a Key West man risks his life and livelihood to conduct illegal business between the two island neighbors.


More Surgery Planned for Long Jumper
The long jumper LLEWELLYN STARKS, recovering from a broken right leg, will require one more operation and possibly two, his doctor said yesterday.
Dr.
STEPHEN J. McILVEEN said that Starks, who fractured his tibia and fibula at Sunday's New York Games, would remain hospitalized in New York until the end of the week.
The doctor said Starks would then be transferred to a hospital in Baton Rouge, La., where he lives.


Treasury to Auction Only Bills This Week
Treasury financings this week are confined to bills, beginning with today's auction of three- and six-month bills.
Tomorrow the Treasury will auction 15-day cash management bills; on Thursday one-year bills.
Late on Friday, the outstanding three- and six-month bills were offered at 3.67 percent and 3.77 percent, respectively.
The one-year bill was offered at a late rate of 3.98 percent.


Forgotten Central America
Whatever happened to Central America?
The region has all but vanished from popular consciousness, along with Ronald Reagan's dire vision of a great red tide inching inexorably to Harlingen, Tex.
Yesterday's cold war battleground is today's backwater.
And Washington, after a decade of interventionism, no longer seems interested in Central America's precarious passage from war to peace, from militarism to democracy.
Yet in Nicaragua, despair haunts an elected Government struggling to disarm contra rebels and tame a Sandinista-led army.
In El Salvador, old belligerents stare across an abyss of distrust as the United Nations strives to carry out a peace accord.
In Guatemala, a new civilian President seeks to end the region's oldest civil war.


McCloskey Nears Timberwolves' Contract
JACK McCLOSKEY said yesterday he was nearing a deal to become general manager of the Minnesota Timberwolves.
McCloskey, the Detroit Pistons' general manager since 1979, met over the weekend with the Timberwolves' president, BOB STEIN, and other team officials and said the deal could be completed this week.


Bridge
A partnership that has been trying to win the prestigious Goldman Pairs for two decades finally succeeded on Sunday.
One of the winners was Steve Becker of Cos Cob, Conn., who writes the syndicated bridge column formerly written by his father, B. Jay Becker, who died in 1987.
The other winner was Richard De Martino of Riverside, Conn., who had a long and highly successful day.
He had earlier won the Bracketed Knockout, teaming with Jeffrey Feldman of Norwalk, Conn., Carl Berenbaum of Philadelphia and Steve Williams of Princeton, N.J., to defeat strong opposition.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Republicans; G.O.P. FACES FIGHT ON ABORTION ISSUE
Republican supporters of abortion rights are preparing for a bruising battle over changing the party platform, which since 1980 has firmly opposed abortion.
The White House opposes the effort and has given no sign of moving to mollify the advocates of the right to choose abortion, who have little immediate prospect of beating an incumbent President of their own party on such an explosive issue.


Khaki, Blue and Blacks
Since the jury's unconscionable verdict in the Rodney King case, debate has erupted again over the economic plight of the inner cities.
But little attention has been given to a more specific problem that can probably be eased, if not solved: the anti-black behavior of many police officers.
Not every white police officer is a bigot and not every police force is a bastion of racism.
Some departments have made strides in promoting blacks, teaching tolerance and engaging minority communities in monitoring police work.
But the remaining biases are severe enough to require an effort as intensive and systematic as the U.S. military has undertaken in the last 20 years to combat racism in its ranks.
In fact, certain Army techniques might help the police.


Physicists Step Up Exotic Search for the Universe's Missing Mass
THE strangeness of the universe obliges astrophysicists to heed the White Queen's words to Alice that she practiced believing six impossible things before breakfast.
Without this kind of logical leap, they find they cannot begin to embark on answering one of the most challenging and fundamental questions in science today: what is most of the universe made of?
All the visible stars and galaxies, scientists now believe, account for less than 1 percent of the mass of the universe.
The rest, then, must be some kind of invisible, or dark, matter that has so far eluded detection by the best instruments of astronomy or particle physics.


Solemn Salutes Honor Sacrifices of War


Who's Got a Gun? Clues Are in the Body Language
Is the man's sweater color-coordinated with the rest of his outfit?
When he walks, does the front edge of his jacket cling to one thigh more than the other?
As he steps off the curb, does his hand brush his hip?
Innocuous details, perhaps, hardly worth noticing.
Or, perhaps, telltale signs of a concealed weapon, says Robert T. Gallagher, former star gun-hunter with the New York City police.


Yugoslav Strife: Challenge for Europe
Aware of their dismal peacemaking record in Yugoslavia, European Community Governments have chosen to blush and remain silent after Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d lectured them this weekend for not acting more forcefully to stop the fighting in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Nudged by Mr.
Baker's public admonition, they have also decided to do sooner what they were thinking of doing later -- to impose new economic sanctions against the Serbian dominated Government in Belgrade and to propose that similar measures be ordered by the United Nations Security Council.


Winds of Yugoslavia's War Threaten To Engulf Muslim Region in Serbia
For nearly 12 months, war has been moving inexorably southward across what was once Yugoslavia, becoming deadlier by turns as it has leapt from Slovenia to Croatia to Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Now, as the United States prepares to lead a drive at the United Nations for mandatory economic sanctions against Serbia, which has been widely judged to be the main aggressor in the fighting, the fears of many in the Balkans are focusing on what could become the next battleground.
It is called Kosovo, and what has happened here in the last 48 hours has offered little hope that the worst of the killing is past.


Instead of Whining, Cavaliers Get Even
The Cleveland Cavaliers would have had plenty of excuses if they had lost today.
Mark Price, their All-Star point guard, was weakened by a stomach virus.
Brad Daugherty, their All-Star center, was relentlessly double-teamed and held without a field goal until the fourth quarter.
But the Cavaliers didn't want excuses.
They wanted a victory over the Chicago Bulls and they found a way to get it.


RESULTS PLUS
TRACK AND FIELD  One Gold and a Very Close Silver  Thomas Thompson of St.
John the Baptist High School in West Islip, L.I., narrowly missed scoring his second double championship in three days yesterday at the 36th annual Joe Fox Eastern State interscholastic outdoor championship meet at St.
John's University.
Thompson, a junior, won the long jump at 23 feet 6 3/4 inches.
He missed his second gold medal when he lost first place on fewer misses in the high jump to Lemmon Hamilton of Rahway, N.J.
Each cleared 6-6.
On Saturday, Thompson won both events at the Catholic High Schools championships.
AUTO RACING  Argentine Wins Lime Rock Grand Prix  Juan Manuel Fangio 2d of Argentina averaged 107.78 miles an hour yesterday in winning the two-hour Lime Rock Grand Prix in Lakeville, Conn.
Fangio, driving a Toyota Eagle MKIII, won by one lap and 2.179 seconds, covering 215.6 miles.
Geoff Brabham and Chip Robinson teamed to take second place, and Pete Halsmer finished third, three laps behind Fangio. (AP) DOG SHOW  Another Best for Champion Puli  Ch.
Hunnia's Tuzes Magyarka, a 7-year-old puli bitch owned by Steve and Alice Lawrence of Somers, Conn., was judged best among an entry of 826 dogs yesterday at the 68th all-breed show of the Union County Kennel Club in the Dunn Sports Center at Elizabeth, N.J.
It was the fourth major award for the top-winning puli bitch in the history of the Hungarian breed in this country.


Consumers in the Military Require Precision Marketing
WHEN the aircraft carrier John F. Kennedy entered New York Harbor last week, waterfront bars hung up "Sailors Welcome" signs, a tribute to the spending power of the 3,500 sailors aboard.
And in another sign of the nation's military spending might, many large packaged-goods companies are also beckoning, "Hey, Sailor."


Accounts
*
Restaurant Concepts Inc., Atlanta, to Wilson, Horne, McClelland &amp; Gray Inc., Atlanta, for the Applebee's franchise account previously handled at Babbit &amp; Reiman Advertising, Atlanta.
Billings were not disclosed.


Get the Courts Back on Camera
After closing the courthouses to video cameras for a year, New York State's legislature is moving to let them back in.
The bill now gathering support in Albany isn't perfect but it would at least reopen the civil and criminal courts to the light that cameras uniquely provide.
Courts in all but half a dozen states now allow cameras -- including television cameras that record the proceedings for later use on the evening news or cable channels.
Helped by wise supervision and today's quiet cameras, courts have overcome the fear of photography born in the boisterous era of the Lindbergh kidnapping trial.


Home Sweet Home, but Where Did the Hitting Go?
They began the evening as the second most productive team in the National League, having scored six runs in each of their previous six games.
But last night, the Mets were unable to take advantage of the few modest opportunities they created in an uninspiring 3-0 loss to the Cincinnati Reds.
Could their lagging offense be traced to jet lag?


New Class of Molecules
FOR the last two years, a growing legion of fascinated chemists have been studying a new class of soccer ball-shaped molecules made mostly or entirely of carbon atoms.
In the latest development, a team of chemists at Pennsylvania State University has succeeded in interlinking such molecules in Tinker Toys fashion, by incorporating metal atoms in their structure.
Dr.
A.
Welford Castleman Jr., leader of the Pennsylvania group that recently created a ball-shaped "metallo-carbohedrene" molecule consisting of 8 titanium atoms and 12 carbon atoms, has now linked similar atoms.
The team reported May 8 in the journal Science that it had found that eight atoms of any of the metals titanium, vanadium, zirconium and hafnium can be combined with 12 carbon atoms to construct molecular balls which, in turn, can be linked as much larger molecules.


Review/Television; Fixing U.S. Economy At Home, Not Abroad
Much as I'd like to call a work as pertinent, informative and sensible as "Made in America?" enthralling television, that would constitute misleading advertising.
The four-hour documentary, presided over by Robert B. Reich, the prolific Harvard University political economist, has a lot to say about American competitiveness and lack of it.
Professor Reich says it well enough, but after a lively start, the pictures of factories and classrooms begin to resemble industrial training films.


INSIDE
The Burden of Debt
The Government is hemorrhaging red ink at a rate of $1 billion a day.
Economists now fear that the debt is undermining productivity.
Page D1.
Baker and the Europeans
The European Community is likely to respond half-heartedly to an American scolding over Yugoslavia policy.
News analysis, page A6.
Too Many Tiny Babies
Aggressive infertility treatments cause a surge in premature, multiple births.
Science Times, page C1.


A Convention in Search of a Theme
Three little words that television viewers watching the Democratic National Convention in July will not see behind Gov.
Bill Clinton when the delegates' votes have been counted and the balloons have cascaded from the rafters -- assuming, as the staff planning the convention does, that he wins the nomination -- are "we the people."
The backdrop behind the podium, perhaps the most valuable square footage inside Madison Square Garden in terms of capturing television viewers' attention, is being changed.
To what, the Democrats have not decided.


Chess
You can see what chess is coming to when you realize that the oldest player in the elite Dortmund International Tournament, which finished at the end of April, was 43 years old, the second oldest was the world champion, who was 29, and the youngest was 17.
The top players are getting younger all the time.
The titleholder, Gary Kasparov of Russia, struggled to a tie for first place with the 23-year-old Ukrainian grandmaster Vasily Ivanchuk.
He was defeated by Germany's top grandmaster, 43-year-old Robert Hubner, and by the 17-year-old United States champion, Gata Kamsky of Brooklyn.


Yale President Quitting to Lead National Private-School Venture
Hours before the Yale University president, Benno C. Schmidt Jr., ushered the Class of 1992 into the future at a spirited commencement ceremony today, he stunned Yale's trustees with the private announcement that he, too, would be leaving the beleaguered university.
Mr.
Schmidt told the Yale Corporation in an early-morning meeting that he was resigning after six years as president to head an ambitious but risky venture to create a national private school system.


For Women, Varied Reasons for Single Motherhood
Vice President Dan Quayle issued a blunt reminder last week that after 25 years of cultural warfare over the American family, single mothers were likely to remain a divisive topic because their lives illuminate unresolved differences between the races and the sexes.
In a speech on Tuesday, Mr.
Quayle argued that the riots in Los Angeles were "directly related to the breakdown of family structure, personal responsibility and social order in too many areas of our society."


SOVIETS GAVE ARMS TO PALESTINE BAND
At the peak of detente, the Soviet Communist Party issued secret instructions to supply arms to a militant Palestinian guerrilla group for use against Israelis and Americans, a Russian official said today.
The official, Sergei M. Shakhrai, a senior legal adviser to the Russian President, Boris N. Yeltsin, brandished the document as one of thousands he said the Government will present to Russia's highest court when it begins deliberations on Tuesday on the legality of banning the Communist Party.


Princeton Wins and Breaks Monopoly
The Princeton players, all 31 of them, took a victory lap around Franklin Field today laughing, chanting and cheering all the way.
They had accomplished what many regarded as an impossible task, a triumph over Syracuse for the national lacrosse championship.
The score was 10-9, with the winning goal, by midfielder Andy Moe, coming 9 seconds into the second overtime period.


Paris Is Indifferent, but Courier Doesn't Care
He got rained upon.
He got shunted off to a cozy, bordering stadium court instead of being allowed to commence the defense of his French Open title on the center court at Roland Garros.
But Jim Courier, the short-spoken pugilist with the trademark battered white baseball cap, professed to care about nothing except winning.
"There's no way to duplicate last year's tournament, but maybe I can duplicate the performance," he said.
After a sketchy beginning against the world's 216th-ranked player, he took a first step toward doing just that.


METRO DIGEST
METRO DIGEST  MIGRANT POOR LINE UP FOR WORK
Across the New York metropolitan region, urban migrant workers -- most of them immigrants, nearly all of them desperate -- line up for hours each day, waiting for trucks or vans to pick them up for unskilled and bottom-dollar employment in construction, demolition, moving, landscaping, anything.
No one is certain how many people are struggling to get by this way.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY  SPOTTING THE BULGE OF A CONCEALED WEAPON
In 18 years on the New York City police force, until his resignation in 1986, Robert T. Gallagher became renowned in police circles for an uncanny ability to spot people carrying guns on the street.
In an often harrowing record his superior officer describes as unbelievable, Mr.
Gallagher disarmed more than 1,200 gun-toting thugs.
B3.
A CONVENTION IN SEARCH OF A THEME
Three little words that television viewers watching the Democratic National Convention in July will not see behind Gov.
Bill Clinton when the delegates' votes have been counted -- assuming, as the staff planning the convention does, that he wins the nomination -- are "we the people." The backdrop behind the podium, which is perhaps the most valuable square footage inside Madison Square Garden for capturing television viewers' attention, is being changed.
To what, the Democrats have not decided.
Reporter's Notebook, B3.
A 9-YEAR-OLD GUNSHOT VICTIM DIES
A 9-year-old boy who was shot while playing video games on his bed died on Sunday evening, two days after unknown assailants fired four bullets through the door of the family's apartment in Brooklyn, the police said.
B3.
REGION  REBUILDING NEIGHBORHOODS TORN BY STRIFE
In the fresh surge of attention to the plight of inner-city businesses, Katie Selikoff may have clues to how the government can help.
It was on the blocks surrounding Mrs.
Selikoff's small furniture store that the Newark riots of 1967 and 1969 left an inner city in ruin.
Now, as a survivor of those tumultuous days, she is also a beneficiary of the Urban Enterprise Zone Program, which the state set up to help businesses prosper in the most distressed neighborhoods.
B4.
THE SOAP-BOX DERBY COMES TO TOWN
It started with the bang of a gun and a simple snap of a metal bar.
At 12:45 P.M., almost an hour behind schedule, two soap-box cars, snub-nosed and only minimally aerodynamic, started down a small wooden ramp, bumped onto the asphalt and headed down Palisade Avenue in Englewood, N.J., with their pre-teen drivers hunched beneath helmets and leaning into the wind.
B4.
A POWERFUL TAX ADVOCATE RETIRES
Even as Irving J. Stolberg prepares to return to private life at a time of intense anti-tax sentiment, the longtime income-tax advocate, one of Connecticut's most powerful politicians in the 1980's, remains an unabashed liberal and defender of public service.
B4.
Our Towns by Andrew H. Malcolm B6  Chronicle B6


ISRAELI FORCES HIT 3 BASES IN LEBANON
Israeli planes and helicopters carried out three attacks on bases of an Iranian-backed Muslim fundamentalist group in southern Lebanon today, killing four people.
Lebanese security informants said the planes hit strongholds of the Party of God, and that the victims were a leader of the group and his family.
An Israeli military statement said the strikes were aimed at what it called terrorist targets.


Heavyweight Payoff For the Middle Man
It is axiomatic in boxing that the heavyweights get the big money.
Always have.
George Foreman made $5 million against an inept Jimmy Ellis last December.
Cash-rich though the heavyweights may be -- Evander Holyfield is guaranteed $18 million and Larry Holmes $7 million for their June 19 fight -- the hour of the middle-division fighter appears near at hand.


Gunshot Kills Boy, Age 9, In Brooklyn
A 9-year-old boy who was shot while playing video games on his bed died on Sunday evening, two days after unknown assailants fired four bullets through the door of the family's apartment in Brooklyn, the police said.
The boy, Francisco Roy, of 1319 Halsey Street in Bushwick, was struck once in the head by a bullet.
He died at 6 P.M. at City Hospital Center at Elmhurst in Queens, said Sgt.
Joseph Herbert of the 83d Precinct.


Cost of High-Tech Fertility: Too Many Tiny Babies
LATE last year doctors at Saddleback Memorial Hospital in Laguna Hills, Calif., held an emergency planning session to confront a happy problem: four sets of triplets, all due in one 10-day period.
"We had to have 12 respirators, extra nurses, extra lab techs, and we still had to accommodate the other high-risk births," said Dr.
David Lagrew, the babies' obstetrician.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Political Week; In California, Primaries End With a Whimper
One more week.
After Tuesday's Presidential primaries in Arkansas and Kentucky, only seven more days will remain until the grand finale on June 2, when Alabama, California, Montana, New Jersey, New Mexico and Ohio cast their ballots to end the seemingly endless parade that began in the snows of New Hampshire.
The nominating process will come to a conclusion, but not a climax.
There has been no climax this year, rather a gradual withering of challenges to President Bush and Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas, and a grudging acceptance by a turned-off electorate that they will prevail at the conventions.


Review/Dance; Monte Carlo Offers Spoleto a Work With a Pun
Les Ballets de Monte Carlo made an even stronger impression in its second program at the Spoleto Festival U.S.A. than it did on the festival's opening night.
The works it presented on Saturday afternoon at Gaillard Municipal Auditorium suggested that with guidance the company could achieve genuine international importance.
The matinee featured the American premiere of "Jeunehome," by Uwe Scholz, a young German choreographer who is virtually unknown here.
His ballet is based on a pun.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
The Government plans to announce that foods developed through biotechnology are not inherently dangerous and, except in rare cases, should not require extraordinary testing and regulation before going on the market.
The long-awaited new policy holds that genetically engineered foods should be regulated just like ordinary ones, unless they have been endowed with ingredients that are not usual for the product.  [ Page A1. ]
A year ago, Administration and Fed officials were trumpeting the end of recession and predicting steadily improving growth through the summer.
Twelve months later, the oratory sounds remarkably the same.
Kenneth N. Gilpin: Credit Markets.  [ D1. ]


Summer and the Computin's Easy
SUMMER vacation will begin soon for millions of students.
About one in four students will go home to a personal computer, recent surveys show.
Whether the computer gets as much use as the television or the video games depends, to a significant degree, on how well the parent has prepared for the summer.
There are several strategies for allowing the student to get the most out of a personal computer this summer.
Not all of them are expensive.
Indeed, the best strategies cost nothing at all, except time.


Italy's Buffeted Leaders Pick President
Spurred by the assassination of a leading anti-Mafia crusader that further eroded Government credibility, Italy's fractious politicians closed their tattered ranks today to elect a new President and thereby hasten negotiations to form a new government.
As many Italians vented grief, rage and protest today at the seemingly invincible power of the Mafia after the slaying in Sicily of Giovanni Falcone, a parliamentary electoral college in Rome chose Oscar Luigi Scalfaro, a Christian Democrat who has been Speaker of the lower house of Parliament, as the country's President.


Ingenio Journal; Roadblock on the Shining Path: Angry Peasants
A freshly cut sapling blocked the sole entrance to this remote Andean village on a recent afternoon.
A peasant sentry wearing a Che Guevara sweater stepped forward to demand identity documents of visitors.
Despite his sweater, the guard's mission was not revolution, but counterrevolution.


The Burden of Debt -- A special report.; Why Economists Fear the Deficit
Spending more than $4 for every $3 collected, the United States Government is hemorrhaging red ink at a record pace this year -- about $1 billion a day, or $11,574 a second.
By late summer, Federal debt, the accumulation of every deficit the Government has incurred over two centuries, will surpass $4 trillion.
All the personal Federal income tax paid by people living west of the Mississippi fails to pay even the interest on this staggering sum, which has quadrupled in scarcely more than a decade.
Interest payments on the debt are 15 percent of the Federal budget, compared with only 10 percent a decade ago.
And for the first time, the Government has not even set a target for halting the debt's growth.


Large Deficits Do No Economic Damage
To the Editor:
Now that liberals and conservatives in Congress are poised to approve a constitutional amendment to require a balanced Federal budget as early as 1995 (front page, May 7), it is again time to examine the evidence.
*
The Federal Government paid off a full one-third of the national debt during the 1920's, but this sound economic policy did not lead to sustained prosperity.


Prisoner Rights Belong in Federal Courts
To the Editor:
Your editorial "Dying for Federalism" (May 20) was succinct and, unfortunately, all too accurate.
The Supreme Court is engaged in a campaign to deny state prisoners access to habeas corpus, which is the right to petition the Federal courts for relief when those prisoners allege that their constitutional rights have been violated.
The Court does so in the name of "federalism" and "deference" to state court judgments.
What kind of justice is it that prevents the Federal courts from hearing the merits of serious constitutional claims -- claims that may even prove a prisoner's innocence -- because complex state procedural rules were accidentally violated?
We turn a blind eye to the fact that life and liberty are at stake if we exalt state technical rules and close the courts off to claims of injustice and innocence.


Home Is Where the Soap Box Derby Rolls
It started with the bang of a gun and a simple snap of a metal bar.
At 12:45, almost an hour behind schedule, two soapbox cars, snub-nosed and only minimally aerodynamic, started down a small wooden ramp, bumped onto the asphalt and headed down Palisade Avenue, their pre-teen drivers hunched beneath helmets, leaning into the wind.
There was a whoop from the crowd, the crackle of a loudspeaker.
The crowd strained forward down the length of the track.
A girl in a ponytail yelled, "Go!
GO!
" to a friend. Then it was over: 900 feet in 30 seconds.


On the Trail
BROWN TAKES CAMPAIGN TO CLINTON'S TERRITORY
LITTLE ROCK, Ark., May 25 (Reuters) -- Edmund G. Brown Jr. brought his Presidential campaign to the home state of his rival for the Democratic nomination, Gov.
Bill Clinton, on Sunday night in advance of the primary election here on Tuesday.
He said that the independent candidacy of Ross Perot could cause a revolt against Mr.
Clinton, the likely nominee, at the Democratic National Convention in July.
"If Perot continues to be first in the polls and Clinton third, maybe the delegates will take a second look," Mr.
Brown said, urging listeners to support him so they could "send a clear message that they want real change." SPEECH WRITER TO FORGO BUSH RE-ELECTION EFFORT
(By The Associated Press) -- Peggy Noonan, who wrote the "thousand points of light" speech that helped propel President Bush to the White House, will not join his re-election campaign team, Newsweek magazine reports in this week's issue.
Ms.
Noonan, who also wrote speeches for President Ronald Reagan, had agreed in March to help Mr.
Bush after his current team of speech writers fell under criticism.
But she has since decided she would rather stay in New York with her child than return to Washington, Newsweek reported.
She will, however, advise the Bush campaign on strategy and policy.
SATELLITE TO CONNECT PEROT RALLIES IN 6 STATES
DALLAS, May 25 (AP) -- Ross Perot will use satellite television to connect rallies in six states in a demonstration on Friday of his "electronic town hall" concept, his office has announced.
Mr.
Perot will be be in Orlando, Fla., with the sound sent to gatherings in Columbus, Ohio; Montgomery, Ala.; Topeka, Kan.; Cheyenne, Wyo., and Boise, Idaho.
The rallies mark the completion of petition gatherings to place Mr.
Perot on the November ballots in those six states as an independent Presidential candidate.
Mr.
Perot has described satellite television hookups as a way of staging electronic town meetings to gauge public sentiment on issues.
WOMEN ARE CONTENDERS IN MONTANA GOVERNOR'S RACE
HELENA, Mont., May 25 (AP) -- Montana, which elected the nation's first Congresswoman in 1916, has female contenders in both the Democratic and Republican primaries for Governor on June 2.
State Representative Dorothy Bradley is the apparent front-runner in a six-person Democratic race, while state Auditor Andrea Bennett is the underdog for the Republican nomination.
Gov.
Stan Stephens, a first-term Republican, withdrew from the race in January because of poor health.
If either woman wins in the fall, she will become the state's first female Governor.
Montana sent Representative Jeannette Rankin to Congress in 1916.
A pacifist Republican, she voted against American involvement in both world wars.


Yank Pitching Improves But Questions Remain
The recuperation of Danny Tartabull, the blossoming of Roberto Kelly and the resuscitation of Don Mattingly give the Yankees reason to think they see positive times ahead in the division race the Toronto Blue Jays refuse to claim as their own.
More critical to the Yankees' presence in the race will be their pitching staff.
The Yankees have been trying to piece together a creditable staff for several years.
For a while, they made highly questionable decisions in signing such free agents as Andy Hawkins, Dave LaPoint, Pascual Perez and Mike Witt.
Then, about two months into last season, out of desperation, they opted for an infusion of rookie pitchers.
Wade Taylor, Jeff Johnson and Scott Kamieniecki briefly offered hope but fizzled quickly.


On 5th Day of Talks, Warmus Jury Shows Signs of Division
In its fifth day of deliberations, the jury in the Carolyn Warmus murder case sent a signal that it may be divided on basic issues.
Until this morning, notes from the jurors appeared to be following the prosecutors' version of how, they say, Ms.
Warmus, a former Westchester schoolteacher, murdered her lover's wife.


The Rev. Jude Mead; Queens Priest Was 72
The Rev.
Jude Mead, a Roman Catholic priest who was a preacher, lecturer and author, died on Saturday in his room in the Passionist Monastery in Jamaica, Queens.
He was 72 years old and lived at the monastery.
Father Mead died of an apparent heart attack, said the rector of the monastery, the Rev.
Justin Kerber.


Sports of The Times; Stockton's Ryder Cup Flashback
HE'S a touring pro again, at age 50 a Senior PGA Tour rookie in the Nynex Commemorative that starts here Friday at Sleepy Hollow.
But wherever Dave Stockton goes, it's as if he were still the Ryder Cup captain.
"At the time, I was proudest of helping 12 guys and their wives get their pride back," he was saying now, alluding to the United States golfers' 14 1/2-13 1/2 victory over Europe's best at Kiawah Island, S.C., last September.
"But now it's the number of people who come up to me and say, 'Thank you for the greatest golf event I've ever seen.' Every day six or seven people do that. Sometimes more."


Plan for High-Tech Private Schools Poses Risks and Challenges
The nationwide network of technologically advanced private schools envisioned by Whittle Communications represents a business and educational venture of monumental scope, one fraught with obstacles and certain to stimulate debate among educators and parents.
On the surface, the objectives seem almost hopelessly contradictory: to invent appreciably better schools, using dazzling technology and longer hours, but to charge no more in tuition than public schools spend on pupils -- all while making a sweet enough profit to attract big-time investors.


Checking Your Learning Style
NOT all software comes in colorful boxes puffed up in size to make the package look as if it is worth the money.
A smaller publisher may have just the program for you, if only you can find it.
Learning Styles may be such a program.
The publisher, Education Information Systems of Ridgewood, N.J., says it can help any student from the fifth grade through college, as well as adult learners, improve grades and test scores by identifying strengths and weaknesses, both the student's and the teacher's.


Time to Stash the Crying Towels
The subject of officiating was a touchy one for Portland today.
The Trail Blazers measured each question with great care, concerned perhaps that their chances of winning the Western Conference finals might rest with a higher authority: the referees.
"Don't ask me about the referees," said Terry Porter, the Blazers' guard and leading scorer against the Utah Jazz, who have tied the four-of-seven-game National Basketball Association series at two games apiece.
"I like the referees. I get along with them." Known as Chronic Complainers
But the relationship is a rocky one.
The Blazers, home again after two straight losses in Salt Lake City, realize that their reputation as occasional complainers has preceded them.
They are wary that another night of arguing could ruin them as it did on Sunday in a 121-112 loss to the Jazz.
"We have the reputation of being a team that complains on every call, and I've heard referees say that," Porter said after a team practice at the Coliseum, where Game 5 is scheduled for Tuesday night.
"I don't know how to get away from it. We just have to go out there and play ball. Each guy has to take it upon himself to remember what happened in the last game and decide that if he wants to complain, don't let it affect the referees."
Portland lost the third game of the series and protested afterward that Jazz forward Karl Malone was permitted too much freedom to bump and push under the basket.
In Game 4, Portland was called for 34 personal fouls and six technicals, including two on Clyde Drexler, who was ejected with 1 minute 30 seconds left and his team behind by 6 points.
Utah made 48 of 55 free throws, both club playoff records, and the Blazers were clearly unhappy with the direction the series had taken.
"I think we do have a bad reputation," forward Buck Williams said.
"Whether it's justified is another story. Show me a team that doesn't question calls. There isn't one in this league."
Things are likely to change Tuesday.
With a home-court advantage, the Blazers figure to regain the momentum they lost after winning the first two games by a combined 42 points.
"We know the easy part of this series is over," said Blue Edwards of the Jazz.
"The toughest part is the last three games."
Utah, virtually unbeatable at home this season (45-4), has struggled on the road.
It was 18-23 during the regular season and is 1-5 so far in the playoffs.
Portland is 40-8 at the Coliseum, including 7-0 in the post-season.
"We feel good about being home," Drexler said.
"We've had a lot of success in this building, and that's nothing to shake a stick at." Likes Running Game Best
Portland won Games 1 and 2 handily, holding Malone to 11 points on 3-of-6 shooting in the opener and keeping both games at a quick tempo, the pace it thrives on.
"We're still very confident," Porter said.
"The pressure is on them. They haven't shown that they can come close to beating us here."
And the Blazers?
They will have to prove they can regain and retain their composure.
At their best, they are legitimate contenders for an N.B.A. title.
At their worst, they are whiners who win little sympathy.


The Hope Business
From the doorway of his formal-wear shop on Fulton Street in Bedford-Stuyvesant, Mortimer Roett has seen a lot of change in 25 years.
The surrounding streets, once home to crumbling brownstones and empty lots, are lined with freshly painted doorways and small apartment buildings.
The old milk-bottling plant across the street has been turned into a six-story commercial complex with a supermarket, banks and a theater.
And though many merchants have come and gone from the bodegas and boutiques around him, Mr.
Roett and his business have prospered.


Colombian Jets Bomb Rebels; Toll Put at 60
Colombian war planes pounded guerrilla positions in the Andes foothills today, and military sources said about 60 rebels and soldiers had died in the fiercest fighting in months.
Gen.
Ramon Gil Bermudez, the acting army commander, estimated that 40 guerrillas had died in three days of fighting around Dabeiba, about 250 miles northwest of Bogota.


Big Money Just Memory For Current Jersey Derby
The race and the track that once symbolized the go-go, money-driven 1980's -- a time of big bonuses on Wall Street and in horse racing -- had an almost sedate afternoon today.
Indeed, the 48th edition of the Jersey Derby at Garden State Park might even have symbolized the end of an era.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Primaries; Presidential Races in 2 States Allow No Showing for Perot
The show of support for Ross Perot's undeclared Presidential candidacy last week in the Oregon primary cannot be duplicated Tuesday in Arkansas and Kentucky because those states do not allow write-in primary votes.
Arkansas law prohibits the counting of write-in ballots in primaries, and Kentucky has no provisions for counting write-in primary ballots.


Business and Health; Blue Cross Breaks Its Business Cycle
APPARENTLY breaking a longstanding insurance cycle of three good years followed by three bad years, the nation's 73 Blue Cross and Blue Shield associations reported a combined surplus of $357 million for the three months ended March 31.
Blue Cross executives say the good news should continue at least long enough to make 1992 the fourth year in a row with a sizable surplus.
Health insurance experts say the surprising extension of the string of surpluses may reflect smarter moves by managers and a trend toward less risk taking.
But they caution that the picture is complicated.
"Even if the first-quarter numbers were good, it is just one quarter," said Harvey Sobel, an actuary and principal in New York with the William M. Mercer consulting firm.


GENE-ALTERED FOOD HELD BY THE F.D.A. TO POSE LITTLE RISK
In a long-awaited policy statement, the Federal Government plans to announce that foods developed through biotechnology are not inherently dangerous and, except in rare cases, should not require extraordinary testing and regulation before going on the market.
Some critics of genetically engineered foods have argued that they pose new safety risks and any that contain new substances should go through the extensive testing required of new food additives.
In addition, they say, any such food sold to the public should be labeled so that consumers can identify it.


Quotation of the Day
"The Endangered Species Act is the pit bull of environmental laws -- it's short, compact and has a hell of a set of teeth. Because of its teeth, the act can force people to make the kind of tough political decisions they wouldn't normally make." -- DONALD BARRY, a vice president of the World Wildlife Fund.  [ A11:2. ]


Markets Closed
All financial and commodity markets in the United States were closed yesterday for Memorial Day.
Government offices, banks and many businesses were also closed.
An article about yesterday's trading in overseas markets appears on page D6.


President Leaves Frankfurt Gips
Jane Cavalier, 31 years old, has resigned as president of Frankfurt Gips Balkind in New York, to start a greeting-card company.
Before joining Frankfurt Gips in August, Ms.
Cavalier was president of Buckley DeCerchio Cavalier in New York.
After her colleagues Bryan Buckley and Tom DeCerchio abandoned the advertising world to become screenwriters, Ms.
Cavalier brought her agency's employees and accounts to Frankfurt Gips.


Why Don't Men Ask Directions? They Don't Feel Lost
BY running male and female college students through mazes, a respected psychologist believes he has shown that men and women, like male and female rats, use fundamentally different strategies for navigating.
Both the human and animal experiments suggest that females tend to rely on specific landmarks for moving through space, the researcher said.
In driving to grandma's house, a woman turns right at the delicatessen, left at the library, right again at the big oak tree.


Market Place; A Bright Future At Southwest Air
WHILE the airline industry was reeling from nearly $6 billion in losses in the last two years, Southwest Airlines was the only consistent money maker among the big carriers.
The expansion prospects for Southwest are now so strong that the airline's big challenge is to pick its way carefully through many potential paths.
Just as Wal-Mart Stores has come to dominate retailing with low costs and low prices, Southwest has ground down its rivals with similar tactics.
Operating costs are the lowest in the industry, and, typically, so are Southwest's fares.


Hot-Dog Makers Vie Over Picnics
Two leading frankfurter manufacturers are introducing advertising campaigns in time for picnic season.
"We answer to a higher authority" continues as the long-running theme for the Hebrew National hot-dog brand's two television commercials.
The spots, created by McCabe &amp; Company in New York, replace Uncle Sam, who touted the franks for 20 years, with a hot-dog manufacturer named Frank Weiner.
Both spots feature Mr.
Weiner on "judgment day" answering to "a higher authority" for his hot-dog brand's lesser quality standards.


By Design; Ampler Bathing Suits
In recent summers, it has taken a real search to find a bathing suit that wasn't on the scanty side.
Even maillots have been cut high on the sides.
Now the tide has turned.
To be covered up is cool.
The emphasis is on classic patterns and fabrics -- though the latter are almost always laced with stretch fibers for a good fit.
J.
Crew's demure version of a Brigitte Bardot-style gingham-check maillot is made of cotton and Lycra.
It costs $64 and can be ordered from the J. Crew catalog.


Not Just to Repair Houses, But to Rebuild Community
In the aftermath of the urban disorders of the 1960's, Franklin A. Thomas grappled with racial animosities and economic decay in Bedford-Stuyvesant.
And after watching television coverage of the recent violence in Los Angeles, Mr.
Thomas, who is now president of the Ford Foundation, recalled in an interview the tension-filled days in the Brooklyn neighborhood where he had grown up.


The Rev. Jude Mead; Queens Priest Was 72
The Rev.
Jude Mead, a Roman Catholic priest who was a preacher, lecturer and author, died on Saturday in his room in the Passionist Monastery in Jamaica, Queens.
He was 72 years old and lived at the monastery.
Father Mead died of an apparent heart attack, said the rector of the monastery, the Rev.
Justin Kerber.


At Indianapolis 500, the Photo Finish That Wasn't
At 3:49 P.M.
Sunday, the worst that could happen at the end of the Indianapolis 500 happened: the finish was missed.
Don Ohlmeyer, ABC's director, held to an angle showing Scott Goodyear seemingly ready to pass Al Unser Jr., until switching to an unmanned camera expected to show the cars crossing the finish line.
But all that viewers saw was the checkered flag and a blur in a corner of the screen.


On the Trail
BROWN TAKES CAMPAIGN TO CLINTON'S TERRITORY
LITTLE ROCK, Ark., May 25 (Reuters) -- Edmund G. Brown Jr. brought his Presidential campaign to the home state of his rival for the Democratic nomination, Gov.
Bill Clinton, on Sunday night in advance of the primary election here on Tuesday.
He said that the independent candidacy of Ross Perot could cause a revolt against Mr.
Clinton, the likely nominee, at the Democratic National Convention in July.
"If Perot continues to be first in the polls and Clinton third, maybe the delegates will take a second look," Mr.
Brown said, urging listeners to support him so they could "send a clear message that they want real change." SPEECH WRITER TO FORGO BUSH RE-ELECTION EFFORT
(By The Associated Press) -- Peggy Noonan, who wrote the "thousand points of light" speech that helped propel President Bush to the White House, will not join his re-election campaign team, Newsweek magazine reports in this week's issue.
Ms.
Noonan, who also wrote speeches for President Ronald Reagan, had agreed in March to help Mr.
Bush after his current team of speech writers fell under criticism.
But she has since decided she would rather stay in New York with her child than return to Washington, Newsweek reported.
She will, however, advise the Bush campaign on strategy and policy.
SATELLITE TO CONNECT PEROT RALLIES IN 6 STATES
DALLAS, May 25 (AP) -- Ross Perot will use satellite television to connect rallies in six states in a demonstration on Friday of his "electronic town hall" concept, his office has announced.
Mr.
Perot will be be in Orlando, Fla., with the sound sent to gatherings in Columbus, Ohio; Montgomery, Ala.; Topeka, Kan.; Cheyenne, Wyo., and Boise, Idaho.
The rallies mark the completion of petition gatherings to place Mr.
Perot on the November ballots in those six states as an independent Presidential candidate.
Mr.
Perot has described satellite television hookups as a way of staging electronic town meetings to gauge public sentiment on issues.
WOMEN ARE CONTENDERS IN MONTANA GOVERNOR'S RACE
HELENA, Mont., May 25 (AP) -- Montana, which elected the nation's first Congresswoman in 1916, has female contenders in both the Democratic and Republican primaries for Governor on June 2.
State Representative Dorothy Bradley is the apparent front-runner in a six-person Democratic race, while state Auditor Andrea Bennett is the underdog for the Republican nomination.
Gov.
Stan Stephens, a first-term Republican, withdrew from the race in January because of poor health.
If either woman wins in the fall, she will become the state's first female Governor.
Montana sent Representative Jeannette Rankin to Congress in 1916.
A pacifist Republican, she voted against American involvement in both world wars.


Dixie Brass Zooms in Metropolitan
The 100th running of the Metropolitan Mile produced a dashing new star as well as a footnote to history yesterday when Dixie Brass flashed wire to wire and outran 10 older horses in one of the best performances of the season.
The 3-year-old colt did not run in the Kentucky Derby or Preakness, and he still may be considered too much of a sprinter to run in the Belmont Stakes, which is even longer.


Looting as Violent Show of Consumerism
To the Editor:
While there has been universal condemnation of the looting that occurred in Los Angeles and elsewhere after the verdict in the Rodney King case, it brought to mind Melissa Fay Greene's award winning book, "Praying for Sheetrock." Looting in the form of illegal distribution of goods from long-distance trucks involved in accidents on U.S.
Highway 17, in McIntosh County, Ga., had been a way of life for decades.
In this rural country the white sheriff kept the allegiance of the poor and powerless black population by letting people know when a truck had been in an accident and turning a blind eye as they took the "roadspill" which included everything from sneakers to sheetrock.
This encouragement of looting was an important mechanism to co-opt black citizens in a racist community.


Just Another Day in May, A Trifle Chilly, Though
WHERE do all these old guys come from every spring?
All year this is an aerobic society consumed with consuming and worshiping wrinkle-free youth, and we're each of us still rather young, sort of -- in our own minds, anyway -- right?
And then along comes this May holiday, the one that's supposed to be May 30 but now just happens to always form a three-day weekend that officially starts summer.
In the last generation or so, this has become one joyous uninhibited civil holiday full of pleasant promise for all the sunshine, picnics, vacations, fireworks, boat rides, barbecues, games and swims that begin now.
Come July 4, summer is one-third gone.
Come Labor Day, life reeks of back-to-school sales.


A Soapbox Derby Is Held in New Jersey, and Everyone's a Winner


U.S. Haitian Policy Is Mindless and Heartless
To the Editor:
As lawyers and citizens concerned about the plight of Haitian refgugees, we were deeply disturbed by your stories of May 16, "Flight of Haitians Suddenly Resumes," and May 22, "U.S., in New Policy, Will Not Pick Up All Haiti Refugees." Although it is true that Haitians recently have been fleeing their country in larger numbers, the May 16 story reflected only the United States State Department's explanation of why Haitians are fleeing and the consequences they face if they are returned.
It is our Government's position that the fleeing Haitians are economic migrants who therefore have no right to come to the United States to seek political asylum.
This claim does not reflect the character of the exodus from Haiti and is refuted by the overwhelming evidence of deteriorating human rights conditions there.
With the rejection of the Washington agreement in April, politically active Haitians resorted to their only alternative: flight.


The U.N. Today
General Assembly Meets on assistance to drought-affected countries of southern Africa - 10:30 A.M.
Trusteeship Council  Meets at 10 A.M.
General information phone: (212) 963-1234 Tours are conducted 9 A.M.-5:45 P.M.


Most Marine Life in Persian Gulf Thrives Despite Huge Oil Slick
IN the troubled waters of the Persian Gulf, a multifarious alliance is resisting the onslaught of a monolithic enemy that invaded 16 months ago.
The invader was the oil slick discharged during the gulf war last year -- at six million barrels or more, by far the most oil ever spilled into a nearly closed body of water.
The resistance: countless marine species struggling for survival.


Departure Leaves Yale In Uncomfortable Spot
The surprising news from Benno C. Schmidt Jr. that he plans to leave the presidency of one of the oldest universities in the United States to become the president of an untested venture shocked the few people here who learned about it today.
The action left Yale in the uncomfortable position of having three of its top officers step down just as the university undergoes some of the most drastic changes in the last 40 years.
Mr.
Schmidt gave the news to the university's trustees this morning and scheduled a news conference for Tuesday to announce it publicly.


Review/Dance; New Sources Play It Safe In 4 Works
Not many risks were taken in "Cadences," an evening of new dances by new choreographers presented on Friday night at the Merce Cunningham Studio.
But it was a generally entertaining evening and given the fact that three of the four choreographers perform with Paul Taylor, an evening remarkably free of Taylorisms.
The program opened with "Chaya," choreographed by Sandra Stone to the Missa Luba, with percussion by Michael Benjamin.
A lilting dance ritual for a group of four women and four men, "Chaya" effectively used the stage's air and ground space, but it was worryingly almost too well crafted for a fledgling choreographer.


Four Dead in Queens Fire
A 58-year-old man and three children were killed when fire swept through a two-story Queens home late last night, the authorities said.
It was not immediately known what caused the one-alarm blaze, which was reported at 11:25 P.M. at 178-08 134th Ave. in Springfield Gardens, said a fire department spokesman, Firefighter Michael LaBarbera.
The fire was under control by 12:42 this morning, Mr.
LaBarbera said.
The children -- ages 8, 9 and 12 -- and the man were not immediately identified, nor was it known whether anyone else was in the wood-frame house.


Scandal Hurts Brazil Stocks
Stock prices plunged on Brazil's markets today as investors reacted to a political scandal stemming from a feud between President Fernando Collor de Mello and his brother Pedro, traders said.
In Sao Paulo, the Bovespa index of the 53 most-traded shares fell 1,890 points, to close at 23,631.
The index had been down more than 8 percent at midday.
In Rio de Janeiro, the I.B.V. index fell 537 points, or 5.8 percent, to 8,612.


Cancer and Seasons
A new study of mice has found a possible link between the development of cancer and the changing of seasons.
The study, conducted by two psychologists at Johns Hopkins University, Joan Blom and Dr.
Randy Nelson, showed some animals may be able to resist cancer by bolstering their immune system during the short days of winter.


Brown Is Told Of the Value Of Friendship
In a departure from tradition, two Brown University seniors jointly delivered a commencement speech to the 1,488 members of Brown's senior class at the First Baptist Meeting House in Providence, R.I., yesterday.
Alaraby Johnson, a history and Afro-American studies major from Bar Harbor, Me., and Andrew Greer, an English and creative writing major from Washington, gave what they called a "tag-team speech," titled "Sonata for Two Bags, Packed." It comprised a series of vignettes about life at and after Brown, with the thesis that lifelong friendships are the most valuable part of the college experience.


A Baby Bull Stands Out From the Herd
The home run was reminiscent of one of those tape-measure monsters that his father, Greg, used to hit.
Ryan Luzinski, of Holy Cross High School, stunned observers when he sent a fastball against Lenape High sailing through the goal posts in left-center field, about 400 feet from home plate.
"People who watch me bat for the first time expect to see the rebirth of him," Ryan said about his father.
"They expect to see these moon shots come frequently. But I'm not the same type of player that he was."


Ex-Macmillan Executive to Head Harcourt
The book publishing company Harcourt Brace Jovanovich Inc. yesterday named Richard T. Morgan to be its president and chief executive, handing him the posts given up last month by Peter Jovanovich when he replaced Mr.
Morgan at the Macmillan/McGraw-Hill School Publishing Company.
Mr.
Morgan, 55 years old, had been president and chief executive of Macmillan/McGraw-Hill, a joint venture of McGraw-Hill Inc. and MacMillan Inc., and had said earlier this year that he planned to take early retirement.


A Long, Long Road From Louisville
It's getting like the Indianapolis 500: to survive is to win.
The only question now is can a 3-year-old horse survive the Triple Crown series and win the Belmont Stakes one week from Saturday?
Only two horses who ran in both the Kentucky Derby and the Preakness are even likely to go to the post: Pine Bluff and Casual Lies.
The favorite, A.P.
Indy, the star of last Sunday's Peter Pan Stakes at Belmont Park, didn't run in either the Derby or the Preakness because of a bruised hoof.
The juvenile champion of last year, Arazi, ran eighth in the Derby and flew back to France to mend his mood.
Lil E. Tee, who won the Derby, is home in Arkansas biding his time.
Alydeed, a strong second in the Preakness, is home in Canada charting a different route to the stars.
And Technology is back home in Florida mending his ankles after running 10th in the Derby and sixth in the Preakness.


Dinkins Foes Cite Hispanic Issue
In the latest sign of the importance of the Hispanic vote to the mayoral election next year, the two most likely opponents of Mayor David N. Dinkins accused him yesterday of failing to provide Hispanic groups with a fair share of the city's contracts for human services.
The politicking centered on a study issued three months ago by the Association of Puerto Rican Executive Directors, a nonprofit organization.
The study found that Hispanic groups received only 4.3 percent of the city's $1.43 billion in contracts for human services in the 1990 fiscal year, and concluded that the Dinkins administration was partly to blame.
Hispanic people account for 25 percent of the city's population, and 15 percent of the registered electorate.


Auto Dealer Is Indicted For Fraud
John McNamara, the Long Island auto dealer accused of stealing more than $400 million from General Motors, was indicted yesterday on Federal racketeering and fraud charges.
From January 1985 to December 1991, the indictment said, Mr.
McNamara borrowed about $6 billion in short-term loans from the General Motors Acceptance Corporation to finance cars that never existed.
In the elaborate seven-year scheme, Mr.
McNamara repaid his old G.M.A.C. loans with new and ever-escalating loans from the company, while diverting about $422 million to his personal investments in real estate developments, gold mines, oil companies and commodities trades, the indictment said.


Sales of Domestic Vehicles Increased by 9.3% in Mid-May
Sales of North American-built vehicles rose 9.3 percent in mid-May, car makers reported yesterday.
Automotive analysts said the gain was an encouraging sign that the market might finally be perking up, but they hastened to add that a single 10-day period was not enough to conclusively call a turn in the market.
Still, the period was sweet for Detroit's Big Three, which continued to gain back a bit of the ground they had lost to Japanese competitors.


Housing Resales Rise 6%
Sales of existing homes rose a strong 6 percent in April from a year ago as buyers took advantage of low interest rates, relatively stable prices and plentiful supply, the National Association of Realtors said today.
April marked the eighth consecutive month that housing resales increased, the association said.
The number of home resales rose to 317,000 units, from 299,000 units in April 1991.


INSIDE
New York Redistricting Plan
A new proposal for redrawing New York's Congressional districts would help Hispanic candidates and hurt several incumbents.
Page B1.
School Network: Long Road
Having hired Yale's president, Christopher Whittle still faces hard questions in creating a private-school network.
News analysis, page B8.
Family Fare at Northwest
Defying the industry's new simplified fare structure, Northwest plans a leisure fare to allow an adult and a child to fly for the price of one.
Page D1.
Philip Habib, Diplomat, Dies
Philip C. Habib, a State Department troubleshooter in Vietnam, the Middle East and and the Philippines, is dead.
He was 72 years old.
Page D21.


Schmidt's Exit Creates Worry and Hope at Yale
In publicly outlining his decision to resign as president of Yale University to head a group designing a system of technologically innovative private schools, Benno C. Schmidt Jr. acknowledged today that the venture could end in failure but said that was a risk worth taking.
"If this venture I've embarked on is a failure, it will be a noble failure," Mr.
Schmidt said at a news conference in Becton Center, an engineering building on the campus.
"We will learn a lot from it that will be of use."


BRIEFS
Preferred  *
Echo Bay Mines Ltd., Edmonton, Alberta, has filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission for $100 million of convertible preferred shares through Goldman, Sachs.
Common


Weimar Journal; Amber-Tinted Rumors Whisper of Buried Booty
From the surface, nothing about Karl-Marx-Platz in this well-kept town seems remarkable.
It is a broad, rectangular plaza, flanked by two long concrete office buildings built in the Nazi period.
But a growing body of evidence now suggests that Karl-Marx-Platz, once known as Adolf-Hitler-Platz, hides one of the great remaining secrets of World War II.
Researchers believe that a spectacular trove of art stolen by the Nazis, including at least part of the legendary Amber Chamber, may be hidden in a labyrinth of underground bunkers.


Company News: Leasing Without Debt; Know How to Buy a Car? Ford Has Another Idea
Car buyers used to be easily divided into two groups: those who took out loans and those who paid cash to avoid debt.
But new leasing programs are blurring this neat division and creating a numbing array of choices.
The Ford Motor Credit Company added another wrinkle yesterday with an option that allows a customer to pay up front, in cash, all the monthly payments for a car lease.


David Rockefeller Leaving Properties Post
Rockefeller Center Properties Inc. announced yesterday that David Rockefeller would step down next month as its chairman and chief executive.
The board voted to name Claude M. Ballard Jr., a director, to succeed Mr.
Rockefeller as chairman, and Edward P. Fontaine, the current president of Rockefeller Center Properties, to assume the additional post of chief executive.


The Owl's Best Interest May Be Our Own; No Hoot for Harvesters
To the Editor:
I was pleased to see you address the endangered-species issue in your "Dialogue" feature, "Showdown on Endangered Species," on the May 11 Op-Ed page.
However, I was most disappointed by T. H. Watkins's article in that it offers a clear example of making up facts to fit a position -- a practice so deplored in the article.


Old Soldier McEnroe Fades Away in Paris
He shook his head sadly in the direction of his pile of five abandoned racquets.
He scuffed the clay along the service line as if testing for quicksand.
And then, unable to keep pace with 21-year-old Nicklas Kulti of Sweden, John McEnroe ended his clay-court singles career at the French Open's center court on a sultry afternoon.
While he declared his undying affection for Paris, he didn't bother saying goodbye to this place itself.
After all, the 33-year-old McEnroe and the Roland Garros clay have rarely been on speaking terms.
His best finish, as runner-up, came in 1984, and his overall singles record closed at 25-10 after 10 years of trying to add Paris to his list of seven Grand Slam singles titles.


For Young Black Men, the Trouble Starts Early; Draft Riots of 1863
To the Editor:
"Young Black Men" (editorial, May 7) cautions against writing off as inherently criminal young black men of the 1990's, and compares them to young immigrant men of the 1890's.
There is an 1863 example of immigrant behavior in New York City history that bears a resemblance to the 1992 Los Angeles riots and supports similar conclusions.
In July 1863, after the victory at Gettysburg, the first Federal draft was enacted.
Men between 20 and 45 were enrolled, and were to serve three years if inducted.
Those who could pay a fee of $300 (about $4,000 in 1992 dollars) or find a substitute were excused; their number included two patriotic capitalists, Andrew Carnegie and J. P. Morgan, and two Presidents-to-be, Chester A. Arthur and Grover Cleveland.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League
CLEVELAND INDIANS -- Activated Dave Otto, pitcher, from the 15-day disabled list.
Sent Rod Nichols, pitcher, outright to Colorado Springs of the Pacific Coast League.
MILWAUKEE BREWERS -- Recalled Mark Lee, pitcher, from Denver of the American Association.
TEXAS RANGERS -- Optioned Monty Fariss, infielder-outfielder, to Oklahoma City of the American Association.
National League
CHICAGO CUBS -- Placed Paul Assenmacher, pitcher, on the 15-day disabled list.
Recalled Jim Bullinger, pitcher, from Iowa of the American Association.
MONTREAL EXPOS -- Signed Felipe Alou, manager, to a contract for the remainder of the season.
Basketball  National Basketball Association
GOLDEN STATE WARRIORS -- Signed Sarunas Marciulionis, guard, to a five-year contract extension.
United States Basketball League
JACKSONVILLE HOOTERS -- Waived Wes Matthews, guard. Signed Derrall Dumas, forward.
NEW HAVEN SKYHAWKS -- Waived Sam Mack, forward.
Activated Phil Lott, guard, from the taxi squad.
NEW JERSEY JAMMERS -- Activated Marc Dowdell, center, from the taxi squad.
Placed Kevin Green, guard, on the taxi squad.
Football  National Football League
KANSAS CITY CHIEFS -- Signed Jonathan Hayes, tight end, to three one-year contracts.
MIAMI DOLPHINS -- Traded Sammie Smith, running back, to the Denver Broncos for Bobby Humphrey, running back.
MINNESOTA VIKINGS -- Agreed to terms with Roman Anderson, placekicker, on a one-year contract.
PHILADELPHIA EAGLES -- Signed Jack Bradford, linebacker.
WASHINGTON REDSKINS -- Announced the retirement of Matt Millen, linebacker.
World League
BARCELONA DRAGONS -- Signed Herb Welch, cornerback.


Moving Scribbled Mail Along
In the future envisioned by the United States Postal Service, neither gloom of night nor a citizen's crabbed scribble will stay an envelope from its appointed rounds.
A dozen companies are competing for a Postal Service contract to harness sophisticated optical-scanning technology and computer-based artificial intelligence to one of the post office's most tedious and costly tasks: deciphering handwritten addresses.


Backward Priorities on Haiti
President Bush's cruel decision to have the U.S.
Coast Guard turn back Haitian refugees on the high seas marks the low point of a failing American policy.
The American-supported trade embargo has failed to dislodge Haiti's repressive coup leaders and only harmed the Haitian poor.
And now the order to rebuff refugees at sea without a hearing trashes American commitments to humanitarian treatment of political refugees.
Mr.
Bush insists that he's acting out of concern for people who are risking their lives in makeshift boats.
Besides, he says, the Haitians are fleeing poverty, not political repression.


60-Minute Gourmet
SEA scallops are abundant and relatively inexpensive on the East Coast at this time of year, and at my house they wind up in all kinds of dishes, from salads and grilled appetizers to mousses and elegant main courses.
Over the years I have devised numerous pasta dishes using scallops.
The addition of vegetables and herbs lends color and texture.
Mild-tasting scallops are extremely versatile, which allows cooks to play with seasonal ingredients.


Connecticut Begins Campaign To Counter Anti-Business Image
Connecticut officials today unveiled a $6 million marketing campaign intended to counter an anti-business image, acknowledging that the state has not helped business in the past and promising to be "user friendly" in the future.
The humble-pie appeal will be evident in a full-page advertisement to be published on Wednesday in every Connecticut newspaper, as the campaign opens by addressing businesses already in the state.
The headline reads: "You're Worried. You're Angry. You're Frustrated. You're Right."


High Rating for Leno's First Night
The Jay Leno era on "The Tonight Show" began Monday night with an audience that NBC estimated was about half as large as the one that tuned in on Friday night to watch Johnny Carson sign off.
But the figure for Mr.
Leno -- about 25 million viewers, the NBC research department said -- still represented more than double the number of viewers that Mr.
Carson had been averaging in his final year on the air.


Panel Votes to Investigate U.N.L.V. Rift
A state legislative panel has agreed to investigate the political battle between backers of ROBERT MAXSON, the president of Nevada-Las Vegas and JERRY TARKANIAN, the former basketball coach.
The 12-member Legislative Commission heard nearly four hours of testimony yesterday before voting to conduct an independent investigation into the controversy surrounding the departure of the coach in March.


Beachfront Owners Face Possible Insurance Cuts
A small piece of legislation, an amendment to a housing bill pending in the Senate, is pitting environmentalists against property owners in a furious battle over some of the nation's most valuable real estate: the beach.
The amendment's purpose is to limit Federal flood insurance protection of coastal property at high risk from erosion.
Environmental groups say the flood insurance, unavailable or prohibitively expensive on the private market, has encouraged destructive and dangerous development of the nation's shores.
They say it must be cut back.


U.S. Says There Are No Plans To Cut Back Nuclear Testing
The Bush Administration has no immediate plans to place new limits on United States tests of nuclear weapons, the White House said today.
The comments by the White House spokesman, Marlin Fitzwater, appeared to reject possible restrictions on testing that were outlined in an "options paper" that the Administration had prepared.
But other officials said there had been no final decision.


Review/Music; Youthful Enthusiasm
Caution is futile in the rollicking finale of Brahms's Second Symphony.
After a halting start, the movement is mostly an all-out sprint.
The players can do little but rely on prior rehearsal and throw themselves headlong into the dash.
Even the best orchestras sometimes sound scrappy here, in the good cause of ebullience.
When the New York Youth Symphony reached this point at the end of its program in Carnegie Hall on Sunday afternoon, the sense of release was almost palpable.
The movement produced some of the concert's sloppiest moments, with slurred passage work and barely suggested syncopations, but the players' joyous abandon proved irresistible.


Summerall Expected to Return to CBS
PAT SUMMERALL, who was discharged last week from the Betty Ford Center for treatment of alcohol dependency, is expected to return to the air for CBS on June 27-28, at the Buick Classic, in Rye, N.Y.
Summerall's last on-air appearance was at the Masters in April.


Reflecting on the Campaign


ON THE TOWN WITH: William Kennedy; Albany as It Is, as It Wa And as It Is Being Imagined
IT is after midnight, and William Kennedy and some of his old pals have just closed the Boulevard, a dim, cavernous saloon sandwiched between the tire outlet stores on Central Avenue.
His pals drift off, pleading fatigue; Mr.
Kennedy still has a few hours to go.
All evening he has been reminiscing about his favorite topic, old Albany, home to the crooks, bums and scoundrels -- real and fictional -- who populate his novels.
Among the most colorful is Jack (Legs) Diamond, and in spite of -- or perhaps because of -- the late hour, he decides to take his vistor to see where Albany's most notorious bootlegger was murdered.
He can point to the exact spot where Legs' luck ran out: a second-floor bedroom in a yellow-brick row house.


Dominican Restaurants: A New Beat in Nueva York
TEMPTATION, not rice and beans, is the specialty of New York City's flourishing new Dominican restaurants.
At El Lina in Inwood, seductive aromas billow from the door, making the unassuming diner a cinch to find.
Step down from the No. 1 train at the 207th Street station, then drift in the direction of the cloud of garlic, coriander and green pepper.
El Lina, one block west, is the storefront with the percolating jukebox and Versailles hall of mirrors.
Inside, a Caribbean Lollobrigida sashays over with the menu in merengue rhythm, beaming a smile.
Second-time diners rate a smile and a wink.
Regulars, the lucky ones anyway, get the works: an exuberant "Hola, mi amor" and a big hug.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Republicans; Abortion Issue Rips Away Veil Of G.O.P. Unity
Abandoning their cherished public unity and sounding like the normally fractious Democrats, Republicans turned to name-calling today and challenged one another's moral values over the question of whether abortion should remain legal.
A daylong hearing of the Republican Platform Committee on social issues and "family values" turned into something of a bazaar where Republicans for and against legal abortion presented their wares.
There were rallies and pickets, handouts and news conferences.
The "Eleventh Commandment" -- that no Republican should speak ill of another in public -- was thrown to the wind.


Belgrade, Facing Curbs, Offers U.N. Role in Bosnia
In an eleventh-hour effort to head off mandatory Security Council sanctions, the leadership of the Serbian-led Yugoslav Government offered today to work with the United Nations to end the fighting in Bosnia and Herzegovina and to speed the flow of emergency relief supplies there.
It also asked the 15-nation Security Council to send a delegation to visit the region in order to assess the situation and avoid what it described as "judgments based on assumptions rather than established facts."


Sony and Philips Set Prices for Rival Recording Formats
The Sony Corporation and Philips N.V., which are rushing to introduce competing technologies to record and play music digitally, each disclosed parts of their strategies yesterday for winning one of this year's most closely watched competitions in the consumer electronics industry.
Sony said yesterday that it would sell its so-called mini-disk system for roughly $620 in Japan, starting in November.
The price for the machine, which will be available in the United States before Christmas, undercuts the price for the competing digital compact cassette machine developed by Philips and Matsushita, to be priced at about $1,050 when it goes on sale in Japan in September.


Lords of the Dome, at Least for a Night
Call it a field of screams, a haunted house or a doomed dome.
Whatever description is used for the Metrodome, the obvious point is that the Yankees had trouble winning here last season.
They lost all six games to the Twins in the land of loudness.
So when Tim Leary strolled to the mound for the first time in 10 days against the Twins, pardon Yankee fans for feeling queasy.
Minnesota had won 11 of its last 14 and five straight at home.
Leary?
He had been blitzed for 14 runs in his previous three starts and was rekindling memories of his horrible 1991 when his 6.49 earned run average was the poorest in Yankee history.


Philip C. Habib, a Leading U.S. Diplomat, Dies at 72
Philip C. Habib, a Brooklyn-born Lebanese-American who was one of the United States policymakers in the Middle East and Asia for decades, died Monday while vacationing in France.
He was 72 years old.
Mr.
Habib died of a heart attack, the United States Embassy said.
He lived in Belmont, Calif.


High Court Upholds Naming Of 22 Theaters as Landmarks
A four-year effort by Broadway's theater owners to overturn the landmark designation of 22 playhouses in mid-Manhattan ended yesterday when the United States Supreme Court refused to hear their case.
In turning back the owners' challenge without comment, the High Court effectively let stand a 1991 ruling by a New York State appeals court that upheld the designations.


COMPANY NEWS
ALLIANT COMPUTER SYSTEMS CORP., Littleton, Mass., a mini-super-computer manufacturer, filed for Federal bankruptcy protection and dismissed 165 employees, more than two-thirds of its staff.
CARMIKE CINEMAS INC., Columbus, Ga., acquired 57 theaters in Texas from Cineplex Odeon Corp., Toronto.
Terms were not disclosed.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Media; Senate Races Marked by Vivid Images
The beating of a white truck driver in the Los Angeles riots.
A black woman denouncing mob rule.
Rivers running pink with toxic chemicals.
An aborted fetus.
It takes a tough advertisement to fight its way through the television clutter here these days, so it is not surprising that aspirants in California's upcoming Senate primary have resorted to some pretty high-voltage images to promote their candidacies.
But in one of the paradoxes of the modern media campaign, the more graphic images the candidates use to distinguish themselves, experts say, the more they risk seeming routine.


Fire in Queens Kills 3 Children and Their Grandfather


CHRONICLE
Most fashion shows are presented for women who already have plenty of clothes in their closets.
The one being put on tonight at the Katie Murphy Amphitheater at the Fashion Institute of Technology is for those who do not: displaced homemakers seeking new jobs.
The Academy of Women Achievers, an organization of the YWCA of New York City, has been collecting clothing, new and used, for two years.
The outfits are for women in the Y's Re-Entry Employment Program who need business clothes for job interviews and work.


BIDDER HAS NO PLANS TO RAISE OFFER FOR BRITISH BANK
The Hongkong and Shanghai Banking Corporation has no immediate plans to raise its bid for the Midland Bank of Britain, despite strong speculation that it would respond to a challenge from the rival Lloyds Bank.
"We have no negotiations going on at the present time to change the offer," William Purves, chairman of HSBC Holdings, the parent of the Hongkong and Shanghai, said after the company's annual meeting yesterday.
Mr.
Purves implied that HSBC did not want to become involved in a long bidding war with Lloyds.


Seattle Finds Good Intentions Cannot Defeat Economics
When they talk about green cities, American environmentalists quickly turn their misty eyes in this direction.
Seattle has become "ecotopia" to many, a city where there are bicycle racks at nearly every street corner, where littering is considered worse than espionage and where recycling has reached its fullest flower.


Quotation of the Day
"I do it to get away from the mob, and that's certainly one thing that you don't have to worry about out there. Every night, we'd sit up there as the sun went down, have a couple of Manhattans and watch the hawks circle around." -- JAMES RYAN, a Milwaukee resident vacationing in a lookout tower in the West.  [ A12:6. ]


TV or Not TV
The sense that TV is becoming more real than life has grown in recent weeks.
Not long ago, I turned on Joan Rivers's talk show and found a panel of female impersonators -- all dressed up to look like Joan Rivers.
A week or two later, Ms.
Rivers celebrated Mother's Day by inviting Shirley Jones (Mrs. Partridge of the Family) and Florence Henderson (Mrs. Brady of the Bunch), both of whom seemed to have mild difficulty distinguishing between their biological and their syndicated children.
Since Brady father Robert Reed's death and H.I.V. diagnosis were still in the future, we were spared that discussion.


Books of The Times; Boys on Horseback, Loose in Mexico
All the Pretty Horses  By Cormac McCarthy  302 pages. Alfred A. Knopf. $21.
Two boys run away from the home place in Texas and light out for a new territory.
Instead of poling a raft, they ride their own horses; instead of going down the Mississippi, they cross the Rio Grande into Mexico.
Unlike the Mexicans who are treated like strangers or worse when they head north, the young Americans are treated like neighbors by the Mexicans they encounter.
The two cultures do not yet clash.
The time of which Cormac McCarthy writes in "All the Pretty Horses" is 1950.
The reader is about to be spurred by the author on an unforgettable journey: part literary, part adventure, part romance, part dream.


Court Upholds Widened Use of U.S. Extortion Law
The Supreme Court ruled today that the acceptance of a bribe by a public official can violate the Federal extortion law even if the official never demanded or extorted the payment as the word "extortion" is ordinarily understood.
The 6-to-3 decision was a victory for Federal prosecutors, resolving a longstanding dispute over whether "passive acceptance" of a bribe by a public official can violate the Federal law, the Hobbs Act.


For Young Black Men, the Trouble Starts Early; Keep Help Alive
To the Editor:
I do not think the statement in "Young Black Men" (editorial, May 7) that "the neighborhood houses and community centers that helped previous generations of restless youths . . . are gone or struggling" is accurate or supportable.
I sit on the boards of several foundations that regularly contribute substantial amounts of money to neighborhood houses and community centers in New York City.


N.H.L. Flips Coin For Draft Order
A coin flip during Thursday night's second game of the Stanley Cup final between Chicago and Pittsburgh will determine whether the Ottawa Senators or the Tampa Bay Lightning gets the first pick in the National Hockey League draft.


Cornucopia of New Foods Is Seen As Policy on Engineering Is Eased
A new Government policy for streamlining regulation of food produced through genetic engineering should result in an abundance of new, varied and more wholesome products, while revitalizing the biotechnology industry, Federal officials said today.
Industry leaders said that the first of these new foods, probably tomatoes that stay flavorful longer than normal ones, should reach consumers next year, and that dozens of other plant products would follow quickly.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.25-6.5
6.25-6.5
8.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.00
3.74
5.93
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.75
3.67
5.60
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.90
3.77
5.68
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.09
7.02
7.92
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.91
7.82
8.22
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.85
8.77
9.29
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.63
6.61
7.28
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-10  HAITIANS ARE SENT BACK
The Coast Guard began returning Haitians to Port-au-Prince under President Bush's new policy of accepting no more of the refugees at Guantanamo Bay naval base.
The decision to start sending back the Haitians was bitterly assailed by human rights groups.
A1  NEW EFFORT AGAINST IRAQ
Baghdad's economy has been hurt by tens of millions of counterfeit dinars being smuggled into the country as part of an economic destabilization campaign led by the United States, said Arab and Western officials in Jordan who keep watch on Iraqi developments.
A1  OLD THAI PARTIES FALTER
The five-party Thai coalition that has controlled the Government was near collapse, torn by recrimination over the violent crackdown last week.
Parliament members seemed to agree that opposition parties must be given a chance to govern.
A3  FILIPINO IS READY TO GOVERN
Fidel V. Ramos, a former general who served as a top commander under Ferdinand E. Marcos and then turned on him in the 1986 upheaval, has emerged as the clear though unofficial winner in the Presidential election.
Mr.
Ramos, while stopping short of declaring victory, is making preparations to take office.
A5  LITTLE REFUGE AT SPANISH REFUGE
In the swamps and woodlands of the Donana wildlife refuge in southern Spain, flamingos and eagles breed and compete for food.
But around Donana, developers want to build hotels and marinas, and farmers seek more water for irrigation.
Environmentalists fear such pressures threaten the park's survival.
A3  BELGRADE ADDRESSES DEMANDS
In an effort to head off Security Council sanctions, the Serbian-led Yugoslav Government offered to work with the United Nations to end the fighting in Bosnia and Herzegovina and to speed relief supplies.
It also asked the Council to send a delegation to the region.
A6
News analysis: Why Washington is bearing down on Belgrade.
A6  TURK SPEAKS ON CAUCUSES STRIFE
Prime Minister Demirel of Turkey, ending a Moscow visit, said his nation and Russia were pledged to a peaceful solution in the widening conflict involving Armenia and Azerbaijan.
Russia is allied with Armenia, and Turkey has strong ethnic links with Azerbaijan.
A8
Russia set the stage for a trial of the Communist Party on July 7.
A6  NUCLEAR BUSINESS AS USUAL
The White House spokesman said there were no immediate plans to place new limits on American nuclear-weapons testing.
A6  Weimar Journal: A trove of stolen art in Nazi-era bunkers?
A4  National A12-19  JUSTICES RULE ON MAIL ORDERS
The Supreme Court left to Congress the task of deciding whether states may tax sales made by national mail-order companies.
The course taken by the Justices prolongs a debate whose stakes, not only for the states but also for the direct marketing industry, amount to billions of dollars.
A1
The Justices broadened enforcement of a Federal extortion law.
A17  REPUBLICANS CLASH ON ABORTION
A daylong Republican platform hearing on social issues and "family values" turned into a bitter dispute over whether abortion should remain legal.
A1
The Bush camp chose two executives to run its ad program.  A18
On the Trail: The Bush campaign's "compliance fund" prospers.  A18
Little Rock remains the capital of the Clinton campaign.  A19
The Senate races in California have yielded powerful TV ads.  A18
In Cleveland, another promising House career is imperiled.  A19  COASTLINE BATTLEGROUND
A Senate amendment is pitting environmentalists against property owners in a furious dispute over some of the nation's most valuable real estate: the beach.
A1  RULES FOR A NEW KIND OF FOOD
The Administration announced details of a regulatory policy treating genetically engineered food in much the same way as food developed through more conventional techniques.
Industry leaders said that the first of the new foods, probably tomatoes that stay flavorful longer than others, should reach consumers next year and that dozens of other products would follow.
A16  AN ABOUT-FACE ON FETAL RESEARCH
Otis R. Bowen, the Reagan Administration official who first barred Federal financing of research involving fetal tissue, said he now believed that the ban was a mistake.
He urged the Bush Administration and Congress to end it.
A12  ROOM WITH A VIEW (A GREAT ONE)
Fire lookouts, those lonely lighthouses of the forest, are enjoying a sudden and unexpected revival as vacation getaways.
A12  TROUBLE AT THE YAHWEH TRIAL
Four days after jurors began deliberating racketeering and conspiracy charges against the black supremacist Yahweh ben Yahweh, they are at a virtual standstill.
The jurors say they are not only deadlocked but also confused about the nature of the charges.
A14  A troubled nuclear weapons reactor sprang another leak.
A12  Education Page B8  Can Chris Whittle and Benno Schmidt succeed against the odds?
Higher salaries for private school teachers spark a fundraising effort.
Campus Journal: Turmoil at The Daily Collegian, at Massachusetts.
Metropolitan Digest, B1 BUDGET SURPLUS GROWS
Mayor Dinkins said New York City would finish the current fiscal year with a surplus somewhat higher than projected last month.
While Mr.
Dinkins said the surplus had increased by $60 million from his previous estimate, City Council officials said he was underestimating it, signaling a battle to determine how big the surplus is and then how to spend it.
A1  NEW RECYCLING PLAN
Faced with a welter of new Federal and state regulations, New York City will soon embark on a recycling program that could quickly become one of the most costly and ambitious in the nation.
But after three years of the city's halting attempts to begin recycling, even the program's most committed supporters question whether it can work.
A1  Business Digest, D1  The Living Section C1-10  Dominican restaurants.
C1  Health Page C12  Arts/Entertainment C14-22  Sports B9-15  Baseball: Yanks end Metrodome hex.
B9  Obituaries D19-21  Philip Habib, U.S. diplomat.
D21  Editorials/Op-Ed A20-21  Editorials A20  Backward priorities on Haiti.
Democrats, standing small.
Don't rush to the "nine." Port Authority oversight.
Letters A20  Anna Quindlen: No closet space.
A21  Melor Sturua: Shevardnadze's rainy night in Georgia.
A21  Bill McKibben: TV or not TV.
A21  Jonathan Rauch: Our friend, Japan.
A21


The Owl's Best Interest May Be Our Own
To the Editor:
In "The Noah Principle" (Op-Ed, May 11), Charles C. Mann and Mark L. Plummer write of the Endangered Species Act: "One job, 100,000 jobs -- it doesn't matter. Any one owl still comes ahead of all human interests, and there is no effective way to balance matters."
Among those who seek to trivialize the interests that the Endangered Species Act aims to protect, it is common to characterize the act as favoring the interests of plants and animals over the interests of human beings.


Bucks Will Interview Grunfeld About General Manager's Job
Ernie Grunfeld, the Knicks' vice president of basketball operations, is expected to be interviewed by the Bucks later this week and offered the general manager position in Milwaukee, according to a source with the National Basketball Association,
Neither Grunfeld nor Dave Checketts, the Knicks' president, would comment on the situation yesterday.
But the source, who spoke on the condition that he not be identified, said Grunfeld was the first choice of Mike Dunleavy, the new coach of the team, who is a friend of Grunfeld's.
The source said he was unsure if Grunfeld would accept the Bucks' position.


New York, Amid Doubts, Broadens Recycling Plan
Faced with a welter of new Federal and state regulations, New York City will soon embark on a recycling program that could quickly become one of the most costly and ambitious in the nation.
But after three years of the city's halting, anemic attempts to begin recycling, even the new program's most committed supporters question whether New York can make it work.


Government Witness Tells Chilling Story of Murder and Life in the Mob
Giving a guided tour through his years of prison, drug deals, arson, extortion and murder, one of the highest-ranking Mafia members ever to turn Government informant described yesterday in chilling detail some of the most intimate workings of organized crime in New York.
The witness, Alfonse D'Arco, a small, balding man dressed in a banker's dark suit, told a Federal jury in Brooklyn about delivering silenced firearms to be "used to murder a couple of people." He talked easily about his days as a captain and later as an acting boss of the Lucchese crime family in which he said he regularly passed instructions that led to the murders of his associates.


Perot Gives Up Company's Top Jobs
Ross Perot, the billionaire computer executive who appears to be on the brink of a Presidential candidacy, stepped down as chairman and chief executive of the Perot Systems Corporation today, turning over the helm to Morton H. Meyerson, a longtime associate and adviser.
Although Mr.
Perot has not been working lately on the company's day-to-day operations, the resignation frees him from all executive responsibility except that of director.
Mr.
Perot, through family trusts, owns about 40 percent of the company, which he founded in 1988.


Bridge
An unusual feature of the Eastern Regional Championships at the New York Hilton over the weekend was a program of free lessons for beginners and inexperienced players.
Four expert teachers instructed 233 students who attended one or both of the lessons.
Information about similar future efforts is available by calling Amy Nellissen at (201) 818-0141.
For experienced players who want lessons, there are some courses available at country clubs with instruction by high-ranked experts.
Most of these are restricted to members, but there are exceptions.
One of them is a course of seven weekly lessons beginning June 8 at Lake Success Country Club on Long Island.
It is sponsored by B'nai B'rith, and the instructor is Marty Bergen Information is available at ((516) 845-1663.


AQUINO SUPPORTER EMERGES AS VICTOR
More than two weeks after Filipinos went to the polls in a test of this country's fledgling democracy, Fidel V. Ramos, the former general who once served as a top military commander to Ferdinand E. Marcos and then turned on him in the "People Power" revolution, has emerged as the clear winner in unofficial tallies.
Mr.
Ramos, while stopping short of declaring victory, made preparations today to take office, visiting President Corazon C. Aquino and beginning to plan his Cabinet.


Giving New Futures to Refrigerators With a Past
Greg Slade worked in construction before the recession blew his small carpentry company off the map.
Now he's into deconstruction.
Old refrigerators to be exact.
He's seen them all: Clunky white Kelvinators with interiors of pure porcelain, geriatric General Electrics with round compressors on top that look like Navy Sonar, Philcos that saw action when TV dinners were a novelty and Tang was the drink of the astronauts.
All once-gleaming symbols of the American century of affluence, they now glide by on steel rollers to be gutted for what Mr.
Slade's company can reuse.
What he cannot is shredded for scrap.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
The decision on taxing mail-order sales was handed to Congress by the Supreme Court, which thus took a course likely to prolong rather than settle this multibillion-dollar debate.
The Justices reaffirmed their longstanding bar against state taxation of mail-order sales by out-of-state catalogue companies, at the same time inviting Congress to remove the bar by legislation.  [ Page A1. ]
Sales of North American-built vehicles rose 9.3 percent in mid-May, a gain seen as an encouraging sign.  [ D5. ]


Rainout Gives Mets A Chance to Regroup
The afternoon rain, and the promise of more throughout the evening, accomplished two things for the Mets yesterday.
They finally received a day off to regroup after the West Coast trip.
More significantly, they discovered a reinforcement in their struggling bullpen.
Anthony Young, who had been scheduled to start tonight against Cincinnati, will temporarily work in the bullpen as the result of the postponement of last night's game against the Reds.
Sid Fernandez, who has earned five victories in his last seven starts, was pushed back one day because of the rain and will take Young's place as the starter tonight.


The Good, Bad and Ugly All Rolled Into One
The low point?
That is a tough one for Nelson Diebel, the goatee-wearing, earring-adorned, American record-holder in the 100-meter breast-stroke.
There was the time in 1986 when Diebel was kicked out of the Kent School in Connecticut, where he had been shipped by his parents from suburban Chicago because, he said, they could take no more of his drinking, his carousing and his chronic health problems.


Consumers More Bullish About Future
Consumers are becoming decidedly more bullish about the next six months and a bit less gloomy about the present, the Conference Board reported yesterday.
The board's index rose to 71.6 in May from 65.1 in April and has jumped from 47.3 in February.


DAIMLER'S AIRCRAFT UNIT IS BUYING 51% STAKE IN FOKKER
Deutsche Aerospace A.G., a division of Daimler-Benz A.G. of Germany, said yesterday that it hoped to complete the acquisition of 51 percent of the Dutch aircraft company Fokker N.V. by mid-June.
Karl Dersch, a member of Deutsche Aerospace's board, said he hoped the acquisition of Fokker would be wrapped up by the opening of the International Air Show in Berlin on June 15.


Treasury Securities Prices Tumble
A series of reports jolted credit market participants yesterday, and prices of Treasury securities fell sharply.
The initial catalyst for selling was an article in The Wall Street Journal reporting a change in Saudi Arabia's oil pricing policy.
As a result, the article said, oil prices could rise as much as $3 a barrel by the end of the year.
At the New York Mercantile Exchange yesterday, light sweet crude oil for delivery in July settled at $22.00 a barrel, up $1.06.


CHRONICLE
On the mend: two legendary show business figures, LANA TURNER and LIONEL HAMPTON.
Miss Turner, 72, is recuperating in her Los Angeles home from surgery to remove a small cancerous growth from her thoat.
She entered a hospital in the city under an assumed name on May 13 and was released a few days later.


The Road To Rio: Setting an Agenda for the Earth; The Wetlands Home of Many Species Is Threatened by Spain's Great Thirst
Before dusk, the visitors come hopping from the bushes, shrieking and whistling, ferreting out worms and nibbling on crabs and seeds.
It is dinner time in the wetlands of Donana, a kind of European Everglades, one of this continent's most important wildlife reserves.
Among Donana's guests are storks, flamingos and imperial eagles and the humbler teals, curlews and coots.
As they migrate from Africa to Europe, over the shortest sea crossing at Gibraltar, hundreds of thousands of birds stop at this national park in southern Spain.
In its swamps and woodlands, they nest, breed and compete for food.
But all around Donana, another kind of competition rages.


Jersey Shore: Booming but Hurt by Redistricting
Long Island has its shores, North and South, but "the Shore" is New Jersey's coastline, a 127-mile state of mind that happens to have some of the America's finest sandy beaches, wide inland bays, fecund tidal estuaries and waterfowl flyways.
The Shore now also refers to the broad communities reaching inland that have been filling up with people, houses and shopping centers -- especially in Monmouth and Ocean Counties -- at a rate faster than anywhere else in the nation's most densely populated state.


Real Estate; The Japanese Are Building In Vancouver
JAPANESE investors are carving out an area for commercial development in Vancouver on the western edge of the downtown business district.
It centers on Alberni Street, with stores and other projects that cater to wealthy Japanese visitors who fly in on tours and are whisked there by tour buses to shop.
The retailing lure has been strong enough to drive one Japanese company, Ueshima Enterprises Ltd. of Kyoto, to plan a major mixed-use building.
Two stores with 17,500 square feet are to be key components in a $20 million, 140,000-square-foot hotel for which the company plans to break ground this summer.
The hotel will have 183 rooms and 18 apartments.


Teaching Computers to Recognize Letters and Numbers
One company bidding on the Postal Service's address-recognition contract is A.T.&amp; T., which since 1988 has been applying "neural networks" to the challenge of reading handwritten envelopes.
Humans are able to read an infinite number of handwriting styles, even though handwriting is as individual as a fingerprint, because of their ability to remember and recognize the pattern of a letter or digit, even if the style of writing is unfamiliar.


Federal Witness Describes Transactions With Milken
Michael R. Milken was certain that a kickback scheme involving bond trades that Federal prosecutors accuse him of masterminding would "pass the smell test" of securities regulators, provided that each trade was made to "look legitimate," a Government witness testified yesterday.
The witness, David B. Solomon, testified in Federal court in Manhattan that Mr.
Milken had forced him to pay the kickbacks in return for participating in the junk-bond business, which Mr.
Milken largely controlled.
He said such kickbacks were applied in 1985 and 1986 to dozens of bond transactions between Mr.
Solomon's $1 billion investment company and Drexel Burnham Lambert, the Wall Street brokerage house.


'Stars in the Alley'
"Stars in the Alley," a free hourlong program of song and dance by performers from this year's Tony-nominated Broadway musicals, is to take place in Shubert Alley, west of Times Square, between 44th and 45th Streets, at noon today.
Among those scheduled to participate are Gregory Hines ("Jelly's Last Jam"), Jodi Benson and Harry Groener ("Crazy for You"), and Sophie Hayden and Spiro Malas ("The Most Happy Fella").


Stocks Lower in Tokyo
Stock prices were sharply lower in Tokyo today, trading below the 18,000 level for the first time in three weeks.
On the Tokyo Stock Exchange, the Nikkei index of 225 issues closed down 382.08 points, or 2.1 percent, to 17,822.56.
Traders said fears of renewed inflation caused by higher oil prices and futures-related selling prompted most of the decline.
On Tuesday, the index dropped 350.36 points, or 1.89 percent.


Newspaper Drivers' Union To Vote on New Contract
In another attempt to resolve the 20-day-old newspaper delivery dispute, the drivers' union is set to vote tomorrow on new contracts with The New York Times and a newspaper distributor, the union announced yesterday.
The way for the ratification vote was cleared over the weekend by an accord on the volatile issue of amnesty for drivers who the distributor said had violated company rules in blocking news delivery trucks.
The amnesty issue had unexpectedly derailed balloting that had been scheduled for last Thursday.


Book Notes
Mystery of the Letter
Ever since she arrived here in Anaheim, Calif., at the American Booksellers Association convention, people have been sidling up to Sue Grafton, the best-selling mystery writer, and whispering into her ear.
"Jury," said some, with utmost conviction.
"Jeopardy," said others, equally sure.


N.F.L. Has Never Collected Some Fines in Olson Incident
Faced with appeals and the possibility of lawsuits by the athletes themselves, the National Football League has never collected the $12,500 it fined Zeke Mowatt and the $5,000 fine levied against Robert Perryman for their alleged sexual harassment of Lisa Olson, a former Boston Herald sports reporter.
The N.F.L. commissioner, Paul Tagliabue, suggested last night that it was unlikely the fines would be paid by either Mowatt or Perryman.


Aquino Supporter Is Unofficial Victor in Philippine Vote


On the Trail
CLINTON WINS IN 2 STATES; UNCOMMITTED IS SECOND (By The Associated Press) -- Gov.
Bill Clinton won Democratic primaries in Kentucky and at home in Arkansas yesterday.
With all Kentucky precincts reporting, Mr.
Clinton had 56 percent of the vote, with 8 percent for his last party rival, former Gov.
Edmund G. Brown Jr. of California.
There was a 28 percent vote for uncommitted delegates, and much of that was seen as representing support for Ross Perot, the Texas businessman.
In Arkansas, with 94 percent of the precincts reporting, Mr.
Clinton had 68 percent, Mr.
Brown had 11 percent and uncommitted 18 percent.


Lots of Pomp, and a Little Happenstance
EVERY year in the academic season, a riddle has haunted me: Earning a degree never wins you the right to wear the fancy clothes that go with it.
Think about it.
When you stand up to seize a bachelor's diploma, you wear a gown and hat, but no hood because the right to wear it has not yet been conferred.
If you chase the sheepskin further, you get to wear the bachelor's hood from last time out, a molting sort of plumage, but not the full peacock colors you are receiving that day.
And so forth.
The only way to don your just deserts is to find a still later occasion to suit up.
The obvious later occasions are bootless, because no college invites you to strut with the degree candidates merely because you have financed a child's education.
The college to which you have dispatched many checks simply invites you to stand by in mufti and try not to dampen your child's robe in joy.


Jury Is Selected in Giants' Bias Case
A jury was selected yesterday to decide if the Giants failed to give LANCE HAMILTON, a former Penn State defensive back player, a coaching job because he is black.
A six-member panel and two alternates will hear opening arguments today before Superior Court Judge BENEDICT E. LUCCHI in Hackensack, N.J. (AP)


In Budapest, Quest For Low-Fat Food Is an Endless One
BUDAPEST LARD, paprika and sour cream. The holy trinity of Hungarian cooking.
Solve the puzzle of how to follow a low-fat diet in a country with the highest heart attack rate in the world and win a trip to the Golden Door.


Restore Fairness on TV
To the Editor:
The ultraconservative ideologues who now want to eliminate Government financing for public television in the name of "fairness" ("A Running Debate About Public TV," Critic's Notebook, May 18) are the same crowd whose deregulation rampage in the Reagan years eliminated the Federal Communications Commission's Fairness Doctrine.
I grew up in the 1950's and 60's believing that the Fairness Doctrine was one of the best things about the United States and that it was permanent.


Stock Offering in Portion of Revlon Is Planned
Ronald O. Perelman plans to sell the public a portion of Revlon Inc., whose lipsticks and powders are staples in millions of purses.
The cosmetics company issued rosy growth projections in asking the Securities and Exchange Commission yesterday for permission to sell a 17.8 percent stake in a newly formed unit called New Revlon Inc.
New Revlon will encompass all of the company's profitable divisions.


Daily News Editor Leaving for Boston
The executive editor of The Daily News announced yesterday that he was resigning to take the same job at The Boston Globe, where he worked in a variety of management posts in the newsroom until 1985.
The editor, Matthew V. Storin, said his decision to leave The News, which is in bankruptcy, "doesn't say anything about the viability of the paper." He said that he was concerned about his own future and that the job offer from Boston seemed ideal.


Congress Urged to Lift Ban On Fetal-Tissue Research
The Reagan Administration official who first banned Federal financing of research involving fetal tissue said today that he now believed that the ban was a mistake, and he urged the Bush Administration and the Congress to end it.
The former Secretary of Health and Human Services, Dr.
Otis R. Bowen, said he ordered the ban in 1988 as a temporary measure until a scientific panel could review medical and ethical information.
But he argued that it was now time to end the ban so the possibly life-saving research could go forward.


Corrections
A news analysis article on Saturday about the debate over the role of race in the preparation and conduct of jury trials misstated the population of Los Angeles County.
The county is home to about 8,863,000 people; the figure in the article, 6,526,000, was the size of the potential jury pool.


Oversight at, and of, the Port Authority
During the booming 1980's, the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey made investments that turned sour when the economy soured.
Now Gov.
Mario Cuomo of New York says he wants to make the agency more accountable.
But reining in an agency that needs independence misses the point.
The Governors of both states have enough oversight already.
Indeed, they approved the very project that has earned so much criticism.
"JFK 2000" was a $3.2 billion plan to make Kennedy Airport more competitive, with a new central terminal, new roads, automated baggage systems and a control tower.
A weak economy, combined with airline deregulation, doomed most of JFK 2000.
Unfortunately, as New York Newsday documented, the project cost the Authority about $100 million in wasted construction.


The Democrats, Standing Small
The European Community has taken what might be a historic step against protectionist farm policies.
How are House Democratic leaders responding to this dramatic opportunity for trade?
They're proposing a giant leap backward, sponsoring a bill that could victimize American workers in Japanese-owned auto factories, provoke Europe to retaliate against U.S. exports and undermine trade talks.
Dan Rostenkowski, the usually sensible chairman of the Ways and Means Committee, and Richard Gephardt, the House majority leader, as they anticipate the elections are eager to portray their party as standing tall, ready to bully trade partners into submission.
That's an ignoble purpose.
Protectionism would jack up car prices and shower Chrysler, Ford and General Motors with windfall profits.
It won't create jobs or prosperity.


Cuomo May Not Speak at the Convention
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo, whose powerful speech at the 1984 Democratic national convention transformed him almost instantly into a potential Presidential candidate, said today that he doubted he would speak at this summer's Democratic convention in New York City.
"I don't expect to speak anywhere at the convention and there's nothing surprising about that," said Mr.
Cuomo, who irked many Democrats last year with his ruminations about running for President.
He finally decided not to run, saying he wanted to stay home to take care of the state budget.


Brooklyn Officer Indicted In Unarmed Man's Death
A Brooklyn police officer has been indicted on manslaughter charges in the New Year's Eve shooting death of an unarmed man in Bushwick.
The arraignment yesterday came just days after the tensions in the gun- and drug-infested Brooklyn neighborhood erupted into a confrontation between officers and protesters who had been mourning a robbery suspect slain by police last Wednesday.
Police Officer John Tavarez, 21 years old, was charged by a grand jury with manslaughter in the second degree in an indictment unsealed yesterday, District Attorney Charles J. Hynes of Brooklyn announced.
The charge is punishable by up to 15 years in prison.


TOP RUSSIAN COURT TO RULE ON PARTY
Russia's new Constitutional Court set the stage today for a trial of the Communist Party and its seven-decade rule by merging petitions from former Communists and their opponents into one major case.
The 13-member court declared that the hearing would begin on July 7 to give both sides time to prepare.
The hearing was originally requested by a group of 36 former Communist deputies who asserted that President Boris N. Yeltsin's decrees banning the party and seizing its properties were unconstitutional.


1,341 Layoffs From Suffolk Are Proposed
Faced with a $91 million deficit, the Suffolk County Executive announced a plan today to lay off 1,341 county employees, reduce the police force by 300, and cancel a new police recruit class.
He also called for a half-cent increase in the county sales tax and a one percent sales tax on gasoline and home heating oil.
The County Executive, Robert Gaffney, also proposed closing five of eight county health clinics and the county nursing home in Yaphank, and eliminating whole departments, like the Cultural Affairs Department.


Lemieux and Jagr (Surprise!) Stun Blackhawks
If Mario Lemieux and Jaromir Jagr both remain with the Pittsburgh Penguins and withstand the test of time, they may some day be remembered as hockey's equivalent of Babe Ruth and Lou Gehrig.
Certainly, with Lemieux in his eighth season and Jagr in only his second, it is too early to equate them with the duo that made the Yankee lineup the "Murderers' Row" of baseball in the 1920's.


I.B.M. Executive Is Named President of Western Digital
The Western Digital Corporation, a maker of chips and disk drives, said yesterday that it had chosen Charles A. Haggerty, who had been with I.B.M. for 28 years, as its president and chief operating officer.
Until he resigned from I.B.M. last week, Mr.
Haggerty had served in a wide range of jobs, including plant manager for the company's Boca Raton, Fla., operation in the years it was developing the first I.B.M.
PC.
From 1983 to 1985 he was site general manager of I.B.M's Rochester, Minn., facility and he was also vice president, worldwide operations, for the AS/400, I.B.M.'s successful minicomputer family, during its development from 1987 to 1989.


Whittle's School Unit Gains Prestige and Pressure
Christopher Whittle, the maverick media entrepreneur, gained instant credibility and considerable publicity when he landed Benno C. Schmidt Jr., the president of Yale University, to lead his ambitious effort to create a national private-school system.
But the hard questions begin now.
Can they succeed when generations of equally ambitious school reformers have failed?
And will the pressure to produce profits make it harder to run radically different schools at the same or lower costs than public schools?


Review/Television; Subtle Changes in Jay Leno's 'Tonight Show'
You take an opening monologue, some kibitzing with the band, a guest or two, a singer or comic thrown in, and there you have it: NBC's "Tonight Show," created in 1954 by a wily programming genius named Sylvester (Pat) Weaver.
Today he's probably better known as the father of Sigourney.
Time moves on, friends.
Just ask Johnny Carson, and then just watch Jay Leno trying to put his own imprint on a formula written in late-night concrete.
After more than a month of media blitz counting down to Mr.
Carson's departure last Friday, Mr.
Leno took over the franchise on Monday evening at 11:35 P.M., and responded to the standard enthusiastic ovation from the studio audience with an appropriately wary crack: "Let's see how you all feel in 30 years." Looking a bit formal in dark jacket, white shirt and dressy tie, the new host was obviously on edge.
The billing was hardly reassuring.
What was known as "The Tonight Show Starring Johnny Carson" is now "The Tonight Show With Jay Leno." Message: Don't feel too comfortable.


JURORS PROCLAIM DEADLOCK IN TRIAL
Four days after jury deliberations began, the trial of a black supremacist is at a virtual standstill.
Jurors said today they were not only deadlocked but also confused about the nature of the charges they are being asked to decide.
In the latest of more than half a dozen notes sent to Judge Norman C. Roettger Jr. since they began deliberating Saturday in the racketeering case of the black supremacist, Yahweh ben Yahweh, jurors today asked the judge to give them a clearer definition of what constitutes a racketeering conspiracy.


Economic Scene; The Wage Gap: Sins of Omission
EVERYBODY agrees that incomes were less equal by the end of the 1980's than at the beginning.
There is hardly a consensus, though, on why.
The collapse of the two-parent family -- Dan Quayle's flavor of the month -- surely had something to do with harder times at the bottom end, as did Washington's squeeze on welfare and other direct assistance to the very poor.
So, too, did the big cut in the top Federal income tax brackets: while high-end earners shouldered an increasing proportion of the total tax burden in the 1980's, flattened tax rates also allowed them to keep a larger proportion of total national income.


Fox's Prime-Time Plans: All Week, Every Night
The Fox Broadcasting Company announced yesterday that it would expand to a full seven-night prime-time schedule in the fall.
Fox had been expected to add just one new night of programs in the fall, for a total of six.
But Peter Chernin, the president of the Fox Entertainment Group, said the strong quality of the shows that Fox had developed, combined with what he said were opportunities created by the prime-time schedules of the other three networks, prompted Fox to accelerate its expansion plans.


Murphy Says He Hopes to Keep Playing
DALE MURPHY ended speculation about his retirement yesterday by saying he hopes to keep playing despite a degenerative arthritic condition in his left knee.
Murphy said he anticipates returning to the Philadelphia Phillies after he recovers from last week's arthroscopic surgery.


Millen Retires to Take a Job With CBS
MATT MILLEN, a linebacker for the Washington Redskins, announced his retirement yesterday to take a CBS football analyst position.
Millen said last week he was strongly considering retiring from the Super Bowl champions.
Millen, 34 years old, said he was "happy with the role" he played last season for the Redskins as a situation player, but had to look at the long term.
"I loved Washington," he said.
The veteran linebacker began considering retirement and moving on to a television career late last season.


Review/Theater; On Blindness, Time, Art: Richard Foreman's Ideas In Unforemanish Fashion
In his new book, "Unbalancing Acts," Richard Foreman defines his creative strategy as a desire to free the mind from the straitjacket of tradition.
From this perspective, character, empathy and narrative limit impulse.
And it is through acts of impulsiveness that Mr.
Foreman puts himself and his audience in touch with primal instincts.
By serving as his own director and designer, he has added self-definition, so much so that his staging has always seemed to be inextricable from his text.
"The Richard Foreman Trilogy" proves otherwise.
In it, two of the author's associates, Paul Schiff Berman and Deborah Lewittes, demonstrate that divergent direction can be enlightening.


76ers Are Reported Ready to Hire Moe
The Philadelphia 76ers were scheduled to hold a news conference today amid speculation that Coach JIM LYNAM would be replaced by the former Denver Nugget coach DOUG MOE.
A 76er spokesman, ZACK HILL, refused last night to comment on the report, broadcast nationally during the Portland-Utah playoff game on NBC.


CHRONICLE
ANJELICA HUSTON, the Academy Award-winning actress, married ROBERT GRAHAM, a sculptor, before a crowd of celebrities on Saturday at the Bel-Air Hotel in Los Angeles, her publicity agent, Susan Geller, said.
The Associated Press reported that the wedding party included JERRY HALL, the model and wife of Mick Jagger; JOAN BUCK, a magazine editor, and JACK QUINN, a lawyer and art collector.
The guests included Mick Jagger, Lauren Bacall, Warren Beatty and Annette Bening, Meryl Streep, Arnold Schwarzenegger, Joe Pesci, Penny Marshall, Carrie Fisher, David Hockney, Lauren Hutton and Harry Dean Stanton.


For Young Black Men, the Trouble Starts Early
To the Editor:
I commend you for spotlighting the plight of young black men in urban centers across our country in "Young Black Men" (editorial, May 7).
"Cause for Alarm," a recent study commissioned by our organization and written by Walter Stafford of the Urban Research Center in New York University's Wagner School of Public Service, concludes that the economic and social problems of black and Latino men are deeply rooted in our institutions.


Metropolitan Diary
STROLLING along Fifth Avenue the other evening, a friend-about-town had just reached 56th Street when she spotted two youngsters and three adults emerging from the Doubleday bookshop across from Trump Tower.
The children, a girl and a boy, were playfully roughhousing under the watchful gaze of the grown-ups -- two bodyguard types and one familiar-looking face.
The familiar fellow was Donald Trump, and he took his children's hands.
Our friend noticed some of the Doubleday staff peering wide-eyed out the window.
As curious as she is well read, our friend popped into the bookstore where a stack of the Ivana Trump novel, "For Love Alone," was prominent.
The book has been hovering in the middle of the best-seller list.


Our Friend, Japan
In the conventional wisdom of popular economics, commerce is like warfare.
That's a core belief of economic nationalism: if they are winning, then we must be losing.
If you believe this, then you probably believe that foreigners generally, and the Japanese particularly, are attacking and laying waste to America's industrial base.
In fact, the truth is just the opposite.
Foreign competition and investment, notably Japanese competition and investment, are revitalizing the U.S. industrial base.


Wine Talk
STEEPED in tradition though they may be, Italy's wine makers have in recent years become some of the most innovative in the world.
With characteristic bravado, they have spent the last three decades or so breaking all the rules in the old wine-making books.
Consider the sanctity of local grape varieties.
In the north, red wines were made from nebbiolo and barbera; in Tuscany, from sangiovese and canaiolo, with perhaps a touch of trebbiano or malvasia, two white grapes.


HIGH COURT INVITES MOVE BY CONGRESS ON MAIL-ORDER TAX
The Supreme Court handed over to Congress today the delicate task of deciding whether states can tax sales made by national mail-order companies, thus taking a course likely to prolong rather than settle this multibillion-dollar debate.
The Justices reaffirmed their longstanding ban on state taxation of mail-order sales made by out-of-state catalogue companies, at the same time inviting Congress to remove the ban by legislation.


Executive Changes
BOSTON ENERGY ASSOCIATES, Boston, a consulting and advisory unit of Boston's J. Makowski Associates Inc., a developer of gas supply and electric power production projects, named David B. Marks president.
GENERAL MOTORS CORP., Fort Wayne, Ind., named Gerald A. Knechtel as its chief labor negotiator.


Old Lookout Towers Become the New Getaways
This town's newest motel room also has its most spectacular view, a 360-degree vista that sweeps over the mesas of Arizona, across the deserts of Utah and back around to snow-capped Colorado peaks.
But the lodging does have some drawbacks.
The bathroom, such as it is, is five stories down, the bedroom sways in the wind, and the building makes an ideal target for lightning.
Still, tourists eager for a different kind of backwoods vacation are undeterred; the room, which is atop an obsolete Forest Service fire lookout tower, is already booked for most of the summer at $30 a night.


Hands Overfull With Triplest? Experts and Groups Offer Aid
FOR most people, The Triplet Connection newsletter is like an exotic travel guide, filled with captivating tales from a strange realm you do not really want to visit.
But for Gerry and Ron Rochford of Englewood, N.J., it has been a lifeline.
"We wait for it to come in the mail," said Mrs.
Rochford, the mother of 10-month-old Abby and Brian and Patrick.
"It helped me get through weeks in bed when I was pregnant, told me how to buy a triplet stroller, and has helped me respond to their different personalities."


TURKEY AND RUSSIA ASK END TO STRIFE
Ending an official visit here, Prime Minister Suleyman Demirel of Turkey said today that Turkey and Russia were jointly pledged to a peaceful solution to the widening Armenian-Azerbaijani conflict.
But even as television showed pictures of Mr.
Demirel smiling and shaking hands with President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia, more deaths were reported in Nakhichevan, an Azerbaijani region on Armenia's southern border that has become the latest battleground for a four-year undeclared war.


Dinkins Announces Surplus Has Grown And Drops Tax Plan
Mayor David N. Dinkins said last night that the city would finish the current fiscal year with a surplus somewhat higher than it projected last month.
The larger surplus, he said, would enable him to withdraw a proposal for $115 million in new taxes that he had been seeking from an obviously reluctant State Legislature.
In a letter to Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and state legislative leaders that was released last night, the Mayor said that the city's surplus had grown to $515 million, because revenues from some business taxes were higher than estimated and because the city had spent less money than expected.


Consumer Bank Rates Are Down
Yields on bank money market accounts and certificates of deposit were down in the week ended today, The Bank Rate Monitor reported in its most recent survey.
On average, the decline was sharper for banks outside the New York market, which some analysts said might indicate lingering expectations of an easing by the Federal Reserve Board.


Congressional District Plan Unveiled
The expert appointed by a Federal court to draw new district lines for New York's Congressional delegation today presented a new scheme that would increase the number of districts with Hispanic majorities and would pose potential election problems for several incumbents, who would have to run against one another.
Taking sharp issue with a plan considered by the State Legislature, the expert, Frederick B. Lacey, placed far less emphasis on some partisan considerations that clearly would have gone into the Legislature's version.
The court turned to Mr.
Lacey, a retired Federal judge from New Jersey, after the Legislature failed to reach an accord on its own because of severe partisan disagreements and the court began hearing an amalgam of lawsuits that Hispanic and Republican groups had filed in Federal court.


Yes! No? Maybe. Jets 'Pursue' O'Brien.
The Jets appear ready to push their decision on making a qualifying offer to quarterback Ken O'Brien right up to the deadline next Monday.
The team has offered O'Brien a contract for $750,000, or about half of his 1991 salary, for the 1992 season.
But to retain the rights to their 31-year-old quarterback, the Jets must offer him 100 percent of what he earned last year ($1.4 million).
If the Jets don't make that qualifying offer to O'Brien, he will become an unrestricted free agent.


Harold Weinberger, Former Professor, 82
Harold Weinberger, a former professor of chemistry at Fairleigh Dickinson University and a president of the Teaneck, N.J., school board, died on Friday at his home in Teaneck.
He was 82 years old.
He died of natural causes, said his daughter, Deborah.


Thai Coalition Near Collapse; Hundreds More Feared Dead
The military-backed five-party coalition that controls the Government was near collapse today, torn by recriminations over last week's violent crackdown on anti-Government demonstrators.
There was some discussion that the five parties might cling to power, but lawmakers from all parties seemed to agree that the coalition's credibility among voters was nonexistent and that opposition parties would have to be given a chance to form a government.


Sports of The Times; Bonilla Finds Groove. Will Mattingly?
IT'S as much art as profession: trying to hit a moving, spinning, speeding baseball with a roundish, polished piece of ash wood.
And if Ted Williams, hailed for having done it better than anybody else, considered it "the most difficult single thing in sports," think how much more difficult it is for anybody else.
Particularly for anybody who's trying too hard to do it. As Bobby Bonilla discovered.


Oil Jumps As Saudis Shift Policy
Oil prices jumped more than a dollar a barrel today as word spread in world markets of a basic shift in Saudi oil policy favoring higher prices and static oil production.
Signaling a strong displeasure with the European Community's plan to impose a gradual tax on oil that will start with $3 a barrel this year and rise to $10 a barrel by the end of the decade, senior officials of Persian Gulf countries said in interviews today that Saudi Arabia, like other major OPEC producers, now appeared willing to let oil prices move up.


Seles, on Top of Game, Wins Raves for New Hairdo
Monica Seles slicked back her new black hair, tuned up her grunt, and got down to the not-so-grim business of defending her French Open title this morning on the Stadium Court.
For the second consecutive year, Seles's hairdo, a designer novelty in curly copper in 1991 and a new wave dose of basic black for 1992, attracted more notice than her tennis, but once again it was her brand of slash-and-crash strokes that sent her swiftly into the second round.


The Pop Life
Meditation on Death  The subject of Lou Reed's recent album, "Magic and Loss" (RCA), a meditation on death and its ramifications, seems like tough going for a concert.
Pop music, with its addiction to good news or at its most dismal, broken hearts, is meant to be a celebratory experience in concert.
But Mr.
Reed, who is performing the suite tonight at Radio City Music Hall, is onto something more complicated.
Commentators, taken aback by the subject, forgot that the suite of songs has a light feel to it; death is examined in all sorts of ways.
"Look, this piece isn't called 'Loss,' it's called 'Magic and Loss,' " Mr.
Reed said.
"I think the record is a perfect example of transforming a difficult situation into something more positive. I wasn't making a dirge. Death is one of the great themes. Within a short period, two of the most important people in my life died from cancer, so the piece is about friendship and how does it transform things."


Free Jazz at Lincoln Center
The trumpeter Wynton Marsalis is to appear with the Lincoln Center Jazz Orchestra in a free concert today at 12:30 P.M. at the Fountain Plaza of Lincoln Center.
The half-hour concert of work by Duke Ellington celebrates the first year of the Jazz at Lincoln Center series.
The orchestra includes Sir Roland Hanna, pianist; Art Baron, trombonist; Joe Temperley, saxophonist, and Milt Grayson, violinist.
David Berger conducts.
If it rains, the concert will take place in a tent in Damrosch Park.


Warriors Sign Marciulionis to 5-Year Pact
The Golden State Warriors signed SARUNAS MARCIULIONIS yesterday to a five-year contract reportedly worth $10.4 million.
Marciulionis, who would have become a restricted free agent on July 1, was the National Basketball Association's top-scoring sixth man last season, averaging 18.9 points per game.
He led all guards with a .538 shooting percentage.
Marciulionis, 27 years old, will be paid $1.5 million next season with annual raises that will escalate his salary to $2.5 million for the 1996-97 season, according to The San Francisco Examiner.


2 Ballets Created By Dancer In Corps
It is not often that a corps dancer -- and a 22-year-old corps dancer at that -- gets to have a ballet produced by a major ballet company.
But that has happened to John Selya, whose "Moondance" was commissioned by American Ballet Theater for its 1992 season.
June 15 is the New York premiere date for the ballet, which is set to the music of Louis Harden, a scruffy counterculturist known as Moondog, who walked the streets of Manhattan in the 1960's and 70's dressed as a Viking and later immigrated to Europe.
And this afternoon, audiences at the Metropolitan Opera House will have a chance to see another new piece by Mr.
Selya, "Jack and Jill," a last-minute addition to the season's repertory.
It isn't hard to pick Mr.
Selya out onstage among the corps, given his baby face and springy step.
Costumed exotically for the acting roles for which he is becoming known, Mr.
Selya sprouts a wolf's muzzle in "The Sleeping Beauty" and an Indian beggar's mane of wild hair as the head fakir in "La Bayadere." But he is just as recognizable for the vivid dramatic detail he brings to such minor but important characters.
Offstage he seems far removed from the arcane world of the classical ballet as he talks about his love for surfing, his dog, Roxanne, and the goats he'd like to have, and about touring with his girlfriend, Shawn Stevens, a Twyla Tharp dancer.
Burned Out at 16
But Mr.
Selya has clearly thought a lot about his life in ballet.
"My biography is kind of boring," he said in a recent interview backstage at the Met.
"I was born in Manhattan, grew up on the Upper West Side, went to the School of American Ballet for eight years and joined Ballet Theater in 1988." He followed his sister, Candace, now a playwright, into ballet lessons with the idea that ballet would make him a better athlete.
In addition to daily classes, he performed small children's roles in the repertory of the New York City Ballet, the school's parent company.


Whalers Hire Burke as General Manager
Experience won out over popularity as the Hartford Whalers yesterday hired BRIAN BURKE, the director of hockey operations for the Vancouver Canucks, as their general manager.
"Experience was the key," said RICHARD GORDON, the Hartford owner.
"We don't have time for practice. We've got to get going in this franchise. It's critical."


Blazers Charge Ahead, Top Jazz in Overtime
They were down to the final seconds of Game 5, but there was no John Stockton.
No John Stockton to create a play, to find an open teammate, to take an open jumper, to somehow give the Utah Jazz hope that they could win here.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Headquarters; Trying to Gain Mileage By Staying in Arkansas
While most voters probably do not know or care where a Presidential campaign makes its home, the decision is not without political consequences.
Both Jimmy Carter, whose campaign was based in Atlanta, and Michael S. Dukakis, who ran his organization from Boston, were accused of provincialism, of presiding over campaigns that were too insular and too reliant on local talent.


3 Killed in Israeli Air Attacks On Targets in South Lebanon
Israeli Air Force planes attacked targets in southern Lebanon today for the second successive day and for the third time in less than a week, killing 3 people and wounding 17, the police said.
The targets were villages in Iqlim al Toffah, a ridge between the port of Sidon and the area Israel has proclaimed as its "security zone."


Blue Jays Continue In a Homer Mode
Blue Jays 5, Brewers 4
TORONTO, May 26 (AP) -- Joe Carter hit a two-run homer and Kelly Gruber and Pat Borders hit bases-empty home runs tonight, powering the Toronto Blue Jays past the Milwaukee Brewers, 5-4.
The Blue Jays have hit 13 home runs in their last 5 games, including 2 each by Carter and Gruber.
Dave Stieb (3-4) allowed three runs on five hits in seven innings.
Tom Henke pitched the ninth, giving up Darryl Hamilton's solo home run with two outs, for his seventh save.


Salary Campaign at a Prep School
Saying it is concerned about "justice and equity" for private school teachers who have long been offered substandard wages, the Lawrenceville School here has embarked on an unusual $125 million fund-raising campaign devoted in large part to increasing faculty salaries substantially.
School officials say their five-year capital campaign is the biggest ever undertaken by a private boarding school in this country, and the most ambitious effort yet by a prep school to match public school salaries.


Why the U.S. Now Leans on Belgrade
The immediate motive for sharper United States words and actions against the authorities in Belgrade in the Yugoslav conflict is revulsion at the killing of civilians and other violence by Serbian forces in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Beyond this, Administration officials said today, is the growing perception that the war in the Balkans has become a test for the United States and its principal allies on how to deal with security threats in post-Communist Europe.


A Shake-Up For Bozell
Bozell Inc. and its parent, Bozell, Jacobs, Kenyon &amp; Eckhardt, said yesterday that it would reorganize and restructure.
Bozell's domestic and international agencies will be consolidated into one, called Bozell Worldwide.


Russian Scientists for A.T.&amp; T. and Corning
Two big American companies, A.T.&amp; T. and Corning Inc., announced separate agreements yesterday in which each hired the services of more than 100 Russian scientists in the field of fiber-optic research.
Such basic research could someday yield important and potentially lucrative advances in the use of fiber optics to convey mountains of telecommunications data with blindingly fast pulses of light.
At a time when formerly state-run organizations are collapsing, Russian scientists have been looking to foreign partners to support their efforts at some of the world's largest research institutions.
As in other such agreements signed recently, including Sun Microsystems' venture with 50 top Russian computer software and hardware designers, the Russian scientists will be paid their current wages, which amount to several hundred dollars a year, or about $40 a month.
That compares with $70,000 or more for a top American scientist specializing in fiber optics.


Too Quick on the 9-mm. Draw
Police unions are pushing Albany to require that the .38-caliber revolvers carried by New York City police be replaced with 9-millimeter semiautomatics, supposedly to even the odds with criminals.
Police Commissioner Lee Brown opposes the bill, for persuasive reasons.
The "nine" carries a clip of 12 or more bullets, compared with the six-shooter revolver.
In recent years many police forces, including New York City's Transit Police, have converted.
But in the City Police Department, the weapon remains restricted to a test program.


Campus Journal; Paper Asks a Mediator To Solve Racial Conflict
For 20 years, the student newspaper at the University of Massachusetts campus here has settled battles over race and sex by creating separate pages and staff positions for those who did not agree with its coverage.
Editors were named for black affairs, women's issues, third-world affairs, multicultural issues, Jewish affairs and lesbian, bisexual and gay issues.
Twice-monthly pages dedicated to most of these groups were published in the newspaper, The Massachusetts Daily Collegian, in what was supposed to be a temporary solution, with the long-term goal being a newspaper that covered these groups as part of the general news.
In most cases, the special pages were begun after the groups had stormed the offices of the newspaper.


D'Amato Kicks Off His Re-election Campaign


GENERAL MOTORS IN DEALERSHIP AGREEMENT IN BALTICS
The General Motors Corporation, the No. 1 American auto maker, said yesterday that it had signed a contract with a car dealership in Estonia to distribute North American-made cars and trucks in the Baltics.
Balt Motors, in Tallinn, Estonia, will initially sell Chevrolet cars and trucks beginning in midsummer and hopes to sell about 200 units in this year.
Balt also agreed to sell products from G.M.'s Opel division in Western Europe in October.


At Lourdes of Bronx, Where Cooling Hope Flows
DELIA RAMOS insists that seven glasses of Bronx water cured her sister Urbina of a stomach ailment that had defied treatment and baffled doctors for years.
As any New Yorker knows, the city's water is good, but this water is even better.
It flows over the rocks of the Lourdes of America, a religious shrine at Saint Lucy's Roman Catholic Church in Williamsbridge.
Tucked atop a stone ledge inside the half-dome sanctuary hewn of rough, gray rocks, a white statue of the Virgin Mary looms above the throngs of the faithful who come to the Bronx shrine to say a prayer or gulp down a mouthful of the water, seeking relief from maladies both physical and spiritual.


Corrections
A picture yesterday with an article about black rap artists' reactions to the Los Angeles riots was published in error.
It showed Dr.
Dre, not M. C. Ren, of the group N.W.A.


METRO DIGEST
METRO DIGEST NEW VOTE IN DRIVERS' DISPUTE
In another attempt to resolve a 20-day-old newspaper delivery dispute, the drivers' union is to vote tomorrow on new contracts with The New York Times and a newspaper distributor, the union announced.
The president of the union said last night that the union's executive board had approved the new contracts.
Union members had voted down an earlier form on May 6.
B4.
NEW YORK CITY  DINKINS ANNOUNCES A BIGGER SURPLUS
Mayor Dinkins said the city would finish the current fiscal year with a surplus somewhat higher that projected last month.
That money, he said, would enable him to withdraw a plan for $115 million in new taxes that he had been seeking from the State Legislature.
But City Council officials said he was still underestimating the surplus, signaling a battle over how big the surplus is and how to spend it.
A1.
GOALS AND DOUBTS ON RECYCLING
Faced with a welter of new Federal and state regulations, New York City is about to embark on one of the nation's most ambitious and costly recycling programs, a plan that would rapidly accelerate recycling to at least 40 percent of the city's trash by the end of the decade.
But even the most committed supporters of recycling question whether city leaders can overcome the financial, political and technical problems standing in the way of success.
A1.
OFFICER ARRAIGNED IN SHOOTING
A police officer was arraigned on manslaughter charges stemming from the New Year's Eve shooting death of an unarmed man in Bushwick, a gun- and drug-infested Brooklyn neighborhood, days after tensions erupted over the police slaying of a robbery suspect last week.
B3.
RECOUNTING A LIFE IN THE MAFIA
Giving a guided tour through his years of prison, drug deals, arson, extortion and murder, one of the highest-ranking Mafia members ever to turn informant described in chilling detail some of the most intimate workings of organized crime in New York.
B3.
THEATER LANDMARK CASE ENDS
A four-year effort by Broadway's theater owners to overturn the landmark designation of 22 playhouses in mid-Manhattan ended when the United States Supreme Court refused to hear their case.
B3.
REGION  GROWING PAINS ON JERSEY SHORE
Despite unchecked growth and issues of common concern to those who live along the ocean, the New Jersey Shore is losing the Congressional district that once united it.
Redistricting this spring carved the present Third District into pieces joined to three others.
B4.
CAR DEALER ARRAIGNED IN THEFT
John McNamara, the Long Island auto dealer accused of bilking General Motors of more than $400 million, was indicted yesterday on Federal racketeering and fraud charges.
B4.
A 'USER FRIENDLY' STATE
Connecticut officials unveiled a $6 million marketing campaign intended to counter an anti-business image, acknowledging that the state has not helped business in the past and promising to be "user friendly" in the future.
The headline from one advertisement reads: "You're Worried. You're Angry. You're Frustrated. You're Right." B4.
About New York by David Gonzalez B3  Chronicle B7


Will Prime-Time Pippen Please Stand Up?
The pressure of defending their championship has weighed heavily on the Chicago Bulls during the playoffs.
And no one has felt the burden more than Scottie Pippen.
Pippen had a scoreless second half in Monday's 99-85 victory by the Cleveland Cavaliers, who evened the four-of-seven-game Eastern Conference championship series at two games to two.
And throughout the playoffs, Pippen's game has fluctuated like a high-risk stock.


Danny Biasone, Ex-Team Owner And N.B.A. Innovator, Dies at 83
Danny Biasone, the former team owner who rescued professional basketball from an impending demise by inventing the 24-second shot clock, died on Monday at University Hospital in Syracuse.
He was 83 years old and died of a blood infection, his family said.
If there was ever a "Why-didn't-I-think-of-that?" idea, it had to be Mr.
Biasone's brainstorm that required pro basketball teams to take a shot within a fixed time after getting possession of the ball.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about Ross Perot appeared in some editions without his response to an accusation that he once tried to intimidate the publisher of The Fort Worth Star-Telegram by threatening to expose an intimate relationship between an employee of the newspaper and a city official.
Mr.
Perot acknowledged having spoken to the publisher, Richard L. Connor, about the paper's coverage of a business deal involving Mr.
Perot's son, but said he had not made the threat cited by Mr.
Connor.
"I have people in my office who will be prepared to do whatever they need to do, swear under oath or whatever, that this didn't happen," Mr.
Perot said.


Sidney Marland Jr., 77, Former U.S. School Chief
Sidney P. Marland Jr., United States Commissioner of Education in the early 1970's, died on Monday at his home in Hampton, Conn.
He was 77 years old.
He died of cancer, said his wife, Virginia.
Dr.
Marland's career in education spanned five decades.
He was a high school English teacher in West Hartford, Conn., in the late 1930's, and in the 50's and 60's, and superintendent of schools in Darien, Conn., Winnetka, Ill., and Pittsburgh.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: White House; BUSH'S CAMPAIGN TRIES MADISON AVE.
Reviving a strategy that helped catapult Ronald Reagan to re-election in 1984, President Bush's re-election campaign is handing control of its $40 million-plus advertising program to two Madison Avenue executives with scant political experience.
The Bush organization has selected Martin Puris, president of Ammirati &amp; Puris Inc., and Clayton Wilhite, president of D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles North America, to head a private corporation that will hold an exclusive contract for all Bush advertising in the general election.


U.S. Sees Shortcomings In Europe's Farm Plan
With the European Community's top trade official due here Wednesday for negotiations, American officials say the community's new plan for cutting farm subsidies could help unblock world trade talks even though they say the new plan still has shortcomings.
The 108-nation talks have stalled principally because the Europeans have refused to agree to deep cuts in protections for farmers around the world demanded by the United States and other agricultural exporters.
Community officials said they first had to agree on how to reduce the costs of their own $63 billion-a-year farm subsidy program.
They agreed on subsidy cuts last week.


Northwest Sets 2-for-1 Fare, Breaking New Airline Rates
Northwest Airlines, in the first big break with the simplified fare structure adopted by leading United States carriers last month, introduced a two-for-one leisure fare last night on all domestic flights except those to Hawaii and Alaska.
Intended principally to stimulate family summer travel, the new fare, which allows an adult and a child to fly for the price of one ticket, also shortens the advance-purchase requirement for family travel to a minimum of 7 days from 14.


Personal Health
GIVEN a choice, many parents would probably prefer to vacation without their children.
Whether they are toddlers or teen-agers, children on trips often mean no rest or peace and quiet for the weary parent.
Youngsters' hunger, boredom, fatigue, sibling squabbles, finicky appetites and uncommon illnesses can drain the energy and patience of the most devoted and tireless parents.
Yet, as many parents have discovered, taking the children along can also mean incomparable joys watching them having fun, making discoveries and adapting to new circumstances.
And for the children, travel can be an invaluable learning and growth experience, leaving them and their parents with wonderful shared memories.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: House Race; Congresswoman Is Facing Difficult Challenge in Ohio
When an eight-term incumbent sues the local newspaper, lends her own campaign $25,000 and broadcasts the first negative television advertisement of the race, another once-promising House career is clearly in danger.
And indeed for Representative Mary Rose Oakar, hard pressed in the June 2 Democratic primary, the threat is not really Tim Hagan, the County Commissioner whom her commercial burlesques as tolerant of welfare fraud, or the five other lesser-known candidates in the race to represent Ohio's newly drawn 10th Congressional District.


HAITIANS RETURNED UNDER NEW POLICY
The Coast Guard returned the first boatload of Haitians to Port-au-Prince today under President Bush's new policy of accepting no more refugees at the United States naval base at Guantanamo, Cuba, the White House announced.
The decision to return Haitians without giving them immigration hearings at Guantanamo has been bitterly denounced by human rights organizations.


Fake-Money Flood Is Aimed At Crippling Iraq's Economy
Iraq's economy is the target of an American-led destabilization campaign to pour vast amounts of counterfeit currency into the country, Arab and Western officials here say.
The fake dinar notes are being smuggled across the Jordanian, Saudi, Turkish and Iranian borders in an effort to undermine the Iraqi economy, said the officials here who closely monitor the situation inside Iraq.
Those officials said counterfeit dollars are being smuggled into Iraq in smaller quantities to further confound the banking system.
The officials, who insisted on not being identified, said the countries behind the separate counterfeiting operations included Western nations, Saudi Arabia, Iran and Israel.


Market Place; Rising Consumer Confidence: Signal for Stocks?
Consumer confidence is rising, and while it may not be going up fast enough to assure President Bush's re-election, it nonetheless is providing a comforting indication for stock buyers.
In the more than two decades that the Conference Board, a business research group in New York, has been reporting on consumer confidence, the figure that has proved to be the most indicative of stock market behavior is the relative levels of consumer confidence: whether the 5,000 people interviewed think the future is likely to be better than they believe the present to be.
Right now, the future looks much better than the present.


Sprint Faces an $80 Million Question, Thanks to Quayle
THE brouhaha over Vice President Dan Quayle's efforts to turn a television sitcom into a morality play has created a dilemma for J. Walter Thompson San Francisco and the Sprint Corporation.
Sprint is the sole advertiser now using Candice Bergen, the actress who portrays Murphy Brown in the eponymous series that Mr.
Quayle attacked in a now-famous speech on May 19.
Since 1990, Ms.
Bergen has been the exclusive spokeswoman for Sprint in a series of irreverent television commercials, the centerpiece of Sprint's spirited battle to lure long-distance telephone customers from its two larger rivals, A.T.&amp; T. and MCI.


Public &amp; Private; No Closet Space
It was 20 years ago next month that an elementary-school teacher named Jeanne Manford made history.
She walked down a street in New York City carrying the sort of poster paper her students sometimes used for projects, except that printed on it were these words:
PARENTS of Gays UNITE in SUPPORT for our CHILDREN


Food Notes
Brooklyn Food Festival
The vast, vaulted space under the Brooklyn side of the Brooklyn Bridge will become a giant food market on Sunday, 11 A.M. to 7 P.M.
Restaurants will dish up food, wineries will pour their best, and food producers will sell their wares.
Admission is free.
The entrance is at Fulton and Front streets, Brooklyn.
Save on Cheeses
Cheese will be on sale beginning Monday at Ideal Cheese, 1205 Second Avenue (63d Street), and running through June 13.
Nine cheeses will be featured, including imported Italian Parmesan, $8.98 a pound, instead of $12.98; Canadian extra-sharp white Cheddar, $3.98 instead of $6.98; farmhouse-aged Dutch Gouda, down to $4.98 a pound, from $7.98.
Sauces, Carolina-Style
The scenario is familiar.
An amateur cook dissatisfied with what's on the market sets out to create something better.
After months of messy kitchens a formula emerges.
Friends love it.
Local shops and restaurants love it.
And a business is born.


Fall Network Schedules Offer Plenty of Choices (At Least for the Young)
With CBS predicting outright dominance, NBC looking for rebirth, ABC concentrating on profits and Fox looking to come of age as a seven-night network, the fall prime-time television schedule is now in place.
For viewers, it will mean a choice among an unusually high total of 35 new series, 20 of which are comedies.
Some favorite series have been moved around to try to bring viewers along to other nights.
Most of the last season's most highly regarded new shows, including NBC's "I'll Fly Away," CBS's "Brooklyn Bridge" and ABC's "Civil Wars," have been given one more chance to establish themselves as favorites.


Flights of Fancy Doom Post Office Conversion for Rail Travel
To the Editor:
In "The Glory That Was Rail" (Topics of The Times, May 14), you say that "America lost a monument of irreplaceable grandeur when the Pennsylvania Railroad demolished New York City's Pennsylvania Station," and you are absolutely right.
I question, however, whether the General Post Office across Eighth Avenue is Amtrak's "brilliant redemption," as you describe it.
The photo of the facade of the Post Office that accompanies your May 13 news article on "Amtrak's envious look" at the Post Office telegraphs my point.
Although the Post Office architects, McKim, Mead &amp; White, might have taken liberties with Latin when they translated "Neither snow nor rain nor gloom of night," incised in the Post Office entablature, they nevertheless proved that they knew their Latin in a more literal sense when they designed Pennsylvania Station.


An Eden With Delectable, if Sometimes Forbidding, Fruit
THIEVES at the Dade County Fruit and Spice Park here headed straight for the jakfruit.
They cut it from the tree, threw it over the fence and went to get their car.
But park employees noticed the fruit on the ground outside and foiled the theft.
Stealing jakfruit is no small bananas.
A single mature jakfruit weighs 30 to 80 pounds.
And at around $3 a pound retail, it's strictly for the delicacy department.


ENERGY BILL GIVEN APPROVAL IN HOUSE
The House today overwhelmingly passed the most ambitious energy legislation in more than a decade, prohibiting new offshore drilling, toughening building codes to encourage conservation and granting incentives to stimulate solar power or other alternatives for homes and cars.
Stitched together by conservation-minded liberals and by conservatives who hoped to reinvigorate the nuclear energy industry, the bill is a patchwork that few lawmakers were entirely happy with.
But it is similar in most essential provisions to a Senate measure passed in February, and the end product is likely to touch the lives of virtually all Americans.


CHRONICLE
There's nothing like a good cause to bring together partygoers who are archrivals in the marketplace.
Take, for example, the dinner-dance being given tonight by the National Minority Supplier Development Council at the New York Hilton Hotel.
ROBERT C. STEMPEL, chairman and chief executive officer of General Motors, is honorary chairman of the event, and the 700 guests will include HIROYUKI YOSHINO, president of Honda North America, and HARUO OHNO, president of Nissan North America.
Coke and Pepsi?
Their executives will be there too.
So will the executives of Pfizer and DuPont, Kmart and J. C. Penney.


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
May 22
May 15
May 24
1992
1992
1991
Gasoline production, daily
7.0
7.1
7.1
Distillate production, daily
2.9
2.9
2.9
Gasoline stocks
216.5
215.9
209.8
Distillate stocks
90.7
90.5
103.0
Crude imports, daily
6.7
5.8
6.3
Product imports, daily
1.4
2.1
1.8
Crude stocks
349.1
353.7
347.2
Crude production, daily
7.2
7.2
7.3
Refinery utilization (%)
88.7
89.3
87.0
Source: American Petroleum Institute


Get Behind Child Health Summit
To the Editor:
The promises, presages and imprudences of the political candidates are well presented by the media.
In comparison, relatively little is available on the candidates' willingness to support the health of our children in the United States and worldwide.
All support the health of children; one cannot do otherwise emotionally or politically.
But what constitutes "support"?
The World Summit for Children resulted last year in the promises of President Bush and 70 other world leaders to enact programs to reduce disease and malnutrition among children worldwide.
Congress responded by approving an increase in funds for child survival and immunization programs as contained in the World Summit for Children Implementations Act.
The act received the support of more than 165 representatives and 36 senators, including the majority of our New York Congressional delegation.
But the final form was severely crippled, with $101 million in aid amputated.


Money Market Fund Yields Down in the Latest Week
Yields offered by money market funds monitored by IBC/Donoghue's Money Fund Report were down in the latest week.
In the period ended Monday, yields on tax-exempt money funds were down for the third time in a month.
Analysts at Donoghue's said the reasons for the decline were still tied to supply.
As the yield spread between taxable and tax-exempt funds continues to narrow, the tax-free funds become relatively more attractive and demand increases, driving prices higher and yields lower.


What Makes Malawi the African Albania
To the Editor:
In "Mobs Challenge Malawi President" (news article, May 10), you neglected to mention two of the most prominent and longest detained political prisoners in Malawi -- a country some human rights groups now call the Albania of Africa.
These two political prisoners are Orton and Vera Chirwa.
They were abducted on Christmas Eve 1981 from neighboring Zambia by Malawian security forces.
They were tried for treason by a traditional Malawi tribal court, without independent judges and without the rights to counsel or to present evidence on behalf of the accused.


Review/Television; Eyewitnesses to The Riots
Ted Koppel comes through tonight with a riveting minute-by-minute report on the Los Angeles riots.
To the pictures of the lootings, beatings and fires, which have lost none of their power despite all the days of repetition, the hourlong "Nightline" special adds we-were-there accounts of police officers, journalists and victims of the hours of uncontrolled violence that followed acquittals in the Rodney G. King trial four weeks ago.
The program, at 10 P.M. on ABC, is an all-out indictment of the city's leaders, specifically Police Chief Daryl F. Gates and Mayor Tom Bradley, for failing to plan for a likely outburst or to act once it started.
"They hate each other," says Linda Breakstone, an ABC reporter, and the implication is that their mutual distaste prevented cooperation even in so drastic an emergency.


Pro Bono
*
The Advertising Council, New York, is introducing a print campaign for itself, in hopes of encouraging the media to donate more advertising time and space to the council's pro bono campaigns.
The advertisements, created by Ogilvy &amp; Mather New York, will run initially in Inside Media magazine.
They carry the theme "We've supplied the ads. The media made them famous. See the Ad Council work."


Paying for a Chance at Life
Robert Orth of Santa Monica, Calif., has Parkinson's disease.
Last August he underwent surgery -- an infusion of fetal cells into his brain -- that he hopes will confer the normalcy he so desperately desires.
Because the procedure is experimental any benefits that accrue to him will, through knowledge gained, accrue to all sufferers from this tragic disease.
But the $30,000 tab is his alone, as Gina Kolata of The Times recently reported.


Sotheby's Tries to Leave oman-Silver Dispute
Sotheby's in New York filed a motion yesterday in State Supreme Court in Manhattan requesting that it be dismissed from a two-year-old suit over 14 pieces of ancient Roman silver called the Sevso treasure.
After Sotheby's announced it would sell the treasure for its British owner, Lord Northampton, in February 1990, the Governments of Lebanon and Yugoslavia claimed title to the silver and obtained a preliminary injunction barring its removal from the United States for sale in Switzerland.
Since then, the Government of Hungary has also filed a title claim for the silver, which is being held by Sotheby's pending settlement of the case.


Quotation of the Day
"It was originally budgeted at $8.7 billion. Now it's budgeted at $14.7 billion, and we still don't know what the final cost will be. We don't know when the tunnel will open, whether the conflict with contractors will be resolved or what revenue to expect. It's all very vague." MARK McVICAR, a financial analyst, referring to the English Channel tunnel.  [ D14:4. ]


Shell Loses An Appeal
The Delaware Supreme Court has upheld a lower court decision giving $120 million to some 1,000 former holders of about one million shares of Shell Oil Company stock.
The court on Tuesday affirmed an award made in December 1990 by Vice Chancellor Maurice Hartnett 3d of $71.20 a share to the stockholders, who had asked for an appraisal of the stock's value.


Miscellany
*
Fairwinds Coffee and Hamilton Projects Inc., the licensing representative for New York State's tourism campaign, are introducing coffee brewed especially for New Yorkers.
A portion of the proceeds from the sale of the product, called I
New York Coffee, will be donated to the state's Return a Gift to Wildlife Fund.


Garden Q. &amp; A.
Lady's Mantle
Q.
I recently purchased an unusual chartreuse-flowered perennial called lady's mantle.
Can you tell me something about it and does it need special care? -- Josephine C. Clark, Kingston, N.Y.
A.
The graceful lady's mantle (Alchemilla mollis) has scallop-edged leaves thought in the 16th century to resemble the Virgin Mary's cloak or mantle, which belief very likely gave rise to its name.
Its botanical name is from the Arabic word for alchemy and may allude to the magical-appearing drops of rain or dew that are caught on its leaves.
The drops were considered essential for mystic potions.
Both leaves and roots have medicinal uses, primarily as astringents.


Olympia Files Bankruptcy Plan For Huge London Office Project
Olympia &amp; York Developments Ltd., in a sign that its desperate efforts to keep its global real estate empire intact are falling apart, tonight sought British court protection from creditors for Canary Wharf, its crown jewel and the largest office-development project in Europe.
The decision by the Canadian company to ask a British court to appoint an administrator to take control of the project in East London came after 11 banks with about $:550 million ($990 million) in construction loans to the project could not agree among themselves on a plan to provide additional funds, bankers and company officials said.


A Record for Short Sales Outstanding on Nasdaq
Between mid-April and mid-May, for the second straight month, the number of shares sold short and not yet covered in over-the-counter trading hit a record, the National Association of Securities Dealers reported yesterday.
The figure, which represents trading that took place by May 8 and was settled by May 15, was 388.2 million shares.
That is 3.7 percent higher than the 374.3 million shares reported last month, and 9.4 percent more than the 354.8 million mid-March figure, still the fifth highest.


Bishop Loughlin Wins Girls' Title
The 15th annual Catholic High Schools Athletic Association girls' track and field championships, interrupted by rain Tuesday, were completed yesterday at Randalls Island.
Bishop Loughlin successfully defended the team title with 68 points, followed by Sacred Heart of Hempstead, L.I., with 31 and Cardinal Spellman of the Bronx at 29.


Police Fatally Shoot Brooklyn Man in His Home
A 42-year-old man who had been undergoing psychiatric treatment was fatally shot by two police officers yesterday at his parents' apartment in Brooklyn after the man stabbed a doctor, then lunged at the officers with a knife, the police said.
Family members disputed the police account, saying that Earl Black, who lived with his parents at 4200 Avenue K in Flatlands, was unarmed and was not threatening them.


Lincoln Center's Menu Of Jazz Is Quadrupled
Lincoln Center yesterday announced the second season of its jazz program, a dramatically expanded schedule that includes its jazz orchestra's first national tour and collaborations with the New York City Ballet and the center's other constituents.
"Lincoln Center is well on the way to becoming the national center for the furtherance of jazz music," said Nathan Leventhal, the president of the center, at a news conference under a huge tent in Damrosch Park.


Control Data to Separate Into Two Companies
The Control Data Corporation, which has not turned a profit since 1988, said today that it would split into two independent companies and take charges of some $400 million in the second quarter as a result of the split and other restructuring costs.
After the split, Control Data's computer business will be called Control Data Systems Inc., while the company's various information service businesses will be known as the Ceridian Corporation.
The information services include the Arbitron Company audience-measurement business, payroll management services, computer network services and computer systems management for government clients worldwide.


Let's Take the Club Out of Police Hands
To the Editor:
It is still common practice, as was clearly shown in the case of the beating of the Los Angeles motorist Rodney King by four police officers, to use sheer brutality to subdue a recalcitrant human.
In all United States cities, as far as I know, police officers carry guns and batons, the latter known also as billies, clubs and night sticks.
These are the instruments that police officers are given to do their job.
No wonder that some of them, those officers who have no respect for human dignity, abuse the power that society gives them.


Congressmen Criticize Judge's Redistricting
United States Representatives from New York sharply attacked a redistricting plan today that was offered to a Federal court on Tuesday, and increased pressure on legislative leaders to do what they have been unable to to for months: draw up their own plan.
The proposal by a court-appointed referee amounts to a political depth charge that could upend New York's political structure by redrawing district lines and forcing several incumbent members of Congress to run against one another this fall.


Review/Ballet; Tudor Work Back in Step With the Times
"Undertow," a once-shocking ballet created in 1945 by Antony Tudor and now splendidly revived by Sallie Wilson for American Ballet Theater, is one of those works whose time has come again.
Murder and sex, the ballet's themes, were common currency in the psychological dance-drama of the 1940's, and Tudor was king of the genre.
Yet in "Undertow," he seemed almost literal about tracing the case history of a killer; by 1979, when Ballet Theater last presented "Undertow," the ballet seemed out of step with a new era.
Although seen from the anti-hero's point of view, the work's message, with no mitigating factors, seem to be that both women and sex are dirty.


Tougher CUNY Standards Touch Entire Public School System
To the Editor:
"Tougher Standards at CUNY" (editorial, May 5) approves the vote by City University of New York trustees for the College Preparatory Initiative, a policy to strengthen academic preparation of high school graduates entering CUNY.
The trustees seek to end the entrance of high school graduates with the thinnest scholarly readiness for college work, who then flounder or fail in their first two years in a CUNY school.
It remains to be proved whether or not the tougher standards will remedy the high dropout and failure rates in the freshman and sophomore classes.
CUNY must give attention to two cautions before it undertakes a task that will have immense effects on New York City's public high school students:


Orders for Durable Goods Rise 1.4%
New orders for long-lasting factory goods rose 1.4 percent in April, the fourth straight monthly advance, the Commerce Department reported today.
The continued climb helped allay lingering fears that the sluggish economic recovery will abort.
But analysts found little to encourage a belief that the pace of the recovery will be picking up substantially.
Indeed, the backlog of unfilled orders for durable goods -- a component of the department's forecasting index -- declined for the eighth straight month.


U.S. Is Hopeful On Trade Talks
The United States trade representative, Carla A. Hills, said today that American officials had a good meeting with the European Community's top trade official to try to narrow their long-running dispute over reducing subsidies to farmers.
In a telephone interview after the meeting, Mrs.
Hills said American officials had suggested to Frans Andriessen, the European Community's Commissioner of External Affairs, how it might be possible to expand upon the limited farm-subsidy cuts to which the community agreed last week.


Bridge
For nearly 30 years The Official Encyclopedia of Bridge, prepared by the American Contract Bridge League, has been the standard authority on every aspect of the game.
The fifth edition is now in preparation under the supervision of Henry Francis, and anyone with suggestions for amendments or additions should write to him care of the A.C.B.L., 2990 Airways Boulevard, Memphis, Tenn., 38116.
In a recent duplicate game Francis held the North cards on the diagramed deal and faced a rebidding problem to which his Encyclopedia would not provide an answer.
After a one-spade response to one diamond some would rebid three diamonds, an underbid, or four diamonds, with the agreement that this rare bid shows long, strong diamonds with three-card spade support.
The actual choice was three clubs, which excited the South player, Dorthy Francis.
She used the modern variety of Blackwood, and her partner later made a majestic leap to seven spades.


A Wealth of Education for 'Kids in Business'
SALES of fragrant potpourri and handmade greeting cards were brisk this spring, so pupils at the 15th Avenue School will have money to give to the homeless in the neighborhood -- $1,833, to be exact, for the Food Pantry at Apostles' House.
There will also be $1,433 to be added to a scholarship fund for a teen-age girl at St.
John's Girls' Residence and $1,833 for the Newark Literacy Fund.
Which still leaves more than enough to pay back a $100 loan taken in March from the Howard Savings Bank.


A Move to Restrict Exports Of Strategic Technologies
American officials said today that Western countries would ask the nations of Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union to cooperate in restricting exports of strategic technology to hostile third-world nations.
In interviews today, these officials said that when the Coordinating Committee on Multilateral Export Controls, a 17-nation group that seeks to limit exports of sensitive technology, holds a high-level meeting next Monday in Paris, it would also discuss giving Russia access to high-performance fiber-optic technology.


Chicago Counting Upon a Lone Star
For a young athlete who is suddenly thrust upon the center stage of his profession, the spotlight can illuminate the talent, also heighten any flaws.
Consider how it might flatter, or expose, Jeremy Roenick, a 22-year-old star for the Chicago Blackhawks.


School Board Bars Material About AIDS
In a major rebuff to Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez and his AIDS-education program, the New York Board of Education yesterday barred a video and a pamphlet from being used in the classroom and ordered Mr.
Fernandez to insure that abstinence is stressed in all other materials used to teach students about AIDS.
The immediate effect of the board's action, which came in a 4-to-3 vote, was to recall a much-shown video featuring Rae Dawn Chong and a pamphlet issued by the New York City Department of Health.
The board majority contended that neither sufficiently emphasized abstinence as the only foolproof way to prevent H.I.V. infection.


Sports of The Times; Where Have New York's Fans Gone?
FOUND my longies and went to the ball park the other day.
No traffic backing onto the highway.
No lines at the parking lot.
The attendants all asked, "How are you today, sir?" They seemed lonely.
Inside Shea Stadium, a cold, damp wind reminded me of how Richard Todd's passes often fluttered on dank December afternoons.
The Jet fans, such as they were, huddled together for warmth.
It is all well and good to lay blame for the bad weather on Saddam Hussein for setting the oil wells on fire in Kuwait, on the Brazilians for burning their forests, on modern technology for producing acid rain.
But is weather the main culprit for the Mets' attendance being down from last year by an average of 8,921 and the Yankees' attendance being down by 1,142?


Dark Days for the Channel Tunnel
Plagued by conflict and delays, the $14.7 billion English Channel tunnel project has degenerated from a grand symbol of European business integration to a financial morass, with one of the leading contractors suggesting this week that the project could face bankruptcy.
The "chunnel," as the 24-mile-long underwater link between Britain and France is sometimes called, was once scheduled to open on June 15 next year.
That has been postponed to the last quarter of 1993 at the earliest and may well be put off until 1994 because of financial disagreements and construction delays.


Clinton Near Prize After Two Victories
Gov.
Bill Clinton moved closer to clinching the Democratic Presidential nomination after decisive victories on Tuesday in the primary in his home state of Arkansas and another in Kentucky, giving him 62 more delegates.
He now has 86 percent of the 2,145 delegates needed to secure the nomination.
In the Republican primaries, President Bush, who has already clinched the nomination, overwhelmed Patrick J. Buchanan, the conservative commentator, with 75 percent of the vote in both states.


U.N. Official Rebukes U.S. on Haitians
The United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees in Geneva sharply criticized the Bush Administration today for returning Haitian refugees to Haiti without giving them the chance to appeal for protection and asylum.
United Nations officials said they believe that the United States is in violation of international agreements prohibiting the forced return of refugees rescued on the high seas.


Saberhagen Isn't Ready to Return
The experiment lasted but one serious throw.
The pain was the same, and so the schedule for Bret Saberhagen's return has changed: he will definitely not return from the disabled list to pitch Sunday.
"Sunday's out," Saberhagen said yesterday after his brief, unsuccessful trial at Shea Stadium.


Peter Jenkins, 58, Who Wrote On British Politics for 30 Years
Peter Jenkins, an author and chief political columnist of The Independent, a new British daily, died in University College Hospital here today of respiratory failure caused by a lung disease.
He was 58 years old.
For more than 30 years, the politics of Britain was Mr.
Jenkins's bread and butter, as he observed and wrote about Prime Ministers from Harold Macmillan and Harold Wilson to Margaret Thatcher and John Major.
He lived politics, talked about it, gossiped about it, broadcast it and wrote two books about it as he watched Britain's world role change over the decades.





Arab Kills Rabbi in Gaza Town; Israelis Retaliate
A Palestinian stabbed and killed the rabbi of an Israeli settlement in the occupied Gaza Strip today, adding to a torrent of rage that has engulfed Israel since an Arab killed a 15-year-old girl near Tel Aviv on Sunday.
Settlers in Gaza retaliated for the killing of the rabbi, Shimon Biran, by beating Palestinians, overturning cars and setting fire to Arab-owned greenhouses and fields.


Home Court Looks Good To Jazz
John Stockton of the Utah Jazz will probably play Thursday night, his vision improved after he was accidentally poked in the left eye Tuesday by Clyde Drexler of the Portland Trail Blazers.
But the Jazz is still one game from elimination by the Blazers in the four-of-seven-game Western Conference finals.


The Anguish of Asking A Court for an Abortion
Laura Stewart sits in the lobby of the Middlesex County Courthouse waiting to meet her client, a pregnant 16-year-old seeking court approval to get an abortion without her parents' consent.
The teen-ager, who lives in a foster home with her 1-year-old son, is easy to spot coming up the courthouse steps in blue jeans and a denim jacket, a nervous outsider amid a stream of well-dressed adults.


Parents and AIDS: Rage and Tears
IT began with a simple question.
"How's your son?" one woman asked another.
The woman shook her head slowly.
She did not have a simple answer.
Her eyes filled with tears.
"He's back in the hospital," she said in a whisper.


Ali Visits Injured Fighter in London
MUHAMMAD ALI visited MICHAEL WATSON at a London hospital yesterday, getting a smile from the British boxer, who suffered severe brain damage in a bout last September.
Watson has been unable to speak and has regained only partial communication skills since he was injured in a World Boxing Organization supermiddleweight title fight against CHRIS EUBANK .


Mortar Attack on Civilians Leaves 16 Dead in Bosnia
In the worst single attack on civilians since fighting began in Sarajevo two months ago, at least 16 people waiting in line to buy bread were killed and more than 100 were wounded today when mortar shells struck a crowded market in the capital of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Hours later, Muslim Slav forces seeking to avenge the mortar attack launched strikes against Yugoslav Army troops, most of whom are Serbs and who have been trapped for weeks in four barracks in the capital.
The attacks camee as Western powers were preparing to impose economic sanctions on Serbia for its role in the Bosnian killing and destruction.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League
DETROIT TIGERS -- Placed Eric King, pitcher, on the 15-day disabled list.
Purchased the contract of Phil Clark, outfielder, from Toledo of the International League.
Designated Rudy Pemberton, outfielder, for reassignment.
OAKLAND ATHLETICS -- Optioned Scott Brosius, infielder, to Tacoma of the Pacific Coast League.
Recalled Dann Howitt, first baseman-outfielder, from Tacoma.
National League
MONTREAL EXPOS -- Placed Ivan Calderon, outfielder, on the 15-day disabled list, retroactive to May 24.
Recalled Matt Stairs, outfielder, from Indianapolis of the American Association.
Basketball  National Basketball Association
NBA -- Fined Danny Ferry of the Cleveland Cavaliers $5,000, for throwing two punches at Michael Jordan of the Chicago Bulls during Game 4 of the Eastern Conference finals.
MILWAUKEE BUCKS -- Named Frank Hamblen assistant coach.
PHILADELPHIA 76ERS -- Moved Jim Lynam, coach, to general manager, and Gene Shue, general manager, to director of player personnel.
Named Doug Moe coach.
Continental Basketball Association
SIOUX FALLS SKYFORCE -- Promoted David Brody, business manager, to director of operations and John Etrheim, intern, to office manager.
United States Basketball League
JACKSONVILLE HOOTERS -- Re-signed Wes Matthews, guard.
Placed Norris Coleman, forward, on the taxi squad.
Football  National Football League
CELVELAND BROWNS -- Named Ellis Rainsberger scout.
HOUSTON OILERS -- Signed Mike Elkins, quarterback; Kasey Dunn and Reggie Brown, wide receivers; and John Diggs, defensive back.
World League
BARCELONA DRAGONS -- Activated Terry O'Shea, tight end, from injured reserve.
BIRMINGHAM FIRE -- Activated Eugene Rowell, wide receiver, from injured reserve.
Canadian Football League
OTTAWA ROUGH RIDERS -- Signed Rob Bodine, defensive lineman; John Galvin, linebacker; and Nick Edmondson, wide receiver.
Arena Football League
CINCINNATI ROCKERS -- Signed Ralph Williams, wide receiver-defensive back.
Hockey  National Hockey League
ST.
LOUIS BLUES -- Named Rick Meagher coach and Mark Reeds assistant coach of the Peoria Rivermen of the International Hockey League.
Soccer  National Professional Soccer League
HARRISBURG HEAT -- Signed Jim Pollihan, coach, for the 1992-93 season. College
LA SALLE -- Signed John Miller, women's basketball coach, to a two-year contract extension through 1994.
LEHMAN -- Named Kevin McGinniss men's basketball coach.
MANHATTAN -- Named Anthony Solomon men's assistant basketball coach.
OTTERBEIN -- Named Dick Reynolds men's athletic director.


In Hudson, 2 Democrats In Spotlight
In an area where winning the Democratic primary has been tantamount to winning the general election, next week's primary in the 13th Congressional District has attracted one candidate bidding to become New Jersey's first Hispanic Representative and another bent on dismantling a Hudson County political machine that once had national prominence.
The Democratic incumbent, 67-year-old Frank J. Guarini, is retiring after 14 years in office, and his would-be Democratic successors are Robert Menendez, a lawyer, state Senator and the Mayor of Union City, and Robert Haney of Jersey City, a 35-year-old corporate lawyer with a Manhattan law firm.


District in Florida Changed, Senior Lawmaker to Retire
Representative Dante B. Fascell, the Florida Democrat who as chairman of the House Foreign Affairs Committee has helped oversee American policy on issues like arms control and the war on drugs, announced today that he would not seek re-election to a 20th term in Congress.
"I've been in politics for 42 years and have served in the House for 38 of those years," Mr.
Fascell said today at a news conference in Washington.
"This seems like a good time for a change in my life." Mr.
Fascell is 75 years old.


Japanese Art Made Simple
FOR thousands of years, Japanese artisans and craftsmen made simple, functional objects for everyday use: quilt covers, tea kettles, lanterns.
But it was not until the 1920's that Yanagi Soetsu, a Japanese philosopher, named these objects mingei, or folk art.
"Japanese Folk Art: A Triumph of Simplicity," an exhibit of 88 mingei, is on display through July 2 at the Japan Society Gallery at 333 East 47th Street.


Bucks Expected to Offer Job to Grunfeld
ERNIE GRUNFELD traveled to Milwaukee yesterday, where he was expected to be offered the Bucks' general manager position.
Grunfeld, the Knicks' vice president of basketball operations, has two years remaining on his contract and may decide to remain in New York.
Grunfeld said last week that he was happy with the Knicks, and DAVE CHECKETTS , the Knicks' president, has said he wants Grunfeld to stay.


Rhode Island Plans Payout In Deposit Insurance Crisis
It has been a long time in coming, but with yesterday's sale of $306 million of bonds by Rhode Island, nearly 40,000 victims of the state's banking debacle should soon recover most, but not all, of their deposits.
The deposits were frozen on New Year's Day 1991 after the collapse of the private insurance company covering deposits at 45 credit unions and bank-like loan companies in the state.


Essay; Perot's Plea of 'Hardship'
Ross Perot, who presents himself as a patriot and defender of servicemen missing in action, turns out to be a man who used his father's political influence to try to get out of fulfilling his commitment to the U.S.
Navy.
Mr.
Perot has changed his story twice about his reason for seeking a "hardship" discharge in 1955.
That straining to reshape his past makes his use of political pull to get out of his service obligation into a character issue today.


Executive Changes
BLOUNT INC., Montgomery, Ala., an international manufacturing and construction company, named Michael N. Luciano president and chief operating officer of its construction unit.
CHASE MANHATTAN BANK N.A., New York, a unit of the Chase Manhattan Corp., promoted Peter R. Schleif, financial management executive for consumer financial services, to senior vice president. &lt;TXT IMATRON INC., San Francisco, , which designs, manufactures and markets scanners for medical diagnostic imaging, appointed Steve Van Dick vice president of finance and chief financial officer.
JANCO CORP., Burbank, Calif., a manufacturer of rotary switches and switching systems for environmentally demanding applications, appointed Richard L. Thompson executive vice president.
LIPOSOME TECHNOLOGY INC., Menlo Park, Calif., a pharmaceutical company, appointed Michael W. Ramsay associate director of manufacturing.


Tougher CUNY Standards Touch Entire Public School System; Like the Old Days?
To the Editor:
I read "Tougher Standards at CUNY" (editorial, May 5) and was about to laugh, but was overcome by a feeling of sadness instead.


METRO DIGEST
LOOKING FOR TOMORROW'S BETTORS
The generation of bettors who regularly visit tracks is aging, and track operators say too few young horse players are showing up to take their places along the rail.
B6.
NEW YORK CITY  MANAGEMENT BY MURDER


Review/Ballet; Ease and Directness Amid Bustle and Fuss
Simplicity triumphed on Monday night at the Metropolitan Opera House when Susan Jaffe and Fernando Bujones portrayed the leading roles in American Ballet Theater's production of "Coppelia."
Enrique Martinez's version of this 19th-century choreographic comedy is crammed with fussy stage business.
Therefore, to attract attention, some dancers might be tempted to exaggerate the steps and belabor the jokes.
But Ms.
Jaffe and Mr.
Bujones stood out amid the bustle because of the ease and directness of their dancing and miming.


Union Drivers Urged to Adopt Pacts With Times and Dealer
On the eve of a vote on disputed new labor contracts, newspaper delivery drivers were urged last night to approve a proposed settlement with The New York Times and a newspaper distributor.
"This is in fact the last, best opportunity to protect this industry," Barry Feinstein, president of Joint Council 16 of the International Brotherhood of Teamsters, told a tumultuous meeting of 700 of the union's 2,900 members.
Mr.
Feinstein was one of a panel of intermediaries who helped bring the parties together.


Corrections
An article on Tuesday about the Bedford Stuyvesant Restoration Corporation misidentified its president.
He is Roderick Mitchell.


New Fraud Law's First Case
Applying a tough new financial criminal law for the first time, a Federal grand jury in Manhattan charged Roy William Harris, the former head of two affiliated oil refining and trading companies, yesterday of defrauding five international banks led by Chase Manhattan of more than $150 million.
Federal prosecutors said the fraud by the Arochem Corporation and Arochem International was one of the largest ever involving banks operating in New York City.
They said Chase alone was defrauded of more than $80 million, which was reflected in its 1991 earnings report.


The Talk of Hollywood; A Hollywood Incident Full of Sound and Furor
Just a few weeks ago Jay Sures was another brash 25-year-old Hollywood agent with fast patter, trendy wardrobe, hefty expense account and, of course, portable phones.
Mr.
Sures was not a powerhouse Hollywood player like Michael Ovitz, the chairman of Creative Artists' Agency, or Jeff Berg, chairman of International Creative Management.
But his feistiness and energy as a television agent made him an up-and-coming player at the United Talent Agency, which represents a number of prominent actors and writers.
Suddenly Mr.
Sures has replaced Dan Quayle as the subject of lunchtime dishing.
And his unexpected notoriety says something about Hollywood power plays, name dropping and ambition.
Even such a prominent figure as Peter Guber, chairman of the board of Sony Pictures Entertainment, is involved in the brouhaha.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Advisers; Even as Perot Denounces Political Professionals, He Woos Them From Major Parties
Ross Perot, the likely Presidential candidate, has been assiduously wooing leading political operatives in Washington and seeking advice from various advocacy groups while at the same time railing in public against political consultants, image makers and special interest groups based in the nation's capital.
Political consultants from both major parties say that in the past month they have been approached by representatives of the Texas billionaire to help run his campaign.
In his search for political professionals, Mr.
Perot is plowing the ground on both sides of the political fence, at times approaching Republicans and Democrats who have squared off against each other in past Presidential campaigns.


TANDY AND CASIO TO DESIGN HAND-HELD COMPUTERS
The Tandy Corporation said yesterday that it would collaborate with the Casio Computer Company of Tokyo to design, develop and market a new line of small, hand-held computers called personal information processors.
The announcement comes two days before Apple Computer Inc. plans to introduce a similar concept developed with the Sharp Corporation, also of Japan.
In both cases, the first products are not expected until next year.


2 From Europe in Belmont
Arazi won't make it from France, and Alydeed will stay home in Canada.
But the Belmont Stakes one week from Saturday, the third jewel in the Triple Crown, won back its international tone yesterday with the addition of horses from France, England and New York.
Bruce Lombardi, racing secretary for the New York Racing Association, reported that Cristofori would be shipped to the Belmont from France by his owner, Sheik Mohammed bin Rashid al-Maktoum, and that Jacksonport would be entered by his owner, Murray Garren of New York.
He also confirmed that the English-bred colt My Memoirs would fly the Atlantic for the race, bringing the likely field to 10.
And, since My Memoirs was not nominated for the Belmont Stakes originally, it will cost his owners, Jeff Siegel and Barry Irwin, a late fee of $50,000 to enter the horse.


Jagr Will Keep Head Up Against Physical Hawks
His spectacular stickhandling effort to score the tying goal in Game 1 left everyone talking about Pittsburgh's Jaromir Jagr today as the Penguins prepared to be hosts to the Chicago Blackhawks in Game 2 of the Stanley Cup finals at the Civic Arena on Thursday.
Jagr scored by weaving through several Chicago players before beating Ed Belfour with a backhand shot with 4 minutes 55 seconds left Tuesday night.
The Penguins won, 5-4, when Mario Lemieux scored on the power play with 13 seconds left.
The victory extended Pittsburgh's winning streak in the playoffs to eight game.
Chicago had won 11 games games in a row.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-14 EMBARGO, WITH MORE THREATENED
European Community governments imposed a partial trade embargo on Serbia and Montenegro and called on the United Nations Security Council to ban oil sales in the hope of forcing an end to Serbian intervention in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
A1  MORTAR WAR IN A MARKETPLACE
In the worst attack on civilians since fighting began in Sarajevo two months ago, at least 16 shoppers were killed and dozens were wounded when mortar shells struck a crowded market, not far from where the assassination in 1914 of Archduke Franz Ferdinand of Austria-Hungary ignited World War I.  A8  O &amp; Y SEEKS BRITISH PROTECTION
Olympia &amp; York, in a sign that its desperate efforts are fading to keep a global real estate empire intact, has decided to seek British court protection from creditors for Canary Wharf in London, the largest office-development project in Europe.
A1  PALESTINIAN KILLS RABBI IN GAZA
A Palestinian stabbed to death the rabbi of a settlement in the occupied Gaza Strip, adding to rage that has engulfed Israel since an Arab killed a 15-year-old girl Sunday.
Jewish settlers retaliated, beating Palestinians, overturning cars and and burning greenhouses and fields.
A10  U.N.
REFUGEE CHIEF ASSAILS U.S.
The U.N.
High Commissioner for Refugees assailed the Bush Administration for returning Haitian refugees without giving them the chance to appeal for protection.
U.N. officials expressed belief that the U.S. is violating international accords.
A3  HAITIAN CAPITAL'S WORST WEEK
The week has been the most violent in Port-au-Prince since the civilian Government of Haiti was overthrown.
Nighttime shootings involving soldiers and groups of marauders have become commonplace -- from the neighborhoods of the poor to rich areas on the hillsides.
A3  RUSSIA'S NEW JOBLESS
Unemployment, the most dreaded of capitalism's consequences, is the shoe that has yet to drop in Russia.
Although joblessness is still negligible, this is little consolation for the casualties of the free market -- those who now make a lonely search for work in a land where unemployment offices are ill prepared and head-hunters unknown.
A10
Yeltsin stumps Siberia, and says he won't run in 1996.  A8
Finland struggles to overcome post-Soviet economic disorder.
A11  A SOLDIER'S LOYALTY IS REWARDED
In November 1986, Gen.
Fidel V. Ramos had to decide whether to side with old comrades in the Philippine military or remain loyal to President Aquino's Government.
He instructed his commanders to "disregard any orders from the Ministry of National Defense," or its plotters.
That was the first of seven coup attempts he foiled.
Now, former General Ramos, West Point 1950, seems all but certain to be the next President.
A14  Curitiba Journal: An example of planning for the third world.
A4  Vatican seeks a voice in Earth Summit's resolutions on population.
A6  As Deng ages, Chinese ask if his children are using him.
A7  Killing of a 12-year-old sets off clashes in an Iranian city.
A13  National A16-21, B8-10  SWEEPING ENERGY BILL GAINS
The most ambitious energy legislation in more than a decade easily passed in the House.
The bill is similar to legislation already cleared by the Senate, and the President is expected to sign whatever version emerges from Congress.
A1  LIMITS ON TEEN-AGE ABORTION
Laws that require unmarried women under the age of 18 to obtain their parents' consent, or at least notify them, before having an abortion are gaining increasing favor with state legislators.
A1
Laws restricting abortion were voided in California and Ohio.
B8  CLUE TO LOU GEHRIG'S DISEASE
For the first time, researchers have found a chemical defect in patients suffering from amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
B10  HOW PEROT MAKES HIS POINT
Washington is a city where nuance and imagery shape the daily complexion of a political campaign.
But Ross Perot frequently steers a a more absolutist course.
That is being underscored again in the dispute over whether, on a trip to Vietnam in 1987, he made an unauthorized disclosure of Washington's negotiating strategy on American M.I.A.'s.
A20
While attacking insiders, Perot woos some of them.  A20
News analysis: Clinton is besieged by Perot and the polls.  A21
On the Trail: More writers of overdrawn checks were defeated.
A20  A SENIOR LAWMAKER WON'T RUN
Representative Dante B. Fascell, the Florida Democrat who heads the House Foreign Affairs Committee, decided not to seek election to a 20th term.
He joins more than 60 of his House colleagues who have chosen not to run in November.
A16  BLACK SUPREMACIST CONVICTED
A Federal jury in Florida found Yahweh ben Yahweh and six of his followers guilty of conspiracy to commit murder.
The jurors deadlocked on racketeering charges.
A16  UNITED WAY RECORDS SUBPOENAED
The Justice Department has subpoenaed extensive records from the United Way of America to determine whether any law was violated by transactions of William Aramony, its former president.
A16  GAIN IN WHEAT RESEARCH
Researchers said they had genetically altered wheat for the first time, an achievement that could help lead to improved yields.
B8  A Congressional agency proposed three alternatives to S.D.I.
A17  Metropolitan Digest, B1 WARMUS IS CONVICTED
Carolyn Warmus, portrayed by prosecutors as obsessed with a married man, was convicted today of killing her lover's wife.
A1  NEW JERSEY HOSPITAL PLAN BANNED
A Federal judge ruled today that New Jersey cannot enforce its system of paying the hospital bills of the poor by increasing the bills of workers covered by self-supporting union health plans.
A1  MURDEROUS MANAGEMENT
A New York-based crime organization often used murder as a managerial technique, its former boss testified yesterday.
A1  Business Digest, D1  The Home Section C1-12  Design Notebook C1  AIDS and Parents.
C1  Arts/Entertainment C14-24  Sports B11-17  Baseball: Reds edge Mets, 1-0.
B11  Basketball: Bulls take 3-2 edge over Cavaliers.
B11  Tennis: Connors out in 5 sets.
B11  Obituaries D21-22  Elizabeth David, a British cookbook writer.
D22  Editorials/Op-Ed A22-23  Editorials A22  "Hello, 911? This is Bosnia." The House ducks on energy.
Paying for a chance at life.
Topics: Mr.
Klestil's demons.
LettersA22  William Safire: Perot's plea of "hardship." A23  Anthony Lewis: The pillage President.
A23  Judy Ching-Chia Wong: Victims of both races.
A23  Mikhail S. Gorbachev: America, da.
A23


Chief Fights Bill to Replace New York City Officer's Guns
New York City's Police Commissioner, Lee P. Brown, urged state legislators today to reject a bill that would require city police officers to carry semiautomatic weapons instead of revolvers, saying that the Legislature had no business telling the Police Department what weapons to use.
The legislation is being pressed by the Patrolmen's Benevolent Association, the most powerful police union in the state, and has bipartisan support in the State Senate and the Assembly.
The bill's chances of passing are enhanced by the fact that this is an election year, and legislators are looking for a cost-free way to appear tough on crime.


1,000 PEOPLE TO LOSE THEIR JOBS IN A REVAMPING
Wang Laboratories Inc. said yesterday that it would lay off more than 1,000 employees worldwide over several months, out of a total work force of 13,532.
The cost of the cuts, while not yet determined, will be reflected as part of operating results for the company's fourth quarter, which will end June 30.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.25-6.5
6.25-6.5
8.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.75
4.02
5.79
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.69
3.75
5.46
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.81
3.90
5.62
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.08
7.09
7.90
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.89
7.91
8.28
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.84
8.85
9.32
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.64
6.63
7.22
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Pop and Jazz in Review
Roy Hargrove  Trumpeter Village Vanguard 178 Seventh Avenue South (at Perry Street) Through Sunday
The young trumpeter Roy Hargrove has often been used as an example by critics of younger jazz musicians.
An extraordinary trumpet player, he has often been faulted for not having the experience needed to lead a band.
Mr.
Hargrove, these critics say, was pushed into the limelight by his recording label, groomed for stardom but not prepared for the responsibilities.
If Mr.
Hargrove's first set on Tuesday night is any example, he has been paying attention to those critics.
He has fashioned a taut and precise band and constructed an exciting, carefully arranged set that led off the group's improvisations.
The set opened with two pieces from his new album, "The Vibe" -- the title song and "Caryisms." Played together, they resembled a suite and moved through a liquid transition that had an aura of unpredictability to it.
At times the group's drummer, Greg Hutchinson, stopped playing, leaving the piano and bass to play alone; tempos changed and the group's dynamics crested and fell.
And Mr.
Hargrove and Antonio Hart, the saxophonist, indulged in a long section of dense polyphony, with Mr.
Hart picking out nasty and bitter notes with which to punctuate the exchange.


Books of The Times; American Dream's Role In a Murder Mystery
Clockers  By Richard Price  599 pages. Houghton Mifflin. $22.95.
The skeleton of Richard Price's bold and powerful new novel, "Clockers," is a seemingly straightforward murder mystery.
Nineteen-year-old Ronald Dunham is known as Strike around the housing project where he hangs out in the fictional town of Dempsy, N.J.
Strike wants to rise above his job as a clocker, or street salesman of cocaine, and be trusted to "deal serious weight."
Rodney Little, Strike's brutally hardheaded supplier, hints that a higher-up in his drug network named Darryl Adams has been cheating on him by holding back profits.
If Darryl were to be done away with somehow, Strike could take over Darryl's more lucrative trade as well as the co-managership of a fast-food joint called Ahab's, which Darryl uses as a front.
Strike picks up Rodney's hint, tries to work up the nerve to shoot Darryl and finds that he cannot.


New Campaigns
*
Red Stripe Lager Beer conveys a laid-back feeling in radio commercials created by Rotando Lerch &amp; Iafeliece, Stamford, Conn.
The jingle for the Jamaican beer, set to a reggae beat, says, "Gonna have me a Red Stripe Jamaica good beer."


Killing of a 12-Year-Old Sets Off Clashes in Iran
Iranian military and police forces in Arak, a city about 150 miles southwest of Teheran, clashed last week with thousands of demonstrators who were protesting the killing of a 12-year-old boy in a confrontation with the Government over a squatter camp.
The clash was the most violent in an Iranian city since the Islamic revolution in Iran 12 years ago.
Witnesses said buildings in Arak were set ablaze by 2,000 to 3,000 protesters, and a local ambulance driver said today that at least seven people suffered gunshot wounds and that about 200 were arrested.


Second Trial Convicts Warmus Of Murdering Her Lover's Wife
Carolyn Warmus, portrayed by prosecutors as obsessed with a married man, was convicted today of killing her lover's wife.
In the seventh day of deliberations, jury members notified the court that they had reached a decision at 11:17 this morning, and within 20 minutes a court officer was snapping handcuffs on Ms.
Warmus, a former Westchester teacher.


Ex-Aide to Dinkins Admits Evading Tax On Money He Stole
Arnold I. Biegen, the finance chairman of David N. Dinkins's 1989 mayoral campaign who has confessed to embezzling more than $1 million from a Brooklyn widow and the Dinkins campaign, pleaded guilty yesterday in Federal court in Manhattan to charges of evading income taxes on money stolen from the widow.
In exchange for his plea, Federal charges of mail and bank fraud were dismissed.
For two convictions of tax evasion, the 58-year-old defendant faces a maximum of 10 years in prison and a $500,000 fine.


President At Charter
The Charter Medical Corporation, a psychiatric hospital chain struggling under an industry slowdown and heavy debt, yesterday named E. Mac Crawford as president and chief operating officer.
He succeeds William A. Fickling Jr., Charter's founder, who kept the titles of chairman and chief executive.
Charter, based in Macon, Ga., hopes to take its 95 psychiatric and general hospitals into a prepackaged bankruptcy, if bondholders approve the deal by a deadline tomorrow.
Analysts said the company would then try to return to public ownership in August or September.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Frank Foster and the Count Basie Orchestra  Carnegie Hall
When the saxophonist and composer Frank Foster took over the Count Basie Orchestra in 1986, it was unclear what would happen.
Mr.
Foster, who was a member of the band during its "atomic" period, between 1953 and 1964, had changed his style, moving toward some of the conclusions John Coltrane had reached about improvisation.
There was bound to be some tension between maintaining the sound of the Basie band and Mr.
Foster's own ambitions
Mr.
Foster, if the band's show on Monday night was any indication, has found a decent balance.
The orchestra, featuring many of its longtime members, rocked through Basie standards like "Corner Pocket," with the drummer David Gibson powering the band with a driving ride cymbal.
The orchestra has some fine soloists, and on several tunes Melton Mustafa pierced riffs with shining be-bop improvisations.


242 Graduate In Ceremonies At Cooper Union
A Yale professor who is an expert in graphic design, Edward R. Tufte, addressed the 242 graduates at Cooper Union's 133d commencement exercises in Manhattan yesterday in the college's Great Hall.
At the ceremony, Mr.
Tufte discussed the unity of art and science, which he described as "the all-out pursuit of one's vision of what is true and then telling the world about it."


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Political Memo; How Perot Tries to Edit the Press (and the Past?) on Prisoner-of-War Issue
"This is Ross Perot calling," the candidate-to-be announced on the telephone recently.
"Now I'm not asking for a retraction or anything like that, I just want to get the facts straight."
He was addressing an allegation by former Reagan Administration officials, reported in The New York Times, that he went to Vietnam in early 1987 and disclosed without authorization the Administration's negotiating strategy on how to resolve the cases of Americans missing in action in Southeast Asia.


Calendar: A Garden, Quilts, Power Towers
An English Garden
Wave Hill, Independence Avenue and 249th Street, Riverdale, the Bronx; (212) 549-3200.
David Wheeler, the editor of the British journal Hortus, will give an illustrated lecture on Cotswold Gardens at 3:30 P.M. on Tuesday.
An exhibition of paintings of Cotswold Gardens by Simon Dorrell runs through Sept. 27.
Mountain Themes
Adirondack Lakes Center for the Arts, Route 28 (off Route 30) in Blue Mountain Lake, N.Y.; (518) 352-7715.


16 HAITIANS SLAIN IN WEEK OF STRIFE
At least 16 people have been killed and many others wounded in the most violent week this city has experienced since the overthrow in September of President Jean-Bertrand Aristide.
Nighttime shootings involving uniformed soldiers and groups of marauding, heavily armed men have become commonplace from the low-lying, muddy neighborhoods of the poor to wealthier areas that dominate the hillsides of the capital, according to residents, diplomats and human-rights workers.


Curtains on the Ceiling
"I DESIGN hats, costumes and clothing, and they all look like curtains," Mary Bright said.
"So I asked myself, could I do a perfect curtain?"
For each room, Ms.
Bright applies a different solution.
For one client, she designed a curtain with double gossamer layers of transparent nylon polyester.
For another, she divided spaces with panels of ivory cotton voile.


Finland Struggles to Overcome the Soviet Fall
Since coming to power 14 months ago, Finland's first non-Socialist Government in 25 years has been struggling under a crushing burden of high interest rates, growing business failures and the worst unemployment levels in decades.
But so far, Prime Minister Esko Aho and his centrist coalition have held together with a rationale that seems to work as well on this side of the frontier as it does within the old Soviet empire: the end of Communism has left the leadership in democratic Finland with an awful mess to clean up too.


Topics of The Times; Call for Summer Jobs
For a disadvantaged teen-ager, having a summer job can mean more than money; it can also provide a sense of opportunity and self-worth and the encouragement to stay in school and out of trouble.
Last year, New York City's Summer Youth Employment Program provided jobs in city agencies and not-for-profit organizations for 30,000 youngsters between the ages of 14 and 21.
Some 27,500 of the jobs were federally funded.
Financing for the 2,500 others came from the city's "Safe Streets, Safe City" anti-crime program.


PARENT &amp; CHILD
RICHARD M. LERNER recalls his first summer job in Brooklyn about 30 years ago.
He was 14 or 15 years old and worked as a delivery boy for a small grocer, earning mostly tips plus a few cents from the owner anytime the order he delivered cost more than $10.
"I felt exploited," said Dr.
Lerner, who is now the director of the Institute for Children, Youth and Families at Michigan State University in East Lansing.
As part of his research on adolescent development, he has studied how teen-agers react to the workplace.


Treasury Issues Edge Upward
Prices of Treasury securities inched higher in slow trading yesterday, as dealers and investors cautiously began to buy securities following sharp declines in the previous two sessions.
A Government report showing a 1.4 percent increase in new orders for durable goods during April was stronger than anticipated, and traders sold notes and bonds immediately after the report was released.


Topics of The Times; Mr. Klestil's Demons
Austria has elected a President who makes a big point out of a small distinction: Thomas Klestil assured voters that he could actually visit important foreign capitals, including Washington.
That's a clear allusion to the involuntary immobility of President Kurt Waldheim, who was persona non grata abroad because of his service in a German Army unit involved in Nazi atrocities.
But regrettably, Mr.
Klestil did not stop there.
In his closing rally he tried to have it both ways.
"We must finally stop demonizing the wartime generation and acting as if they were all criminals," he asserted, sounding very like Mr.
Waldheim.
The blatant bid for hard-right-wing support worked: Mr.
Klestil won 57 percent in a second-round vote, the biggest margin for any winner since Austria regained its independence in 1955.


With Films Scarce, New York Still Feels Impact of Boycott
The idea was a winner: a romantic New York comedy, starring Michael J. Fox, that would recall gems like "Breakfast at Tiffany's," "The Apartment" and "Barefoot in the Park." In the eyes of Universal Pictures, there could be only one location to make such a latter-day New York comedy.
Toronto.
"In my first meeting with Universal, I was told it's impossible to shoot in New York," said Barry Sonnenfeld, director of the film, which is as yet untitled.
"I said, 'I've worked on lots of films in New York.' They said, 'Well, you haven't been there in a few years. It's changed.' "


Curitiba Journal: The Road To Rio - Setting an Agenda for the Earth; The Secret of a Livable City? It's Simplicity Itself
On paper, Curitiba sounds like another nightmarish third-world city.
The population increased 11-fold in the last 50 years.
Most households survive on family incomes of less than $100 a week.
In reality, Curitiba is a leafy, livable showcase for low-cost solutions that many urban planners believe can be applied in other growing cities of the third world.


Dinkins Firm on Surplus, but Hints of Possible Budget Revisions
Mayor David N. Dinkins held firm yesterday to his administration's estimate of the size of the city budget surplus.
But he also seemed to open the door slightly to the possibility that there might be additional revisions before the jousting with the City Council is completed next month.
Mr.
Dinkins said Tuesday that he had increased his projection of the size of the surplus by $60 million, to $515 million.
The money, which has built up during the current fiscal year, would be used to pay city expenses during the fiscal year that begins July 1.


Honors
*
Stephen P. Rogers, senior executive vice president at Black, Gillock &amp; Langberg, Houston, was elected president of the Houston Advertising Federation.


Indians Sweep A's And Stewart Away
Indians 4, A's 2
OAKLAND, Calif., May 27 (AP) -- Paul Sorrento homered twice off Dave Stewart and Albert Belle also homered off the four-time 20-game winner as Cleveland beat Oakland, 4-2, today for a three-game sweep.
Scott Scudder (3-5), who hasn't pitched a complete game in 50 major league starts, allowed both runs and eight hits in eight and one-third innings before Steve Olin finished for his ninth save.


Sect Leader Convicted On Conspiracy Charge
After five days of deliberation, a Federal jury in Fort Lauderdale today found a black supremacist, Yahweh ben Yahweh, and six followers guilty of conspiracy, but failed to reach a verdict on racketeering charges against the sect leader.
Seven other members of the Nation of Yahweh religious sect headed by Yahweh ben Yahweh were acquitted of the conspiracy charge, and the jury deadlocked on the two other defendants.
None of the defendants were convicted of racketeering; the jury declared itself hung on the accusation against Yahwey ben Yahweh and four others, and the remaining defendants were aquitted.


BUSINESS DIGEST
International
Olympia &amp; York sought British court protection from creditors for Canary Wharf, in a sign that its desperate efforts to keep its global real estate empire intact are falling apart.  [ Page A1. ]  Technically, the decision will have little or no direct impact on Olympia &amp; York U.S.A.
But there may be a serious psychological reaction.  [ D2. ]
The English Channel tunnel project has degenerated from a grand symbol of European business integration to a financial morass, with one of the leading contractors suggesting this week that the project could face bankruptcy.  [ D1. ]


Blunder Is Costly As Yanks Go Under
The play seemed so routine and so basic.
Kirby Puckett tapped a grounder to first and Mike Stanley touched the base and threw accurately to Mike Gallego at second base for what was apparently a double play and a harmless ending to the third inning.
But the baseball demons inside the Metrodome haunted the Yankees once again as Chuck Knoblauch inadvertently dislodged the ball from Gallego's glove to keep the inning alive.
Before the Yankees even viewed a replay of how the ball slithered free today, the Twins blitzed unlucky Melido Perez for four unearned runs and swiped a 5-1 victory.


P.&amp; G. Seeking Growth In Health-Care Areas
With health care growing faster than the food or soap business, the Procter &amp; Gamble Company wants to stake out more shelf space in consumers' medicine cabinets.
Industry analysts said Procter was in talks with Marion Merrell Dow Inc. to distribute an over-the-counter version of Seldane, an immensely successful prescription antihistamine.


Racetracks Search Out New Group Of Bettors
The horse players are back on stage in the Broadway revival of "Guys and Dolls," singing of a "horse right here -- the name is Paul Revere," waving their racing forms and touting their picks.
But unless current trends are reversed, the scene may mean almost nothing to audiences at future revivals.
That's because the generation of bettors who regularly visit tracks, who follow the progress of horses the way others do batting averages and who would not be caught dead in an Off-Track Betting parlor is aging, and track operators say too few young horse players are showing up to take their places along the rail.


Review/Dance; Mark Taylor Evokes Life's Ambiguities
When four people descended from the altar of St.
Mark's Church on Sunday night, they moved angelically.
But as they involved themselves with other dancers in Mark Taylor's "Mortal Drift," these guardian angels acted like devilish pests.
Mr.
Taylor's concern for life's ambiguities was equally evident in three premieres presented under the auspices of the church's Danspace Project by the two companies he directs: Mark Taylor and Friends and the Pittsburgh-based Dance Alloy.
"Pater," to recorded music by Guy Klucevsek, was a poignant duet for Mr.
Taylor and his father, William M. Taylor.
Each held the other.
Each ran away from the other.
Each looked strong.
Each looked weak.
Each curled up on the floor as if to imply that all grown-ups once were babies and that, with luck, all babies will one day grow up.


Dr. Dawon Kahng, 61, Inventor In Field of Solid-State Electronics
Dr.
Dawon Kahng, the president of the NEC Research Institute and a physicist whose inventions led to significant advances in electronic technology, died on May 13 at St.
Peter's Hospital in New Brunswick, N.J.
He was 61 years old and lived in Princeton, N.J.
Dr.
Kahng died of complications following emergency surgery for a ruptured aortic aneurysm, said Star Wilmarth, a spokeswoman for the institute.


An Advance in Lou Gehrig's Disease
For the first time, researchers have found a chemical defect in patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, the devastating and inevitably fatal neurological condition known as Lou Gehrig's disease.
They say the patients have flaws in sponge-like molecules that mop up one of the brain's most powerful chemicals.
When the chemical, glutamate, accumulates in the fluid between brain cells, nerve cells that control motor activity become overexcited and die, the researchers found.


Unser Jr. Promoting Race in New York
AL UNSER JR ., who won the Indianapolis 500 on Sunday, was in New York yesterday to help the promoters of the Marlboro Grand Prix of New York finally announce a firm date for that race.
The 200-mile race around the World Trade Center will be held on the weekend of July 10-11, 1993.
Unser's victory over SCOTT GOODYEAR , the closest finish in Indy history at .043 seconds, came on a day when 13 drivers crashed.
Three of them are still hospitalized.


Bulls Use Late Breakaway To Push Cavaliers to Brink
Suddenly and without warning, the Chicago Bulls turned tonight's game into a rout.
They scored the first 15 points of the fourth quarter.
They held the Cleveland Cavaliers scoreless for the first 5 minutes 40 seconds of the final period.
And when the Bulls play great defense, as they did tonight, Michael Jordan usually takes care of the rest.


An Advance in Lou Gehrig's Disease
For the first time, researchers have found a chemical defect in patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, the devastating and inevitably fatal neurological condition known as Lou Gehrig's disease.
They say the patients have flaws in sponge-like molecules that mop up one of the brain's most powerful chemicals.
When the chemical, glutamate, accumulates in the fluid between brain cells, nerve cells that control motor activity become overexcited and die, the researchers found.


Growing
SOME friends came down to the farm on Preakness weekend to help me in the garden.
They weren't like most people who say they want to weed and then stand there asking if you have Ken Follett's "On Wings of Eagles" because Ross Perot says it tells everything we'd ever want to know about the corporate king who wants to be President.
It's hard to concentrate on the peppers when somebody like this is helping.
You're likely to give the jalapenos an overdose of Epsom salts.
You're liable to over-react (in the friend's opinion) when the friend sits down on your fluffy raised bed to discuss the abysmal state of the Democratic Party and then says: "Haven't you had enough of this now? Let's go into town."


CHRONICLE
Never mind that he is gearing up for the Tony Awards ceremony Sunday night.
GREGORY HINES, the star of "Jelly's Last Jam," wouldn't think of missing the AIDS Walk in Central Park that morning.
"It's not like I'm being put out," the dancer and actor said on the telephone yesterday.
"I feel I have a responsibility to be at the AIDS Walk. I have lost so many of my good close friends and colleagues to AIDS, I feel I need to be there."


To Gauge the Film Industry, Start With a Magic Number
Filming in New York is often called a $3 billion-a-year industry, but that figure is more guesswork than fact.
The magic number comes from the the Mayor's Office of Film, Theater and Broadcasting and represents an estimate of the value of all location filming in 1990, New York's best year, in the 10 categories for which the office issues shooting permits.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Democrats; Making Up Lost Time, Democrats In New Jersey Now Rush to Clinton
New Jersey's Democratic political establishment was slow in climbing aboard Gov.
Bill Clinton's bandwagon, and now that all hands are accounted for the party is struggling to make up for lost time.
What finally tilted New Jersey's top Democratic leaders into the Clinton camp was the Arkansas Governor's lopsided victory in the Pennsylvania primary on April 28.
Coming on the heels of Mr.
Clinton's victories in New York and three other states three weeks earlier, the Pennsylvania election made it clear to New Jersey Democrats that he was all but unstoppable.


Events: Tours of Houses and Streets
Tours in Yonkers
Corner of Park Hill and Rockland
avenues; (914) 963-8772.
On Sunday from 11:30 A.M. to 5:30 P.M. there will be a self-guided house tour in the Park Hill area, including a 1908 house in the Arts and Crafts style and an 1899 house in the Victorian Shingle style.
Guided walking tours will be offered at 11:30 A.M., 1:30 P.M. and 3:30 P.M.
Tickets, $12.
Brooklyn Neighborhoods
Brooklyn Center for the Urban Environment; (718) 788-8549.
The center starts a series of walking tours with row house architecture in the Fort Greene and Clinton Hill areas on Saturday.
Future tours cover the development of Flatbush from the colonial era (Sunday); church architecture in Greenpoint (June 6); diverse buildings in Red Hook (June 7); and brownstones in Park Slope (June 13).
Tours are from 1 to 3:30 P.M.
Call for meeting place.
Fee, each tour, $6; $3 for children 12 years old and younger and adults 65 and older.
Westchester Show House
Donahue Home, 140 Kirby Lane, off Grace Church Street, Rye, N.Y.; (914) 967-6964.
Thirty-four interior and landscape designers will participate in a show house to benefit the National Council on Alcoholism and Other Drug Addictions of Westchester; through June 7.
Hours: 10 A.M. to 5 P.M., Monday through Friday (Thursday evening until 8); 11 A.M. to 5 P.M., Saturday and Sunday.
No children under 6.
Tickets, $15.


Clinton Is Knocked Off Course by Tide for Perot
There comes a time in many campaigns when a candidate seems trapped in a script of someone else's making.
So it goes for Bill Clinton, looking stoically into a local television camera and answering, perhaps for the ninth or 10th time of the day, questions about his lagging poll ratings and the growing threat of Ross Perot.
Mr.
Clinton told reporters in Cleveland on Tuesday night that he was going "to stop answering foolish questions about polls," but the vow was short-lived.
Within hours he was giving a series of live local television interviews, which began with a question about why it took him so long to get a local endorsement and moved quickly on to a new Ohio poll that showed the Arkansas Governor in third place in a three-way race.


Cleaners Who Do Windows (Sort Of)
THE equipment at Hairo Baghdassarian's dry-cleaning establishment in Queens looks as if it was designed for giants.
The examining tables, where the staff inspects fabrics before cleaning them, are the size of banquet tables.
The pressing machines measure 110 inches long.
And there's a huge contraption with wooden teeth for stretching draperies.
The outsize equipment is necessary for cleaning draperies and curtains, said Mr.
Baghdassarian, who opened Drapemasters of America 23 years ago.
"You cannot press eight-foot drapes on a garment press," he said.


Front-Runner in Manila: Loyal to Aquino and 'People Power'
Fidel V. Ramos's transformation from a hard-line general to the man who now appears to be the next President of the Philippines can be traced back to a single night in November 1986, when the freshly installed Government of Corazon C. Aquino seemed about to fall to a coup by her own Defense Minister.
Earlier that year General Ramos, the armed forces Chief of Staff, was among the generals who turned on Ferdinand E. Marcos when he tried to steal the election from Mrs.
Aquino, and the general had become a key player in the "People Power" revolution.


Philip Morris Is Adding $3 Billion to Buyback
The Philip Morris Companies said yesterday that it would expand its program to buy back its stock, a move that could give the shares a lift and benefit current shareholders.
Philip Morris said it would repurchase an additional $3 billion of stock, which follows a $2 billion buyback announced in November.
The company already repurchased 12.3 million shares for $929 million, an average of just over $75 a share.
This leaves a fund of $4.1 billion to buy shares.
Philip Morris's stock closed yesterday at $75.375, up $1.


As Deng Ages, China Watches His Children
For thousands of years in China, the anticipated death of an emperor has been a time of palace intrigue, when family members jostle for authority and spin webs of secrecy about the health of the great man.
So it was with Mao Zedong in the 1970's, and so it is becoming with Deng Xiaoping today.
Mr.
Deng, who will turn 88 in August, does not seem to be in imminent danger -- indeed, some suspect that he is immortal -- but already many Chinese think that Mr.
Deng's children may be grasping authority and serving as his gate-keepers.


Constantine Shapiro, Cellist and Writer, 95
Constantine Shapiro, a cellist, composer, writer and teacher, died on Monday at his home in Hollywood.
He was 95 years old.
He died in his sleep, said his son, Isaac, of Manhattan.


76ers Juggle Staff and Name Moe Coach
A top-level shake-up yesterday by the Philadelphia 76ers resulted in the appointment of DOUG MOE as coach, replacing JIM LYNAM , who took over the job of general manager from GENE SHUE .
Shue was named the director of player personnel.
Moe, 53 years old, the National Basketball Association coach of the year in 1987-88 with the Denver Nuggets, steps into the job amid speculation about the future makeup of the club, including the status of CHARLES BARKLEY .


Agreement at Ravenswood
The United Steelworkers of America and the privately held Ravenswood Aluminum Corporation have reached a tentative agreement to end a 19-month lockout of 1,700 workers that had become a crucial test of union power.
No terms will be released until the union presents the proposal to the workers Saturday morning in Charleston, W.Va.
The tentative agreement came just over a month after Ravenswood's board fired R. Emmett Boyle, the chairman and chief executive who had been the architect of the confrontational strategy.
Mr.
Boyle had run Ravenswood since 1989, when he and other investors bought the company from the Kaiser Aluminum and Chemical Corporation in a leveraged buyout.


H.I.V. Testing Becomes Test for N.F.L.
In a sport where violent collisions are mandatory, and bloody uniforms are displayed as a badge of honor, the National Football League is trying to come to grips with the specter of fear of H.I.V. and the ramifications that testing for the virus could hold for the league, the team and, most of all, the players.
Today and Thursday, N.F.L. trainers and player representatives from each of the 28 teams are here for a seminar on the league's drug, alcohol and steroid-abuse policies and the question of H.I.V. testing.
And the N.F.L. is looking at its policy on H.I.V. testing, which now allows each team to offer voluntary testing and counseling for players in accordance with the prevailing state laws.
At this point, confidentiality of the results is at the center of players' concerns.


Industry Views Environment
As next week's Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro nears, the advertising industry is concentrating on a variety of environmental issues.
Still, interest in the environment among consumers, as expressed in surveys conducted by the Leo Burnett Company, has dropped to its lowest level since the agency began the nationwide studies in September 1989.


Trevino Hot on Trail of Perfection
On the Senior PGA Tour, where even the aging process slows and comfort is at least as important as competition, there is a restless urgency to Lee Trevino.
Just as it drove him from the slums of Dallas, it interrupted the afterglow of his fifth victory of the year at the Bell Atlantic Classic on Sunday.
Trevino couldn't get over the fact that sloppy iron play had caused him to miss 21 of 54 greens in regulation.
He vowed to spend the next three days practicing at his home near Hartford.


An Advance in Lou Gehrig's Disease
For the first time, researchers have found a chemical defect in patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, the devastating and inevitably fatal neurological condition known as Lou Gehrig's disease.
They say the patients have flaws in sponge-like molecules that mop up one of the brain's most powerful chemicals.
When the chemical, glutamate, accumulates in the fluid between brain cells, nerve cells that control motor activity become overexcited and die, the researchers found.


Theodore H. Silbert, Chairman Of Sterling National, Dies at 87
Theodore H. Silbert, who was the chairman of the Sterling National Bank and Trust Company, died on Tuesday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 87 years old.
He died of a heart attack, his family said.


Chief of Lincoln Hospital Quits During Fight for Accreditation
The executive director of Lincoln Hospital resigned yesterday in the middle of the hospital's fight to keep its national accreditation.
The resignation of the director, Dr.
Carlos Molina, came after a morning meeting with Dr.
Billy E. Jones, president of the Health and Hospitals Corporation, which runs the city's 11 municipal hospitals, including Lincoln, which is located in one of the poorest neighborhoods in the Bronx.


Ayer Merges Agency in Paris
Ayer Inc. said yesterday that it had merged Ayer Magnin, its agency in Paris, with Resonances, an independent shop there.
Ayer will own only a minority interest in the new shop, called Resonances Ayer, which will be based in the Paris suburb of Neuilly-sur-Seine.
Marc Meynier, president of Resonances, will become president of Resonances Ayer, while Claude Magnin, president of Ayer Magnin, will become vice president and creative director.


Russia Braces for Storm Of Mass Unemployment
Four months into Russia's economic reforms, as prices go up and production declines, unemployment, the most dreaded of capitalism's consequences, remains the shoe that has yet to drop.
Compared with Europe and the United States, the level of joblessness here is still negligible: 118,000 people, or less than two-tenths of 1 percent of the nation's 74 million workers, according to Russia's Government.


Market Place; A Coffee Trend Is Going Public
IS Wall Street ready to wake up and smell the cappuccino?
The Starbucks Corporation, better known as the Starbucks Coffee Company, thinks so.
Last week, Starbucks announced an initial public offering of 2.1 million shares of common stock, priced at $14 to $16.
The offering, the first by a specialty coffee retailer, is being co-managed by Alex.
Brown &amp; Sons Inc. and Wertheim Schroder &amp; Company.


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Tuesday about the rivalry between the Microsoft Corporation and the International Business Machines Corporation misstated the amount of money invested by Microsoft in developing an operating system intended to make it a force in commercial computing and in the work station business.
It is $40 million, not $400 million.


COMPANY NEWS: Playthings to Come; Giving Consumers a Peek At Tomorrow's Gizmos
One of the most unusual features at the summer Consumer Electronics Show, which opens today in Chicago, has nothing to do with electrical outlets or batteries.
For the first time, the industry trade show will throw open its doors to consumers.
The change -- made after industry sales growth last year fell to single digits -- has rankled many exhibitors and is certain to affect the show's complexion.


Home Video
This week in video stores big new titles like "Father of the Bride" and "My Girl" are stocked by the hundreds of thousands of copies.
As always, though, some new releases have had to work for every piece of shelf space they could get.
A case in point is "Poison," a movie that tells three tales, about patricide by a 7-year-old, a loathsome disease and lust in a prison that results in a homosexual rape.
The film, by Todd Haynes, which was released today by Fox Lorber, provides an example of how careful promotion can help a small niche title on videocassette.


INSIDE
How Perot Makes His Point
Ross Perot's admonition to "get the facts straight" about his 1987 trip to Vietnam underscores his uncompromising approach to political salesmanship.
Political Memo, page A20.
Clue to Lou Gehrig's Disease
For the first time, medical researchers have found a chemical defect in patients suffering from amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Page B10.
Dinkins to Veto Carriage Bill
Mayor Dinkins promised to veto a bill allowing horse-drawn carriages in much of mid-Manhattan.
Page B3.
Channel Tunnel in Trouble
Plagued by conflict and delays, the $14.7 billion English Channel tunnel has degenerated from a grand symbol to a financial morass.
Page D1.


TV Deal Near For World Cup
ABC and ESPN are expected on Wednesday to announce their deal to televise the World Cup in 1994, an $11 million contract that will place 11 games on ABC and 41 on ESPN.
Eight of ESPN's games may be seen on a pay-per-view basis.
A key part of the deal is the involvement of sponsors like Coca-Cola, MasterCard and M&amp;M/Mars, who have made commitments for advertising time, and whose spots will air only during the pre-game, halftime and post-game periods.


Mortar Attack Kills 16 in Bosnia


Making Windows Safe for Children
THE arrival of warm weather brings an increased risk for children living in city buildings: an easily opened window can lead to a fatal fall.
But properly installed window guards can prevent such tragedies.
Last week, two children in New York City were killed when they climbed or fell out of windows.
An 8-year-old boy tried to lower himself through a 12th-floor Manhattan apartment window onto the ledge of the balcony of the apartment below, and fell.
And an 18-month-old girl in Corona, Queens, leaned against a window screen that gave way.
The child fell five stories to the ground.


Judge Voids New Jersey Fee That Finances Care for Poor
A Federal judge ruled today that New Jersey cannot enforce its system of paying the hospital bills of the poor by increasing the bills of workers covered by self-supporting union health plans.
Officials said the ruling affected about 2.4 million workers.
They include not only those in the unions that brought the lawsuit but those in all group health-insurance plans that do not involve private insurance companies.


Sari Dienes, 93, Artist Devoted To the Value of the Found Object
Sari Dienes, an artist whose career spanned many different media and several decades of the New York art world, died on Monday at her home in Stony Point, N.Y.
She was 93 years old.
She died of cancer, said Rip Hayman, a friend and the curator of the Sari Dienes Foundation.


COMPANY NEWS
ALLSCRIPS PHARMACEUTICALS INC., Vernon Hills, Ill., has entered into an agreement with Sears, Roebuck and Co., Chicago.
Allscrips will provide mail-service prescriptions through Sears catalogues.
The service will be available through the retailer's 1992 health-care and fall catalogues.
BARRY'S JEWELERS INC., Monrovia, Calif., said its banks, bondholders and shareholders had voted to accept its prenegotiated reorganization plan.


Connecticut's Management Maestro; A 'Shadow of the Governor,' William Cibes Gets Agencies to Function in Concert
William J. Cibes Jr. radiates cheerful humility.
The small state agency he heads, the Office of Policy and Management, is really just a technical advisory office for Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr., Mr.
Cibes says, or the "lengthened shadow of the Governor," as he puts it.
But what a long shadow.


Mob Witness Talks of Murder as Management Tool
In hours of testimony on how a New York-based crime organization used murder as a managerial technique, its former boss described in brutal detail yesterday the extent to which the crime family would go to silence "rats" and rivals within its ranks.
In his second day on the stand, Alphonse D'Arco told the United States District Court in Brooklyn that "whacking" fellow crime family members, even graying ones who spent a lifetime being loyal to the organization, was commonplace in the underworld he inhabited most of his life.
In one case, a canary was stuffed into a murder victim's mouth as a warning to potential informers.


Five-Set Opener for Connors May Have Been a Paris Finale
Another one bites the dust.
And in Jimmy Connors's case, the damage was literal this afternoon at the French Open, where he followed the precedent set Tuesday by his contemporary, John McEnroe, and succumbed, with scraped knees, to a defeat that provoked a reverie on retirement.
Spattered by the clay from Michael Stich's 26 aces, and shattered by the effort to outlast the Wimbledon champion in a five-set endurathon played in the height of the presummer swelter that has hit this city, Connors tried but failed to come out ahead in a 7-5, 3-6, 6-7 (4-7), 6-1, 6-2 decision.


Anderson Signs With Giants
Ottis Anderson, who at age 34 is pro football's oldest runner, is coming back for a 14th National League season.
The Giants have signed him to another one-year contract, from which he will earn the same $500,000 base figure he enjoyed last season.
"He'll still be in on short yardage," General Manager George Young said yesterday.


Farm Credit Debt Is Priced at Par
The Federal Farm Credit Banks Funding Corporation yesterday set the interest rates on three issues of consolidated system-wide bonds totaling $2.105 billion for offering to the public.
Underwriters led by the corporation priced all the bonds at par.
The financing includes $1.225 billion in debt securities that are due to reach maturity in three months and yield 3.85 percent; $635 million in debt securities due in six months yielding 4 percent, and $245 million in one-year bonds yielding 4.32 percent.


Jeff Andretti Remains in Fair Condition
JEFF ANDRETTI remained in fair condition yesterday at Methodist Hospital after his third surgery for injuries suffered Sunday in the Indianapolis 500.
JON WHITE , a hospital spokesman, said the exploratory surgery revealed that Andretti has no tendon damage in his right leg.
White said Dr.
TERRY TRAMMELL made some bone adjustment in the leg during surgery.


Opening Arguments in Giants Bias Case
A former Penn State player was denied a coaching position with the Giants because he is black, the player's lawyer said in the opening arguments of a trial yesterday in Hackensack, N.J.
But ANDREW BERRY , a lawyer for the Giants, said the team never promised a job to the plaintiff, LANCE HAMILTON .
Hamilton, 27 years old and now living in Tampa, Fla., failed to win a job as a defensive back coach with the Giants before the 1986 season.
BILL PARCELLS , then the coach of the Giants, promised Hamilton a job if he went back to Penn State and got some coaching experience, said Hamilton's lawyer, MICHAEL REIMER .


S.E.C. Charges Stotler &amp; Co. With Fraud
The Securities and Exchange Commission charged yesterday that investors were defrauded when they bought shares in the Stotler Group Inc., the now-bankrupt commodities and government-securities firm, when it went public in 1988.
Karsten (Cash) Mahlmann, the chairman of Stotler, resigned as chairman of the Chicago Board of Trade after Stotler went broke in 1990.
The S.E.C. complaint did not charge illegal action by Mr.
Mahlmann, but it did name him as a "relief defendant," asking that he be required to disgorge money he had received from the company.
Mr.
Mahlmann filed for personal bankruptcy last year.


License for Crime
To the Editor:
The Tennessee Valley Authority's purchase of rights to emit 10,000 tons of sulphur dioxide from the Wisconsin Power and Light Company (front page, May 12) makes as much sense as a murderer buying good-behavior time from someone on the outside to reduce the sentence.
If everything is for sale and we are going to auction off the right to commit one kind of crime against society, let's do it for all crimes.
OTTO SALAMON Glen Rock, N.J., May 13, 1992


Once-Lowly Sneaker Is Pedestrian No More
THEY weren't always designed to look like World War II fighter planes -- muscular, multistoried works of mobile rubber architecture.
They were just sneakers.
But that was then.
Before sneakers became pedestrian icons.
Before Encapsulated Gel Systems and Cantilever Technology.
Back in those sun-kissed days when sneakers were mere gym shoes, simple canvas-topped Tom Sawyers for the feet.


The House Ducks on Energy
A sound energy strategy would have two key components: stiff energy taxes, to discourage unnecessary use, and large buffer stocks to protect the economy against catastrophic supply interruptions.
Congress hasn't even thought about the former and, after yesterday's vote in the House to approve an energy bill, won't pay for the latter.
So much for a sound policy.
Succumbing to pressure from oil companies and potential voter backlash, the House rejected by a vote of 263 to 135 an original provision of the bill to bring the Strategic Petroleum Reserve -- 600 million barrels of oil stored in caverns along the Gulf Coast in Louisiana and Texas -- up to its targeted capacity of one billion barrels.


Daniel Cowin Is Dead; Investment Banker, 70
Daniel Cowin, an investment banker and real-estate executive, died on Tuesday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 70 years old.
He died of cancer, his family said.
Mr.
Cowin served on the boards of 26 corporations.
He was a founding director of Continental Telephone, which merged into G.T.E.
He was an early director of Berkshire Hathaway, where he became associated with Warren Buffett, the investor.


O.&amp; Y. Filing Could Affect U.S. Assets
From a strictly technical viewpoint, the decision by Olympia &amp; York to seek bankruptcy for Canary Wharf, a $3.5 billion project on 71 acres of London's Docklands area, will have little or no direct impact on Olympia &amp; York U.S.A.
The American subsidiary has not provided any guarantees to the creditors of the wharf project, and loans to the project are not doubly secured by any of the properties in New York or other United States cities.


Time-Sharing Plan for Yanks' Middle Infield
Where are Abbott and Costello when you need them?
Manager Buck Showalter knows that Don Mattingly will be on first base every day and that Charlie Hayes will be at third base most days, but he does not know who will play second base or shortstop for the Yankees Sunday.
Showalter addressed the infield problem on Tuesday by saying that Pat Kelly would not be demoted to the minor leagues and that the Yankees would employ a "flexible" infield once Andy Stankiewicz comes off the disabled list on Sunday.
But the manager declined to say who among Mike Gallego, Stankiewicz and Kelly would be selected to start at shortstop and second.


Senate Plan To Sell Radio Frequencies
In a possible breakthrough in the long political stalemate over how to parcel out rights to the nation's airwaves, two prominent Senators offered a bipartisan proposal today to auction off radio frequencies to the highest bidder.
Drafted in part by the staff of Senator Daniel K. Inouye, Democrat of Hawaii, chairman of the Senate subcommittee on communications, the proposal could speed the passage of legislation, already approved by the House of Representatives, that would open up a big swath of radio frequencies for new wireless communication technologies.


Biasone as Visionary Is N.B.A. Loss
The last call Dolph Schayes would make to the old man was not unlike countless others over four decades.
The subject, as always, was basketball, a game invented by James Naismith and reinvented into its current popular form by an irascible fellow named Daniel Biasone.
"They won't give me a television," Biasone complained to Schayes last Sunday from the intensive care unit of University Hospital in Syracuse.


Industry Views Environment
As next week's Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro nears, the advertising industry is concentrating on a variety of environmental issues.
Still, interest in the environment among consumers, as expressed in surveys conducted by the Leo Burnett Company, has dropped to its lowest level since the agency began the nationwide studies in September 1989.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Kevin Welch and Kelly Willis  Lone Star Roadhouse
Country music, despite its down-home ethos, is loaded with formalities.
Performers abide by a code that tells them what kind of hat to wear, which topics to cover in their songs, how many rhinestones to flaunt on a jacket or dress.
Last Thursday night, Kevin Welch and Kelly Willis, two singers on country's commercial fringe, dispensed with the formalities and played a set that followed a loose, impromptu design of their own.
Mr.
Welch and Ms.
Willis each have two solo albums to their credit, but instead of performing separately they joined in a single set, alternating lead vocals and sharing harmonies on each other's songs.
They dressed casually, in jeans and comfortable shirts.
There was no strict set list, no interfering egos.


Children's Day at Gracie Mansion


Sometimes the Art on the Wall Happens to Be the Wallpaper
OVER the last 400 years, artists like Albrecht Durer, Alexander Calder, Saul Steinberg, and Roy Lichtenstein have had second, sometimes secret, careers.
They designed wallpaper.
In the 16th century, satyrs cavorted on Durer's wallpaper.
In the 20th century, Andy Warhol designed cows; Steinberg, plaintive dogs.
Unlike Rene Magritte, who was ashamed of having designed wallpaper, Calder "
asked
for his first commission of wallpaper," Marilyn Oliver Hapgood said in her book "Wallpaper and the Artist," to be published in September by Abbeville Press. Calder, who designed a paper called Splotches, was a wallpaper enthusiast.


CHRONICLE
Retired United States Supreme Court Justice THURGOOD MARSHALL has been named the 1992 recipient of the Philadelphia Liberty Medal.
He will be presented with the medal and $100,000 at a ceremony in front of Independence Hall on July 4.
The medal was established after the bicentennial of the Constitution in 1989 by We the People 2000, a private organization.
The previous winners are former President Jimmy Carter; Lech Walesa, the founder of the Polish Solidarity movement; Oscar Arias Sanchez, former president of Costa Rica, and Medicins Sans Frontieres (Doctors Without Borders).


Dinkins Promises to Veto Plan on Horse Carriages
Mayor David N. Dinkins promised yesterday to veto a bill allowing horse-drawn carriages to operate outside Central Park in much of midManhattan, setting the stage for what could be a close fight in the City Council to override his decision.
The Mayor refused to elaborate on his reasons for opposing the bill, which was passed on May 14 by a 32-to-18 vote after intense lobbying from the carriage drivers.
He said he would spell out his thinking when he vetoes the bill on Friday at the monthly bill-signing ceremony.


Justice Department Seeks Records Of United Way and Its Companies
The Justice Department has subpoenaed extensive records from the United Way of America and several organizations it controls to determine if any Federal criminal law was violated by the charity's transfer of millions of dollars to the spinoff organizations.
Federal subpoenas were delivered on Tuesday night to the home of John Glaser, executive director of United Way International, one of the smallest of the spinoffs, ordering him to turn over financial and travel records for at least the last six years as well as records of any transactions with the other spinoffs or with the United Way of America, people familiar with the organization said today.


Joachim Aberbach, Art Dealer And Pop-Music Publisher, 81
Joachim Jean Aberbach, a music publisher and art dealer, died on Sunday at Columbia resbysterian Medical Center in Manhattan.
He was 81 years old and had homes in Manhattan and Old Westbury, N.Y.
He died of a stroke, said his wife, Susan.


People
*
William Hudson Giles was named creative director at Bozell Detroit, Southfield, Mich., succeeding Dan Hughes, who became senior vice president and creative director at J. Walter Thompson Detroit.
Mr.
Giles had been a senior vice president and group creative director at Grey Advertising, Detroit. *
Jack Supple, executive creative director at Carmichael Lynch, Minneapolis, was named to the additional position of managing partner.
Also, Charles Anderson, financial senior vice president, was promoted to chief financial officer and named a managing partner.


To Gauge the Film Industry, Start With a Magic Number
Filming in New York is often called a $3 billion-a-year industry, but that figure is more guesswork than fact.
The magic number comes from the the Mayor's Office of Film, Theater and Broadcasting and represents an estimate of the value of all location filming in 1990, New York's best year, in the 10 categories for which the office issues shooting permits.


Genetically Altered Wheat Promises Higher Yields
Researchers say they have genetically altered wheat for the first time, an achievement that could help lead to improved yields around the world.
Scientists at the University of Florida and the Monsanto Company said Tuesday that the foreign gene they had introduced into wheat had produced an enzyme that had rendered many powerful herbicides harmless to the wheat.
The work is to be reported in the June issue of the journal Bio/Technology.


HOME IMPROVEMENT
WINDOW and door screens are relatively fragile and inevitably need repair or replacement.
Fortunately, both projects are easy and inexpensive.
Most screens are either aluminum or fiberglass.
Both types are sold by length and come in various standard widths.
The cost of either material is about the same; to cover a window 2 feet wide by 3 feet high usually costs about $2.
Aluminum screen is available in its natural, shiny finish (which soon dulls with exposure), but both kinds can also be obtained in black and shades of gray.


On the Trail 2 WRITERS OF OVERDRAFTS ARE DEFEATED IN PRIMARIES   (By The Associated Press) -- Two more House incumbents who wrote overdrafts have been defeated in primary elections.    In Arkansas, Representative Bill Alexander, a 12-term Democrat whose 487 overdrafts at the now-closed House bank ranked him among the institution's worst abusers, was soundly defeated on Tuesday by a former aide, Blanche Lambert.


Model-School Plan Gets More Ideas Than Money
The Bush Administration's private-sector effort to inspire innovative models for the nation's schools, the New American Schools Development Corporation, has attracted a flood of proposals but less than a quarter of the $200 million needed to finance them.
Officials at the corporation said today that the nonprofit group would have enough money to finance the first round of 20 to 30 projects in July at $1.5 million apiece.
But they also announced the election of Ann D. McLaughlin, a former Secretary of Labor in the Reagan Administration, as president and chief executive officer, with a mandate to improve the fund-raising effort.
She will take over July 1.


Stars' Tresses on the Floor
JOSE EBER, hairdresser to the stars (Elizabeth Taylor, Cher, Victoria Principal) sports a pretty impressive mane of his own and, now, a new 10,000-square-foot-salon at 2 Rodeo Drive in Beverly Hills.
"In the 30's and 40's, beauty salons used to have comfort, and women used to be pampered," Mr.
Eber said.
"But we lost it in the 80's when we had to fill up every chair and get the most of the square footage."


Agency Proposes Options to Cut 'Star Wars' Costs
The Congressional Budget Office today suggested three alternatives to the Bush Administration's anti-missile defense system that it said would cost billions of dollars less over the next five years.
The budget office said its options would trim $6 billion to $17 billion from the Administration's $37 billion proposal from 1993 to 1997.


Chairs on the Wall
CHARLES EAMES'S molded plywood DCW Side Chair (circa 1946), an anonymous 19th-century American steer-horn and leather chair, and Daniel Mack's 1991 "Rugbeater Chair," an Adirondack-style chair whose back is made from two rugbeaters, are among the 25 chairs and 18 drawings in "Designs for Seating," at the Cooper-Hewitt Museum at 2 East 91st Street in Manhattan.
They are on view through Aug. 30.
Most of the chairs are arranged on a floor-to-ceiling "chair wall." The juxtaposition of an 18th-century Swiss folk chair, an 1830's English Gothic Revival design and Robert Venturi's 1984 "Chippendale" chair, all made of pierced or cutout wood, show how designs span centuries and cultures.


Vatican Seeks a Voice in Earth Summit Resolutions on Population
In preparation for next month's Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro, Vatican diplomats have begun a campaign to try to insure that the gathering's conclusions on the issue of runaway population growth are not in conflict with Roman Catholic teaching on birth control.
To pursue its cause, the Vatican has insisted on changes in the wording of some documents on demographic issues to be put before the summit, which is to be attended by the leaders of nearly 100 countries.


AT HOME WITH: Jonathan Kaplan; A Tony Nominee With a $10 Allowance
FAME has come suddenly to Jonathan Kaplan, 11 years old, who made his debut on Broadway in late April in the hit musical "Falsettos."
One critic called him a young Woody Allen.
Another called him a sage.
He is nominated for a Tony for best featured actor in a musical.
And while Jonny -- as friends and family call him -- is pleased with all of this notice, he is also proud of another accomplishment.
Because his teeth have slight separations, he is able to spit a mouthful of water through them.
"Looks like a fountain," he said modestly.


'Hello, 911? This Is Bosnia'
When there's an emergency and you call 911, says Haris Silajdzic, Foreign Minister of helpless little Bosnia, "someone must respond. Otherwise there can be no new world order." Every day brings ever grimmer evidence of the need for forceful help.
Just yesterday, Serbian troops lobbed mortar shells into a bread line in Sarajevo, killing at least 16 civilians and wounding more than 100.
Thankfully, Secretary of State Baker appears ready at long last to answer Bosnia's call for help.
Moved by its "humanitarian nightmare" and the test that poses for global security after the cold war, he urges the United Nations to impose mandatory economic sanctions on Slobodan Milosevic's outlaw Serbian regime.
And commendably, Mr.
Baker does not rule out more forceful steps if sanctions fail to stop the Serbian aggression and atrocities.


EUROPEANS IMPOSE A PARTIAL EMBARGO ON BELGRADE TRADE
European Community governments imposed a partial trade embargo on Serbia and Montenegro today and called on the United Nations to go further and ban oil sales in its own economic sanctions in the hope of forcing an end to Serbian intervention in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Their move came just three days after they were publicly admonished by Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d for moving slowly to tackle what he called the "humanitarian nightmare" gripping the former Yugoslav republic since it declared its independence from Belgrade three months ago.


Give Homeowners A Tax Break
To the Editor:
The recession we are emerging from has had many causes, but one key reason it lingers can be found by looking carefully at what has happened to home values since the Comprehensive Tax Reform Act of 1986.
The reform ended many of the tax code's wildest abuses.
The ability to write off against taxes $3 or $4 for every $1 invested in certain kinds of real estate partnerships made syndications boom, bidding up prices for every kind of real estate.
Unfortunately, in this climate most of us bought our homes.
When tax reform let the air out of the market for abusers, it let the air out for average homeowners, too.


French Ex-Cabinet Member Charged With Business Fraud
A French judge today charged Bernard Tapie, one of France's most flamboyant and outspoken businessmen, with fraud just four days after he resigned as Minister of Urban Affairs.
The indictment was delivered by Judge Elizabeth Boizette in a meeting with Mr.
Tapie (pronounced Tah-PEE).
It relates to a payment he is said to have received from the Japanese electronics company Toshiba in 1985.
Mr.
Tapie's former business partner in the company that once distributed the Toshiba Corporation's products in France has accused him of embezzling more than $2 million.


The Blue Angels Receive the President's Vote


Baseball; Fernandez Loses a Battle and the Game as Well
If it wasn't epic, the contest certainly felt eternal.
Sid Fernandez and Darnell Coles went at it, one tough pitch after another, one determined swing after another.
In the end, the fight amounted to 11 pitches.
In the end, the fight amounted to the game.


Runners Try To Qualify For Games
A pair of two-time Olympians in track and field are quickly approaching their chances to become three-time Olympians.
This weekend at opposite ends of the country, Valerie Brisco and Joan Benoit Samuelson have entered races in which they will be trying to meet qualifying standards for the Olympic trials next month in New Orleans, Brisco in the 400 meters, Samuelson in the 10,000.


Elizabeth David Is Dead at 78; Noted British Cookbook Writer
Elizabeth David, a food writer credited with almost single-handedly changing the cooking in her native England, died on Friday at her home in London.
She was 78 years old.
She died of a stroke, British press reports said.


Court Rules That Strauss May Compete
ASTRID STRAUSS can make a bid for another Olympics while she is investigated for possible drug use, a court ruled yesterday.
A court in Magdeburg, Germany, where Strauss lives, ordered the German Swimming Federation to allow the Olympic silver medalist to compete at the national championships, which serve as the Olympic trials, or face a fine.
The championships start today.


Whimsy In Sterling
SILVER has been transformed into a bowl with sharp, dangerous-looking teeth and a chalice fit for ancient knights on holy quests at "A Sterling Exhibition."
The show of 120 objects by 38 American silversmiths is at the Pritam &amp; Eames Gallery, 29 Race Lane in East Hampton, L.I., through June 30.
"The objects range from colonial to arts and crafts to funky," said Jeffrey Herman, director of the Society of American Silversmiths in Providence, R.I., a co-producer of the show.


Parental Consent to Abortion: How Enforcement Can Vary
At Planned Parenthood of Greater Boston, Annie Faulkner answers a call from a 16-year-old who wants an abortion but does not want to get her parents' consent, as the law requires.
After 15 minutes of counseling, Ms.
Faulkner tells the young woman to call back later for the name of a lawyer who will help her get a judge's approval instead of her parents'.
As soon as she hangs up, the counselor goes to the files to match the teen-ager with one of the 200 lawyers, most of them women, who handle 1,000 such hearings each year in Massachusetts and routinely win judicial consent.
An Unbroken Barrier
But what is routine in Massachusetts is all but unheard of in Indiana and in many other states with laws requiring girls under 18 years old who want an abortion to get the consent of a parent or a judge.
In Indianapolis, abortion clinics advise minors to go to Kentucky or Illinois, where such laws are not being enforced, rather than go before a judge in Indiana.


Cher Postpones Opening
Cher has postponed the opening of her five-night engagement at the Paramount because of illness.
Saturday's performance will be the first, and tickets from the originally scheduled opening, last night, will be honored next Thursday.
Tonight's tickets will be good on June 5, and tomorrow's on June 6.
All performances are at 8 P.M.
Information: (212) 465-6741 or (212) 465-6000.


Market Place; A Coffee Trend Is Going Public
IS Wall Street ready to wake up and smell the cappuccino?
The Starbucks Corporation, better known as the Starbucks Coffee Company, thinks so.
Last week, Starbucks announced an initial public offering of 2.1 million shares of common stock, priced at $14 to $16.
The offering, the first by a specialty coffee retailer, is being co-managed by Alex.
Brown &amp; Sons Inc. and Wertheim Schroder &amp; Company.


American Airlines Cuts Some Fares in Half
American Airlines raised the stakes in the fare wars yesterday by announcing a 50 percent cut in its lowest fares less than 24 hours after Northwest Airlines offered a two-for-one summer fare.
Within minutes of American's surprise announcement, most other big carriers, which matched Northwest earlier in the day, said they would also cut fares by 50 percent.
Last night, Northwest also decided to match American.
"We started something others seemed to like," said Mark E. Abels, Northwest's vice president for corporate communications.


A Writer Who Has Been There, and Still Is
At 3 o'clock most mornings, when stillness settles uneasily over this crime-ravaged city, a tapping of typewriter keys can be heard emanating from an abandoned bus sitting in a junkyard in an industrial section.
Once, the 1959 Greyhound was a home to Jess Mowry and his family, but these days it serves mostly as an office where Mr.
Mowry painstakingly types out his novels and short stories, and fields calls daily on his cellular telephone from literary agents, press agents, Hollywood and journalists. (He bought the telephone only after his publisher begged him to.)


Gaza Arab Kills Rabbi
A Palestinian fatally stabbed the rabbi of a settlement in the occupied Gaza Strip yesterday, adding to rage that has engulfed Israel since an Arab killed a 15-year-old girl near Tel Aviv on Sunday.
Settlers retaliated for the rabbi's death, beating Palestinians, overturning cars and setting fire to farm fields.
Article, page A10.


Review/Rock; Lou Reed, Forever Bohemian, on Loss and Death
Whether he likes it or not, Lou Reed, at age 50, is one of rock-and-roll's elder statesmen.
In the same way the Grateful Dead symbolize a hippie psychedelic ethos, defiantly free-spirited despite changing fashions, Mr.
Reed, a disciple of Andy Warhol and of the poet Delmore Schwartz, has claimed his niche as the music's eternal New York bohemian.
Mr.
Reed may never achieve mainstream popularity.
But as long as he continues to write and perform bitter songs about death and urban blight in his incantatory monotone, he will never be accused of selling out or of going soft.
And on Tuesday evening at Radio City Music Hall, where he opened a two-night engagement, he was treated with the respect that college students might pay to an especially hip professor.


Suspect Is Wounded By Police in Queens
A 25-year-old man was shot by the police and critically wounded early this morning when he exchanged gunfire with three officers on a Queens street corner, the police said.
The officers were responding to reports that a man was brandishing a gun at the corner of 212th Street and Jamaica Avenue in Queens Village just after midnight today.
Soon after they arrived, the suspect, Anthony Robbins, fired at the officers, who then returned fire with five to eight shots, detectives said.


Corrections
An article in Business Day yesterday about a jump in the price of oil misstated the target price of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries.
It is $21 a barrel, not $23.


New Leader at the New Salomon
Salomon Brothers named Deryck C. Maughan chairman and chief executive yesterday, replacing Warren E. Buffett in a move to solidify leadership following the firm's settlement of Government charges over last year's Treasury auction scandal.
Mr.
Maughan, 44 years old, has run the day-to-day business at Salomon Brothers as chief operating officer since the firm's executive board was upended in August after news of the scandal emerged.
In a settlement last week, Salomon agreed to pay $290 million in fines and penalties, but avoided criminal charges.


Retro Look Thrives at the Old Ball Game
To see some of the country's most impressive and delightful advertising, buy a ticket -- not to a museum or a gallery, but to a ball game.
Baseball, architecture and design fans have been crowing over Oriole Park at Camden Yards, home of the Baltimore Orioles, since the $105.4 million stadium opened last month.
Simultaneously modern and traditional, it blends elements of baseball's rich past with contemporary features in a fashion that almost prompts visitors to sing "Everything Old Is New Again" rather than "Take Me Out to the Ball Game."


Abroad at Home; The Pillage President
Among the curiosities of the bizarre 1992 political campaign is the idea that policies do not matter: all we need is "leadership."
Ross Perot is propagating that notion, and he says his supporters agree.
They do not want to be bothered with details.
They just want to send someone to Washington who will knock heads and get things done.


Market Place; A Coffee Trend Is Going Public
IS Wall Street ready to wake up and smell the cappuccino?
The Starbucks Corporation, better known as the Starbucks Coffee Company, thinks so.
Last week, Starbucks announced an initial public offering of 2.1 million shares of common stock, priced at $14 to $16.
The offering, the first by a specialty coffee retailer, is being co-managed by Alex.
Brown &amp; Sons Inc. and Wertheim Schroder &amp; Company.


Economic Scene; An Anti-Plonker Bids a Farewell
STEPHEN POTTER, creator of "Gamesmanship," the art of being one-up on competitors, called economics "the plonking science." And what is plonking?
Mr.
Potter instructed those who would learn to plonk in this way: "If you have nothing to say, or, rather something stupid and obvious, say it, but in a 'plonking' tone of voice -- i.e., roundly, but hollowly and dogmatically."
As an economic journalist, I have sought to rid economics of its plonking tone, and, more important, to demonstrate that behind the tone, economics has nonstupid and nonobvious things to say.


Bush Ordered Iraqis Plied With Aid
A secret policy directive on the Persian Gulf region signed by President Bush in October 1989 said the United States should offer economic and political incentives to President Saddam Hussein of Iraq as a way of moderating his behavior and increasing American influence in his country.
The directive, part of which was made available to The New York Times today, also stated that Iraq should be told that the United States would impose economic and political sanctions and urge its allies to do so if Baghdad resumed its use of chemical weapons, used biological weapons or tried to develop a nuclear weapon in violation of international accords.


Cultural Groups Plead With City For More Funds
In an effort to have the $19.7 million recently cut from New York city's culture budget restored, representatives of the 31 cultural institutions that occupy city-owned buildings presented a slide show to members of the City Council yesterday.
The presentation included a "Recovery Plan" that showed how the money would be used by cultural groups if the city's financial support were restored to the 1991 level.


Black Experience Fuels Suspicion About AIDS
To the Editor:
As president of New York Theological Seminary, which specializes in training church leaders for the metropolitan area's inner cities, I read with interest "The AIDS 'Plot' Against Blacks" (editorial, May 12).
According to the editorial, several surveys have shown that a substantial proportion of the black population (from 10 to 35 percent) believes that AIDS was deliberately created in a laboratory to infect black people.
Your editorial characterizes the 35 percent figure as "astonishing."


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.25-6.5
6.25-6.5
8.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.81
3.78
5.84
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.66
3.69
5.46
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.82
3.81
5.63
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.99
7.08
7.86
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.85
7.89
8.21
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.85
8.84
9.27
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.64
6.64
7.21
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


There's a Bonanza in Nature for Costa Rica, but Its Forests Too Are Besieged
On a recent day, Dr.
Rodrigo Gamez walked through the temperature-controlled aisles of the research institute he directs, pulling out case after case of carefully mounted grasshoppers, beetles, butterflies, bugs by the thousands -- all representing an effort to catalogue the wealth of one of the most biologically diverse lands on earth.
His army of peasant collectors has only begun and he already has two million specimens of Costa Rica's flora and fauna, enough, he says, to make the world's leading museums envious of a project that began two years ago in a converted warehouse.


Weicker's Tax Fight Wins Him a Kennedy Award
Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr. of Connecticut, whose name still evokes anger and dismay among many residents of his home state, was hailed here today by the John F. Kennedy Library Foundation as an exemplar of modern political courage.
Mr.
Weicker got the foundation's $25,000 annual Profiles In Courage award for leading the fight last year to impose a tax on the wages of Connecticut residents, which is also what made him unpopular.


Foreign Affairs; The Ultimate Pro
After a conference where he lectured on foreign policy as the art of right and wrong and practicality, and after dining at three-star restaurants, Philip Habib died in France this week at the age of 72 of perhaps his tenth heart attack.
I worked with him in government and harassed him as a reporter.
He was the most outstanding Foreign Service officer of his generation, and he relished his reputation as the worst Washington source for journalists.
A roly-poly Lebanese Christian from Brooklyn, he rose, improbably, to the highest ranks of the most unwelcoming WASP institution in the United States -- the State Department -- without ever learning to act like a WASP.


Review/Film; Hired Killer Who Loses His Taste For the Job
In "Diary of a Hit Man," Forest Whitaker, an actor best remembered for his portrayal of Charlie Parker in Clint Eastwood's film "Bird," has the impossible role of Dekker, a hired killer who suddenly develops pangs of conscience.
One day he is a cold-blooded murderer, the next a slobbering, tear-stained mess who bawls, "How am I supposed to live?"
Dekker's crisis of conscience comes after a commodities trader (Lewis Smith), a yuppie caricature who is beyond monstrous, hires him to kill his wife, Jain (Sherilyn Fenn), and her baby for $40,000.
The carrying out of the assignment turns into farce as the victim's slatternly sister, Kiki (Sharon Stone), shows up and Jain, a forlorn agoraphobe and failed cheerleader, tries to seduce Dekker in a rah-rah strip act.


Seaweed, Mud, Hunger and Other Luxuries
WE survived the endless orientation tour, with its detailed explanations of exfoliation facials, herbal therapy and aroma wraps.
We had been fully briefed on aerobics classes (aqua, funk, step and hi-lo combo), the stress-reduction workshops, nutrition management seminars and, of course, the special Canyon Ranch diet ("Instead of prices our menus list calories and grams of fat next to every dish").
Vats of gel and raw seaweed were waiting should we wish to marinate in them.
Gleaming rows of Stairmasters, Lifecycles and treadmills beckoned silently.
A team of experts in hypnosis and biofeedback stood ready to serve.
Wild things with mud had been planned.
But first, we had to get past the nurse.


3 Very Different Approaches To Pitching the Candidates
IT looks as if the three likely Presidential candidates will be handling their advertising -- like so much else in their political lives -- in three very different ways.
Now that President Bush's campaign has assigned its advertising to executives from the giant agencies of Madison Avenue rather than the political consultants of Pennsylvania Avenue, attention has turned to the strategies of Gov.
Bill Clinton, the likely Democratic nominee, and Ross Perot, who is inching closer to an announcement of a third-party candidacy.


Corrections
An article on Tuesday about Benno C. Schmidt Jr.'s departure as president of Yale University, to join Christopher Whittle's Edison Project to develop a national network of private schools, referred imprecisely to the choices available to American parents for schools outside their districts.
No state programs include private schools among the choices, but a Milwaukee program lets up to 1,000 low-income families use state funds for private schools.


A Publisher At Hachette Is Leaving
The respected publisher of Woman's Day, Robert Mate, is leaving to join the Meredith Corporation's magazine group as vice president and publishing director.
Mr.
Mate has been with Woman's Day for 16 years.
For the last four years, he has served as vice president and publisher of Woman's Day magazine, Woman's Day special-interest publications and Hachette Publications Inc.'s popular magazines group.


Ross Perot: Where's the Beef?
To watch Ross Perot's 1992 campaign is to recall Richard Nixon's in 1968.
Mr.
Nixon waged his real campaign on television.
So has Mr.
Perot.
Mr.
Nixon's message was disarmingly simple and maddeningly vague: Things are terrible; I'll change them.
Ditto Mr.
Perot.
Mr.
Nixon left conscientious citizens groping for a sense of what he believed and what manner of President he would be.
So has Mr.
Perot.
Mr.
Perot has actually gone the former President one better.
Mr.
Nixon maintained the pretense of a conventional campaign.
He traveled the country, addressed rallies, issued position papers -- all designed to keep the press busy and convey the impression that his campaign was more than a contrived sequence of paid television programs with hand-picked questioners and audiences.


Black Experience Fuels Suspicion About AIDS; Media Must Educate
To the Editor:
"The AIDS 'Plot' Against Blacks" (editorial, May 12) seems to dismiss the idea that human immunodeficiency virus was engineered out of hand.
I believe that this is a mistake, as there are solid grounds on which to base this belief.
When I first heard the theory that H.I.V. had been engineered by the U.S.
Government, I thought it ludicrous.
Later, I learned about the Tuskegee study, in which syphilitic black men were studied by the Government over their lifetimes to gain information about the effects of syphilis.
These men were never treated for the disease, even after penicillin became available, nor were they even told that their conditions were treatable.
Although I regard the idea that H.I.V. was engineered as implausible and unlikely, I no longer consider it to be ludicrous and impossible.
I read about the Tuskegee study in a book.
Blacks deal with this kind of callous indifference and outright hostility on a regular basis.
It does not surprise me that many of them honestly believe that H.I.V. is a man-made virus created for the purpose of genocide.


Anthony Accardo, Long a Figure In Mob World, Dies in Bed at 86
Anthony Joseph Accardo, a former reputed head of the Chicago crime syndicate whom law-enforcement officials considered responsible for scores of murders during a 60-year career in crime, died peaceably Wednesday at a Chicago hospital.
He was 86 years old.
Mr.
Accardo died of congestive heart failure and acute respiratory failure, said a spokeswoman for St.
Mary of Mazareth Hospital Center.


Spain Hit by a General Strike
Spanish unions held a nationwide half-day general strike today to protest sharp cuts in unemployment benefits that the Socialist Government decreed last month as part of its effort to join the European Community in monetary union by 1997.
Unions called the four-hour strike a success, with 100 percent of industrial workers and 70 to 80 percent of service workers taking part.
A Government-sponsored survey said fewer than 35 percent of workers nationwide had taken part.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Democrats; A Stung Clinton Attacks Bush and Pokes at Perot
Governor Bill Clinton of Arkansas, whose efforts to stage a triumphant final march to the Democratic nomination have been all but drowned out by the attention given to Ross Perot, struck back today with a veiled attack at Mr.
Perot and a direct assault on President Bush.
Mr.
Clinton, who had planned to travel the country raising money and campaigning in New Jersey and Ohio during the next several days, scrapped that agenda late Wednesday.
By this morning the Governor and his strategists, stung by polls showing the campaign continuing to lose ground to Mr.
Perot, had decided to use an appearance here in Silicon Valley as a first step toward regaining the spotlight.


Review/Theater; Was Hauptmann Guilty in the Lindbergh Case?
The execution of Bruno Richard Hauptmann for the kidnapping and murder of the Lindbergh baby began a controversial chain of events that has continued for six decades.
Since the trial there have been many books and documentaries dealing with the accused man's guilt or innocence.
Hauptmann's widow, at the age of 93, is still pleading her husband's cause.
The playwright John Logan enters this legal maelstrom with his equanimity intact.
His play, "Hauptmann," which opened last night at the Cherry Lane Theater, is fair-minded, marshaling facts as Mr.
Logan has found them.
He does not hazard guesses Oliver Stone-style, but encourages theatergoers to make up their own minds.
Whether or not Hauptmann was guilty of the so-called crime of the century, one verdict is clear from the play: his trial was a disservice to the judicial system.


Market Place; Rich and Reluctant Stock Funds
Individual investors are putting more money into stock mutual funds than ever before, but the money managers who run the funds seem to be reluctant to put all the cash to work.
The Investment Company Institute, a trade group, said investors put a net $7.52 billion into stock funds in April, just topping the previous record of $7.47 billion, which was set in February.
And some fund groups said May was proving to be even better, with strong cash flows into both stock and bond funds.


Lipton Food Lines Moved to Lintas
In its second recent consolidation of large accounts, the Thomas J. Lipton Company in Englewood Cliffs, N.J., has moved advertising for several food product lines to Lintas New York from Ogilvy &amp; Mather New York .
The products, which include Wish-Bone salad dressings and Lipton Side Dishes, had been at Ogilvy only since early May of last year, when they arrived from Young &amp; Rubicam New York.


The State of the States of the Union
What a decade.
Those with jobs took 42 seconds longer to get to work in 1990 than they did in 1980.
Workers were less likely to car pool or use public transportation.
Americans were more likely to have graduated from high school, but their children were also more likely to be growing up in poverty.
The Census Bureau asked a lot of questions in 1990, and yesterday it released many of the answers.
The announcement included a comprehensive state-by-state look at a host of statistics -- on income, housing, migration into the country and among the states, and fluency in English.


Not Easy to Say 'I've Got It' If You've Never Been Given It
You are 16, 17, maybe 18 years old.
You are given the job of your dreams but told that in order to fill it, you must move to a foreign land where hardly anyone will speak your language or understand your valiant attempt to converse in theirs.
Laws and traditions are not readily provided.
Nor are full-time interpreters.
If you are lucky, perhaps one or two of your peers might have time to help you sift through your obvious struggles.
To keep you going as far as your new employers need you to go, you are taught a few essential phrases, such as how to say the equivalent words for "cheeseburger" or "taxi" or "hotel."


Executive Changes
ARMOUR PHARMACEUTICAL CO., Collegeville, Pa., the plasma fractions unit of Rhone-Poulenc Rorer, appointed Zsolt Lavotha vice president and general manager of non-U.S. markets and Lyn Wiesinger vice president of worldwide marketing.
AVON PRODUCTS INC., New York, named John I. Novosad corporate officer and group vice president for the Pacific region.


Polish Assembly Votes to Release Files on Communist Collaborators
The Polish Parliament voted overwhelmingly today to release the secret police files of collaborators with the Communist Government from 1945 to 1990.
The move reverses the policy set by Eastern Europe's first post-Communist Prime Minister, Tadeusz Mazowiecki.
On taking office in 1989, he declared that his Solidarity Government would draw a "thick line" between the present and the past.


Art in Review
Adam Fuss  Robert Miller Gallery 41 East 57th Street Manhattan Through June 13
Walking into this small show of Adam Fuss's new photograms (a kind of print made without a lens) is a bit like entering a Baroque chapel, with dark putti zooming around in golden clouds of light.
In the past, Mr.
Fuss has made color photograms by placing sheets of photographic paper into trays of water and flashing them with colored light, recording the concentric ripples caused by dripping liquid, or the waves made by swimming snakes.
Here he puts babies in the trays, capturing their silhouettes as they lie, crawl or sit in the shallow water.
The results recall similar silhouettes, both photographic and painted, made in recent decades by a range of artists including Robert Rauschenberg, Bruce Conner and Yves Klein.
But Mr.
Fuss's examples, all but one of which are in glowing tones of yellow, brown and orange, combine a sentimental charm with an almost laughable sense of the grandiose.
Transposed to the wall, the babies appear to be flying or floating, curled in on themselves or with arms and legs outstretched.


METRO DIGEST
METRO DIGEST  NEWSPAPER DRIVERS PASS CONTRACTS
Newspaper delivery drivers approved a series of far-reaching labor contracts that ended a bitter two-week stalemate with The New York Times and a newspaper distributor and carried the prospect of labor peace in the industry to at least the year 2000.
A1.
PAINTING BY THE CENSUS NUMBERS
In the nation's self-portrait by numbers, New Jersey, Connecticut and New York can be found largely where they are on any map: at the edge.
By many economic measurements in the 1990 census, all three states rank near one end of the spectrum or the other compared with the remaining 47 and the District of Columbia.
A15.
NEW YORK CITY  A VOTE TO GIVE POLICE MORE POWERFUL GUNS
After a debate that included the spectacle of two New York City lawmakers waving semiautomatic weapons, the State Senate overwhelmingly approved a bill that would require the city to arm its 26,000 police officers with the more powerful guns they say they need to counter the deadly weapons used by criminals.
The Assembly now gets the measure, which is opposed by Mayor David N. Dinkins and Police Commissioner Lee P. Brown.
A1.
IT TOOK 17 MINUTES TO GET HELP
An 81-year-old Bronx resident who lived half a block from a fire station died of a heart attack earlier this month after an Emergency Medical Services ambulance took more than 17 minutes to answer his son's call for help.
B4.
A CRASH COURSE IN SCHOOL FINANCE
Some of New York City's best and brightest at the Bronx High School of Science tackled a pair of problems not found in any textbook: how to fight both student apathy and the proposed cuts in public education.
Classes were replaced with a daylong teach-in where education policy experts gave a crash course in school finance.
B3.
New Board of Education AIDS policy is criticized.
B3.
School janitors charged in gun sales.
B3.
REGION  HEALTH NOMINEE ACCEPTS PAY CUT
Nine months after he was nominated as commissioner of the New York State Health Department, Dr.
Mark R. Chassin has agreed to accept $70,000 less in salary than he was first offered.
State lawmakers, who had never challenged Dr.
Chassin's qualifications, just his proposed pay, said they were prepared to move forward with his confirmation.
B5.
THE NEW JERSEY OAKLANDS?
The wildfires that stormed through 15,000 acres of the New Jersey pine barrens earlier this month rekindled a debate over development and wilderness in the million-acre preserve.
Without fire, everyone agrees, the Pinelands will eventually become the New Jersey Oaklands.
B4.
AN AWARD FOR RAISING TAXES
Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr. was honored by the John F. Kennedy Library Foundation as an exemplar of modern political courage in America for imposing a tax on the wages of Connecticut residents.
The Governor accepted the prize with characteristically blunt words, saying that anyone who took action "in the midst of the whiniest moment in our history" deserves praise.
B5.
A vote in New Jersey to repeal gun ban.
B5.
Our Towns by Andrew H. Malcolm B5  Chronicle B4


Georgia Governor Acts to End Confederate Symbol
In a significant break with his predecessors and several other Southern governors, Gov.
Zell Miller of Georgia said today that he would introduce legislation to eliminate the Confederate battle symbol from the official state flag.
The flag has flown as a defiant symbol of the segregationist South since 1956, when the Georgia Legislature voted to adopt it to protest the tide of civil rights changes that were starting to engulf the nation and decisions by the United States Supreme Court ordering the integration of public schools.


Sounds Around Town
Songs of Syria
Sabah Fakhri Ensemble, Town Hall, 123 West 43d Street, Manhattan, (212) 840-2824.
One of the Near East's most celebrated artists, Sabah Fakhri, who was born in Syria, has been acclaimed for his powerful interpretations of songs, which have thrived in major Arab cities, particularly Aleppo, Syria.
His name has been synonymous with the classical Moorish-derived song known as muwashshah, as well as with other traditional genres.
Accompanying him is to be a 12-member ensemble of some of the most accomplished Arab vocalists and instrumentalists.
Show time is 8 tonight.
Tickets are $20 to $30.
Daugherty and Field
"Daugherty and Field Happen to Like New York," Club 53, the New York Hilton, Avenue of the Americas at 53d Street, Manhattan (212) 261-5853.
Daugherty and Field, talented musical-comedy cutups, are the second act, after Barbara Cook, to perform in the swank new cabaret at the New York Hilton.
All the songs in the new show celebrate New York City.
They include "The Sidewalks of New York" "Lullaby of Broadway" and "Take the 'A' Train," along with rarities by Irving Berlin and others.
The centerpiece is a breathlessly paced seven-minute compression of the entire score from "Guys and Dolls." Show times are at 8:45 and 10:45 P.M.  today and tomorrow, and tickets are $25 and $15, plus a two-drink minimum.
The show continues through June 6.


Brown to Work With Oregon Prisoners
JIM BROWN, the former National Football League star, will bring his Los Angeles-based anti-gang program to Oregon prisons this summer to try to divert gang members away from a life of crime and violence.
The Amer-I-Can Program Inc. will target about 300 gang members in the Oregon State Correctional Institution and Oregon State Penitentiary, both in Salem, and the Eastern Oregon Correctional Institution in Pendleton.


House Post Office Inquiry Examines Cash Outlays
Federal prosecutors investigating possible criminal wrongdoing at the House post office are looking into a postal employee's accusations that three House Democrats charged their expense accounts there to obtain cash, people close to the investigation said today.
The best known of the three lawmakers, whose financial records were subpoenaed this month, is Dan Rostenkowski of Illinois, the chairman of the House Ways and Means Committee.


Restaurants
The Post House has always been a place where sizable people with capacious appetites consume hefty drinks and formidable portions of food, all in a smart, masculine setting.
It still is, although changes since the restaurant was last reviewed in 1988 have left it a bit less refined on the cooking front.
This year the restaurant was sold by Alan Stillman to the landlord, the Lowell Hotel, on East 63d Street in Manhattan.
The changes should have been minimal, however, for Mr.
Stillman, who also owns four other restaurants in Manhattan, retains a management contract to run the operation.
Another major change was the departure of the chef, Andrew Papas, who was replaced by his sous chef, Robert Mignola, last fall.


Vallone Speaks at St. Francis
Peter F. Vallone, speaker of the New York City Council, addressed the 108th commencement of St.
Francis College yesterday at the Brooklyn Academy of Music.
Mr.
Vallone urged the 238 graduating seniors to "develop and nurture a continued sense that you are part of the great community of democracy that only you can preserve."


Pop/Jazz; Folk Tunes That Address Real Folks
"I really feel that working people are at a disadvantage when it comes to surviving in this world," the folk singer and songwriter Hazel Dickens declared recently.
"The big corporations have just taken over, and there's not much room now for the little person. The last two Administrations have really been tough on the working class."
Ms.
Dickens, who was speaking by telephone from her home in Washington, has been writing and singing songs about the lives of working people for more than 40 years.
Tonight she is appearing at Weill Recital Hall in the second concert of the second annual Carnegie Hall Folk Festival, which continues through June 12.
Joining her in an evening titled "Workin' in a Coal Mine" will be the Rabbit Ridge Pea Pickers and Nomonde Ngubo, all of them, like Ms.
Dickens, with bitter experience of the hardships of the coal-mining life.


Players' Union vs. Players: 7 Passers Sued
The National Football League Players Association yesterday filed a lawsuit against seven quarterbacks and three agents in a licensing dispute.
The suit, filed in Superior Court for the District of Columbia, accuses the players and agents of breaching allegedly exclusive licensing authorizations with the players association.
Named in the suit were PHIL SIMMS of the Giants, BOOMER ESIASON of Cincinnati, BUBBY BRISTER of Pittsburgh, JOHN ELWAY of Denver, JIM EVERETT of the Rams, DAN MARINO of Miami and WARREN MOON of Houston.


Spelling Champ


Art in Review
Mark Tansey  Curt Marcus Gallery 578 Broadway (near Prince Street) SoHo Through tomorrow
The fictional scenarios in Mark Tansey's paintings, usually based on historical and philosophical artistic "in" jokes, can be affecting, although they often settle for the urbane cleverness of good cartoons.
Most of these recent paintings operate at that level.
"Authentication," for example, depicts an Andy Warhol painting being appraised with the help of measuring tape, magnifying glass and audiovisual recording, and alludes amusingly to the ironies engendered by Warhol's making an assembly-line esthetic glamorous.
An image of Picasso and Braque as the Wright Brothers turning a Cubist collage into a vehicle for flight shows Picasso airborne while Braque remains nervously on the ground -- a neat embodiment of a familiar view of the relationship between these two artists.
Mr.
Tansey's recent device of embedding obscured passages of newsprint into his images to address the image-as-text issues of recent art theory works less well only because the narratives are hazy and the images -- surprising for this artist -- visually dull.


American: Disciplinarian of the Skies
When Robert L. Crandall, the determined chairman of American Airlines, jolted the struggling industry with a new fare structure seven weeks ago, he sought to discipline the industry and the business traveler by curbing the use of discount fares and other loopholes.
Nevertheless, part of his fare structure was undermined within weeks by carriers desperate for traffic.
But Mr.
Crandall does not back off easily.
This week in response to a two-for-one fare plan by Northwest Airlines, he fought back, jolting the industry again by cutting the lowest fares in half in a gamble to raise traffic and to send another warning of his determination.
American also cut back the advance purchase requirement to 7 days from 14.
The rest of the industry quickly followed American's initiatives.


Review/Art; Far Better to Display Than Merely to Receive
There is probably no simple way for the Whitney Museum of American Art to introduce the eclectic group of more than 200 objects that entered its collection in the last year, short of lining the pieces up side by side and letting them fight for attention.
As it turns out, the three-part exhibition "Gifts and Acquisitions in Context," which places the new arrivals among related works already owned by the museum, is a nice solution.
Even if the first installment, on view through July 5, generates no major surprises, it effectively suggests the depth of the museum's holdings and offers some fine individual works.
A few artists are given star treatment.
Nine pieces by Jasper Johns amount to a kind of micro-retrospective, with the focus on the newly acquired "Studio II." It's one of those maddening Johns paintings from the mid-1960's that seem to do everything possible to thwart viewer interest.
The colors are wan grays and pinks with jabs of hard orange, and there is no composition to speak of, except a few highly brushed white rectangles set across a horizontal expanse.
The Whitney's "Studio" (1964) and "Racing Thoughts" (1983) are hung beside and across from it as indicators of where "Studio II" is coming from and where it is going, although it is the well-known "Three Flags" hung nearby that stresses just how concentrated an artist Mr.
Johns can be.


Critic's Choice/Film; A '53 Classic By Allegret
Yves Allegret belonged to the paternal generation of film makers the French New Wave rebelled against.
Gerard Philipe was known as the French James Dean.
And Jean-Paul Sartre needs no introduction, except as the unlikely author of the story on which Allegret's 1953 film "The Proud Ones" was based.
Sartre's story "L'Amour Redempteur" ("Love the Redeemer") was resituated from China to Mexico, where the film was shot.
Philipe was cast as a drunken, defrocked Parisian doctor.
And the result was a bizarre combination of melodrama, existential redemption and star presence.


Editorial Notebook; The Good Cops in Los Angeles
By now, most of America agrees: The amateur video of Los Angeles police beating Rodney King reflected dangerous strains in the Los Angeles Police Department.
Prolonged understaffing and leadership that emphasized aggressive tactics made gratuitous brutality nearly inevitable.
Yet a visit to one corner of this sprawling city tells another story.
At least some Los Angeles police officers practice a far more enlightened approach that emphasizes community involvement and mutual respect.
In fact, as the new chief takes over, there is plenty of reason to hope that kind of community policing gets the support it deserves.


Kelly Is Feeling Secure In Yanks' Infield Plans
Pat Kelly does not miss the speculation about his Yankee future and he does not miss the suspense that blossomed as Andy Stankiewicz moved closer to being activated from the disabled list.
For now, Kelly is secure.
Kelly found out on Tuesday he would not be sent down to Class AAA to open a roster position for Stankiewicz, and it was the first time in almost two weeks he felt safe.
Manager Buck Showalter plans to use a flexible infield that will mainly rotate Kelly, Stankiewicz and Mike Gallego at shortstop and second base.


Police Charge 2 Janitors With Gun Sales in School
Two school janitors were charged yesterday with running a gun-selling operation for at least a year out of two Brooklyn public schools, one across the street from a police station house, the police said.
The janitors and two other people operated the ring mostly at night from Prospect Heights High School in Prospect Heights and Intermediate School 61 in Crown Heights but were not believed to have sold any guns to students, the police said.
Instead, the four used the schools as a base, with the sales, mainly to drug dealers, occurring elsewhere, said Lieut.
Kenneth McCann, the commanding officer of the Police Department's joint task force with the Federal Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms.


We're Good Republicans -- and Pro-Choice
An open letter to the Republican National Committee:
Last year, during the 18th week of Beverly's pregnancy, we discovered through testing that our baby suffered from grave defects that would have prevented him from becoming a healthy human being.
Anencephaly was just one problem.
Ultrasound and, later, an autopsy revealed several more.


Vote on Fetal Tissue Is a Victory for Bush
The House voted to lift a ban on Federal funds for medical research using fetal tissue, but the margin was not enough to override President Bush's promised veto.


On Stage, and Off
Crystal ball, anyone?
That's what's needed to figure out who will win the Tony race.
In a season crammed with the gifted, it's anyone's guess who the winners will be in many of the categories.
When their names are announced during the broadcast on CBS, Sunday night at 9 P.M., most of the winners will be just as surprised as the rest of us.
What follows is the consensus of 21 theater professionals, all of whom spoke on condition of anonymity:


Brown Tops Matching Funds List
Former Gov.
Edmund G. Brown Jr. has trailed in the battle for Democratic Presidential primary votes but finished first this month in the race for Federal matching money for his campaign.
The Federal Election Commission approved today another $5.52 million in taxpayer-backed assistance for the Presidential candidates, with the largest amount, $1.67 million, going to Mr.
Brown.


Penguins Turn Back the Tough Guys, Too
Man for man, the Chicago Blackhawks aren't as skilled as the Pittsburgh Penguins, even though they have a few sharpshooters.
The most accurate are Jeremy Roenick and Steve Larmer, who have combined for 212 points in the regular season and playoffs.
When the Blackhawks tried to even the Stanley Cup finals tonight against the defending champion Penguins at Civic Arena, Roenick and Larmer were sitting on the bench for long stretches of the game.
Chicago Coach Mike Keenan decided to play his intimidation specialists, Mike Peluso and Stu Grimson, who have accounted for 16 points and 658 penalty minutes.
Approaching Playoff Record
Keenan's strategy didn't work, although any other approach might have failed as well.
In a game filled with close checking, the Penguins won, 3-1, behind two goals from Mario Lemieux.


At the Movies
Of course he's happy about winning this year's Academy Award for best foreign film, but Gabriele Salvatores, the director of "Mediterraneo," isn't stopping to savor the accolade.
He is back in Italy, editing "Puerto Escondido" after filming it in Mexico for much of the winter and early spring.


No Headline


Judge Puts Reynolds on the Track
In his continuing quest to have his eligibility restored, BUTCH REYNOLDS won a minor victory when a United States District Court in his hometown, Columbus, Ohio, ruled that he can attempt to get a qualifying time for the Olympic trials next month in New Orleans.
In granting a temporary restraining order against the International Amateur Athletic Federation, which has suspended Reynolds for two years through Aug. 11 for failing a drug test, Judge JOSEPH KINNEARY cleared Reynolds to run Saturday in the 400-meter event at the Bruce Jenner Classic in San Jose, Calif., or in any other meet before June 8 to reach the minimum qualifying standard of 45.80 seconds.


Electro-Entrepreneurs Compete for Consumers
Jackie Tompkins says she knows how to invigorate the consumer electronics industry.
Her secret weapon, in development for two years, is Collecto-Vid, a bookshelf of numbered, colored boxes designed to clean up videotape clutter.
An index book, with a sleeve to hold a TV Guide, "makes instant access easy as punch," she said.
"We're going to energize tape sales."


Cardinals Reward Torre and Maxvill
The St.
Louis Cardinals, in first place in the National League East, extended the contracts of Manager JOE TORRE and General Manager DAL MAXVILL through the 1994 season, the club announced yesterday.
Terms of the extensions were not disclosed. (AP)


U.S. SEEKS U.N. BAN ON YUGOSLAV TRADE OVER BOSNIA STRIFE
The United States pressed the United Nations Security Council today to impose an immediate and virtually total economic embargo, including a ban on all oil sales, on the rump Yugoslav Government in Belgrade to force it to end Serbian intervention in neighboring Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Britain, France and Belgium, the Council's three European Community members, accepted the American position in consultations at the Security Council today after favoring a weaker plan for imposing sanctions in stages.
But Russia and China, two permanent Council members with veto power, which are also Serbia's principal oil suppliers, have appeared reluctant about sanctions.
It was not certain that they would accept the embargo plan being pushed by Washington.
Medicine and Food Are Exempt
The sanctions the United States now wants are as comprehensive as those imposed on Iraq before the Persian Gulf war.
They include a ban on trade, with the exception of medicine and approved supplies of food.
An embargo on arms deliveries is already in effect.


TV Weekend; A Very Polite Chat With the Clinton
About halfway into "Governor and Mrs. Clinton Talking With David Frost," Bill Clinton manages to lay out his views on a balanced budget, taxes and entitlement programs.
For a few minutes, he speaks in a focused way on ever-increasing medical costs, with the money going "to insurance companies, to health-care bureaucracies, to the government bureaucracy itself." He maintains that the well-to-do are getting far more in entitlements than they paid for and should be asked to pay more for Medicare and for long-term care.
He has plainly thought about the subject, has an approach and seems eager to go into more detail.
But his host's mind is on other matters, and Mr.
Clinton smiles his pleasant smile and plays the good guest.


Member of Gerber Board Is Named to President's Post
The board of the Gerber Products Company promoted James T. Smith yesterday to the position of president.
Mr.
Smith, already a board member, had been president of Gerber's largest unit, its Gerber Products division, a job he will continue to head.
Gerber's chairman and chief executive, Al Piergallini, had been serving as president.
Mr.
Smith joined Gerber, the Fremont, Mich.-based maker of baby food and nursery supplies, in January, 1991, as executive vice president after a 20-year career with the Procter &amp; Gamble Company.


Reorganization Planned at Doremus
Doremus &amp; Company in New York said yesterday that it would reorganize into two units, one focusing on its traditional financial accounts, the other on general advertising.
Carl J. Anderson, corporate executive vice president and chief financial officer, was appointed president of the financial unit, which continues as Doremus.
Parry Merkley, executive vice president and creative director, was appointed president of the unnamed general advertising unit.


H.I.V. Tests Stay Voluntary
The National Football League has no information that any of its players have H.I.V., and because players face a greater risk of infection off the field, the league is not advocating mandatory testing of players for the virus that causes AIDS, Dr.
Lawrence Brown, the league's adviser on substance abuse said today.
"The data would seem to suggest that the risk for H.I.V. acquisition in the N.F.L. is more due to the behaviors off the field," said Brown.
"As a consequence, the decision to test is a private one between the player and his medical provider. We do ask the clubs to provide for their players the information and counseling on how and where they can get H.I.V. testing."


Profits Decline At Hitachi Ltd.
Hitachi Ltd., Japan's largest electronics company, said today that its earnings plummeted 33 percent in its 1991-92 fiscal year because of price wars in chips and computers.
It reported pretax profits of 374.9 billion yen, or about $2.9 billion, in the year that ended in March, while sales were flat at 7.77 trillion yen, or $60.2 billion.


Newspaper Drivers Ratify Pacts With The Times and a Distributor
Newspaper delivery drivers approved far-reaching labor contracts last night that ended a bitter three-week labor dispute with The New York Times and a newspaper distributor and carried the prospect of labor peace in the industry to at least the year 2000.
The new contracts promise to change the way the industry operates, giving management sweeping new powers to decide how papers will be delivered, in what size trucks, by how many drivers and along what routes.
And the contracts set the stage for similar reordering, as well as other long-range agreements, with other unions.
A Bad Bargain to Many
In the case of The Times, the ratification appears to clear the way for the long-delayed opening of its $450 million color printing plant in Edison, N.J.
Last night's vote resulted from the dissolution of existing contracts when distribution companies changed hands.
After rejecting an earlier version of substitute contracts, union drivers at two distributors were replaced, setting off scattered violence and delivery disruptions.


Advertisers Plan Telethon Segments
A national telethon this weekend will replace a portion of its traditional song-and-dance entertainment with sponsored program segments on subjects like child-rearing and sports.
Seven of the 21 hours of the Children's Miracle Network telethon, which will be carried by an ad hoc group of stations nationwide, will present programming like "The National Parenting Poll," sponsored in part by Eckerd Drugs, and "Marriott Sports Dream," sponsored by the Marriott Corporation.


Call It Daly's Passion: A New Nets Era Begins
Before he was officially presented as the new head coach of the New Jersey Nets today, Chuck Daly telephoned Derrick Coleman to make a connection with the team's brilliant but moody forward.
Coleman wasn't home, but rest assured Daly isn't about to lose his number.
"If you're going to be a coach, it's going to be a selling job, night in, night out," Daly said after being introduced as the successor to Bill Fitch less than one month after resigning as head coach of the Detroit Pistons, a position he held for nine seasons.
"It's selling, selling, selling."


Ford in Shift On Rental Cars
In a move aimed at improving profitability, the Ford Motor Company said today that it would no longer offer rental car companies big cash discounts when they buy Ford cars.
A spokeswoman for Ford said the auto maker notified rental car customers of the change several weeks ago.
The policy pertains to all 1993 cars, beginning with the Ford Escort and Mercury Tracer, which are already rolling out of the factory.
The move prompted rental car companies like the Hertz Corporation to raise its rental rates.
Hertz, which is 49 percent owned by Ford, said it would raise daily rental rates $4 to $5 a vehicle, or about 12 percent, in 17 locations Unlike last year, when the Big Three United States car makers used fleet sales to keep factories running, Detroit's auto makers have been trying this year to reduce the number of low-profit fleet sales and increase the retail side of its business.


Corrections
A sports article yesterday about Joan Benoit Samuelson's efforts to qualify for the United States Olympic trials misstated the number of times she has competed in an Olympics.
It was once, not twice; she won the women's marathon in 1984.


Critics Decry New AIDS Education Rules as Censorship
The day after the Board of Education approved rules ordering that all AIDS education in the public schools stress abstinence, AIDS educators, civil liberties groups and elected officials denounced the new policy as a step toward censorship.
Critics of the policy, including Mayor David N. Dinkins and the borough presidents of the Bronx and Manhattan, said it would prevent students from obtaining information about safe sex, delay new AIDS curriculum from reaching classrooms, and discourage community organizations from assisting the schools in AIDS education.


Fire in the Pine Barrens: Keeping the Oak at Bay
The wildfires that stormed through 15,000 acres of the New Jersey pine barrens earlier this month rekindled a policy argument between conservationists and state foresters over the role fire plays in creating and maintaining the piney wilderness character of the million-acre preserve.
As the first shoots of fresh pine saplings and fiddle-head ferns poke out of the charred undergrowth, there are echoes of the "let it burn" debate that swept the United States Forest Service when wildfires burned a million acres of Yellowstone National Park in 1988.


Review/Film; Cousin Bobby; A Bonding of Cousins, Avid Idealists Both
THE fact that Jonathan Demme had not seen his cousin the Rev.
Robert Castle in 30-odd years is not sufficient to explain "Cousin Bobby," Mr.
Demme's documentary account of his cousin's life.
Plenty of people have long-lost relatives, and not all of those relatives' stories belong on film.
But something special was at work here: a true meeting of the minds, which the film captures effortlessly, and a remarkable family trait both cousins share.
Both Mr.
Demme, the Academy Award-winning director, and Father Castle, the priest in charge at St.
Mary's Episcopal Church in Harlem, are avid enthusiasts, and both are fueled by an idealism that elevates "Cousin Bobby" well beyond the home-movie realm.
It seems fitting that Mr.
Demme, in one scene, wears a shirt displaying a map of the world.
As the major director with Hollywood's most exotic resume, Mr.
Demme has explored an enormous range of interests, making a collection of films bound together by the film maker's sheer fascination with his subjects rather than by any unifying themes.


Bring Remaining Nazi War Criminals to Justice
To the Editor:
" 'Last' Nazi Criminal Gets Life Sentence" (news article, May 19) and others reporting on the sentencing of the Nazi officer Josef Schwammberger indicate that this verdict might be the last one against an important Nazi officer.
In fact, there are still unprosecuted Nazi war criminals, and the implication that Mr.
Schwammberger's sentence might be the last one gives tacit approval to not bringing the remaining criminals to justice.


Empire in Trouble; Focus Is Shifting To Debt Talks On U.S. Assets
The bankruptcy filing Wednesday night of Canary Wharf, Olympia &amp; York's $3.5 billion office project in London, was the greatest blow that members of the Reichmann family of Toronto, owners of Olympia, have suffered so far in their real estate and energy empire.
Now the biggest unanswered question is whether they can remain in control of their company's United States subsidiary, and keep it out of the bankruptcy courts.
The likelihood that the Reichmanns will be able to get nearly 100 bank lenders to go along with Olympia's overall debt restructuring is now much less certain, a change that even the company's executives acknowledged yesterday in London.
Olympia has total debts in excess of $19 billion.


Money Fund Assets Fall
The assets of the nation's 595 money market mutual funds decreased by $10.75 billion, to $492.23 billion, for the week that ended on Wednesday, the Investment Company Institute said yesterday.
Those of the 218 institutional funds decreased by $9.90 billion, to $176.39 billion.
The assets of the 286 general-purpose funds were up by $19.2 million, to $175.09 billion.
The 91 broker-dealer funds decreased by $872.5 million, to $140.76 billion, the institute said.


Famous Ape, Tourist Lure, Is Shot Dead
A 400-pound male gorilla, the leader of a family of rare mountain apes that Western tourists spend thousands of dollars to view close up, has been found shot to death, apparently a victim of the civil war in this country.
Made popular by the biologist Dian Fossey, the mountain gorillas of Central Africa are the most endangered of great apes and have been brought back from the edge of extinction in the last decade, many conservationists believe, by the revenues from tourists.


Car Insurer Sets Rebates
The Mercury General Corporation said today that it had agreed to pay rebates totaling $45.8 million to 266,000 automobile insurance policyholders in California under the terms of a much-contested initiative passed by the state's voters in 1988.
Mercury is the second large insurer in the state to drop its opposition to the rate-cutting initiative, Proposition 103, and the first publicly traded company to do so.
Last year the Automobile Club of Southern California rebated $104 million to half a million customers.


Criticism Grows Over Aliens Seized During Riots
Lucia Artal Ramos is a trophy of the Los Angeles riots, one of hundreds of illegal immigrants who were swept off the streets as the Immigration and Naturalization Service took advantage of the city's recent chaos.
By her own account, police officers stopped her on the evening of May 4, told her she was going to get "a free ride back to your country," and handed her over to immigration agents who held her without charges for 18 days before a lawyer obtained her release.


Schedule for French Turns to Mud
It's raining, it's pouring, the French Open has turned boring -- because its afternoon matches never seem to be resolved.
Ivan Lendl, lured into a fifth set today by Jaime Oncins of Brazil, fussed and fumed about the raindrops that kept falling on his head and got the contest stopped with darkness setting in and things uncomfortably knotted at 5-5.
Stefan Edberg, likewise receiving trouble from a South American source, dropped the first set to Gabriel Markus of Argentina, needed a tie breaker to claim the second and barely scrambled from a 4-2 deficit to a 5-5 deadlock in the third when his match was halted, too.


Evidence of Bone Shows Vertebrates To Be Far Older Than Once Believed
The first vertebrates, the ancestral line of animals that led to the human race, appeared on earth at least 40 million years earlier than previously believed, according to British scientists studying fossils of enigmatic, worm-like creatures called conodonts.
Their conclusion is based on new evidence that the gripping teeth of ancient conodonts were made of bone cells of the type that occur only in animals with backbones.
The development of bone in primitive, soft-bodied animals was one of the great landmarks of evolution, opening the way for higher animals, starting with bony fishes and leading to the human race.


CHRONICLE
It was the quintessential nuns' night out at the movies on Wednesday: 300 sisters went to the Cinema 2 theater on the East Side for a screening of "Sister Act," leaving 60 more on a waiting list.
The film, which opens today, is a comedy about a nightclub singer played by WHOOPI GOLDBERG who witnesses a killing and is hidden by the police in a convent, where she shakes things up in more ways than one.


Sounds Around Town
Percussion
World of Percussion, Symphony Space, 2537 Broadway, at 95th Street, Manhattan, (212) 864-5400.
How many ways are there to split a beat?
An international gathering of percussionists and other musicians will suggest some possibilities at a concert that includes the Afro-Cuban drumming of Orlando (Puntilla) Rios y Nueva Generacion, the Indian violin of L. Shankar, the south Indian mrdangam drumming of Trichy Sankaram, the African-American percussion and singing of Ladygourd Sangoma and the Australian didgeridoo, a tugboat-toned horn made of a hollowed-out log, of Adam Plack.
Tomorrow at 8 P.M.; tickets are $15.
Australian Rock
Yothu Yindi, Tramps, 45 West 21st Street, Manhattan, (212) 727-7788.
Here's rock from the other side of the world.
Yothu Yindi includes aboriginal musicians from Australia, and they mix traditional music, using the deep drone of the didjeridoo, with rock in the unvarnished, politically conscious style of Midnight Oil.
Tomorrow at 9 P.M.; tickets are $10 in advance, $12 tomorrow at the door.


Empire in Trouble; 3 Specialists In Insolvency Take Charge
The partners from Ernst &amp; Young appointed by Britain's bankruptcy court to oversee Olympia &amp; York's Canary Wharf holdings have handled some of the nation's biggest bankruptcies.
Two of the three partners -- Stephen Adamson, 49 years old, and Nigel Hamilton, 51 -- together managed the 1990 administration of British and Commonwealth Holdings, a financial services concern whose collapse at the time was Britain's largest corporate failure.
More than $:1.3 billion in debts were involved.
The administrators were credited with preventing a run on the corporation's investment bank.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Undeclared Candidate; Perot in Wide-Ranging TV Interview
In a television interview, Ross Perot, the likely Presidential candidate, said that he opposed raising taxes to trim the Federal budget deficit, that it would not be "realistic" for homosexuals to be in the armed forces and that he would not appoint homosexuals to top Cabinet-level jobs.
"No, I don't want anybody there that will be a point of controversy with the American people," the Dallas billionaire said during a segment of the ABC-News program, "20/20," which is scheduled to be broadcast Friday night.
"It will distract from the work to be done. See, as far as I'm concerned, what people do in their private lives is their business."


Review/Jazz; Church In the Spirit Of Song
Wynton Marsalis introduced the world premiere of "In This House/On This Morning" by telling Wednesday night's audience in Avery Fisher Hall, "We want to take you all to church, and we want you to have a good time." For the finale of Jazz at Lincoln Center's first season, the program had commissioned an evening-length composition from Mr.
Marsalis, its artistic director.
And he went back to a wellspring of 20th-century culture, the rituals of black American churches: gospel music.
The piece used the 12-part structure of a Protestant church service, and stretched to about 100 minutes, plus intermission.
Jazz composers like Charles Mingus have re-created preaching and prayer meetings with down-home, gospel-charged jazz.
But "In This House/On This Morning" is closer in approach to Duke Ellington's Sacred Concerts, touching on spirituals and uptempo gospel among many other idioms.
Without the program notes and Mr.
Marsalis's comments from the stage, the music could be perceived as another of his recent large works that toy with styles from the most basic blues to the most abstruse hard-bop.
He leads a septet -- with Wes Anderson on alto saxophone, Todd Williams on tenor saxophone, Wycliffe Gordon on trombone, Reginald Veal on bass, Eric Reed on piano and Herlin Riley on drums -- that can whisper and croon and strut, though it never shouts.


Larrieu-Smith Is on Her 3d Wind, or Is It 4th?
How does it feel to be the oldest elite runner in the world's oldest and most prestigious women's road race?
"I can't wait to turn 40," Francie Larrieu-Smith said yesterday, noting that the field for tomorrow's 21st running of the 6.2-mile Advil Mini Marathon in Central Park was loaded with impressive youngsters and even deeper than usual.
"I'm looking forward to being a master, where I'm the youngest one again."


Empire in Trouble; 3 Named to Administer Olympia London Project
A British bankruptcy court today appointed three administrators to take charge of the vast Canary Wharf office development here, marking the first time that the financially crippled Olympia &amp; York Developments Ltd. has lost control of part of its global real estate empire.
On Wednesday night, Olympia sought bankruptcy protection from Canary Wharf's creditors, after 11 banks with about $:550 million, or $992.2 million, in loans to the project, refused to provide new funds to keep construction going beyond the end of this month.


Review/Film; Intimations Of Danger, Mysticism And Sex
It appears at first as if Nicolas Roeg may be on promisingly familiar territory with "Cold Heaven," which concerns a married couple whose travels to a foreign land are infused with menace and dread.
These were the underpinnings of "Don't Look Now," the unforgettably eerie 1973 thriller that remains Mr.
Roeg's best work.
They are also factors in the novel by Brian Moore on which "Cold Heaven" is based.
Mr.
Moore's book, which has been adapted for the screen by Allan Scott, revolves around the bizarre accident that befalls Dr.
Alex Davenport (Mark Harmon), who is vacationing in Nice, France, with his wife, Marie (Theresa Russell).
An excursion on a paddle boat in coastal waters (the setting has been changed to Mexico for the film) leads to a ghastly mishap, and Marie is told by doctors that her husband is dead.
She is asked to view his body and she does, which makes it all the more surprising when that body disappears the next morning.


Accounts
*
North Shore Hospital, Manhasset, L.I., to Deutsch Inc., New York, as its first agency.
Deutsch was chosen over Ogilvy &amp; Mather New York and J. Walter Thompson Healthcare, New York, for the account with billings estimated at $2.5 million.
*
Sullivan Marketing Group, New York, to Frierson Mee &amp; Herman, New York, as the first agency to handle the free-standing insert coupon company's advertising account.
A campaign is scheduled to begin next month in trade publications.
Billings were not disclosed.


Apple to Give the Public Its First Look at Newton
On Friday, Apple Computer Inc. will take the wraps off its first entry into what its chairman, John Sculley, predicts will be a $3.5 trillion industry combining entertainment, communications and computing with digital technology.
Dubbed Newton, the pocket-size, pen-based computer is the first completely new product introduced by Apple since the Macintosh in 1984, and the first created since the departure of Steven P. Jobs, the co-founder.


Bronx Science Students Tackle Politics, Costs and Their Future
Some of New York City's best and brightest at the Bronx High School of Science applied themselves yesterday to solving problems not found in any textbook: how to fight both student apathy and the proposed cuts in public education.
With the approval of teachers and administrators, classes were suspended and replaced with a daylong teach-in at which education policy experts gave the students a crash course in school finance.
Later the students broke into small groups to discuss the impact of decreased budgets and how they could mobilize themselves and their parents so that their concerns reach the city's political and educational establishment.


Books of The Times; Recalling the 50's and Finding Them a Golden Age
New York in the 50's  By Dan Wakefield  Illustrated. 355 pages.
Houghton Mifflin/Seymour Lawrence. $24.95.
In an Esquire piece about the generation that came of age during the 50's, Frank Conroy once wrote: "In college we were named. The Silent Generation. The Apathetic Generation. There was no doubt about it. The sleepy Eisenhower years. American in a trance, drifting leisurely through a long golf game while the clouds gathered. Among students it was hard to find a rebel, virtually impossible to find a Marxist, a mystic, a reformer or indeed, anyone who felt very strongly about anything."
In his new book about New York in the 50's, another former Esquire writer, Dan Wakefield, tries to dispel that stereotype of his generation.


Council Puts Pressure on Dinkins For an Early Budget Compromise
The Dinkins administration and City Council leaders worked hard yesterday to reach an early agreement on a final city budget, saying there was a chance that they could resolve their differences before Mayor David N. Dinkins leaves on a trade mission to Europe tomorrow night.
The Council leaders are seeking to add about $100 million to the Mayor's $29.5 billion spending plan by revising estimates of tax revenues, and they would also like to shift an unspecified amount of money already in the Mayor's plan toward other purposes.
Council budget aides said they were pushing for more money to be spent on schools, libraries, parks, cultural institutions and more police officers.


Review/Film; Love, War And Brigands In Old China
Whenever "The Silk Road," a lavish but somewhat muddled epic of life in 11th-century China, doesn't know what else to do, the camera draws back for one more spectacular aerial shot of warring tribes thundering at one another on horseback across the desert.
The film, a Chinese-Japanese co-production directed by Junya Sato, is an Asian variant of American swashbucklers like "Ivanhoe," and has an eye toward educating as well as entertaining.
The story is framed with a pompous-sounding historical narration explaining that "The Silk Road" takes its title from the name of the ancient trading route later followed by Marco Polo.
The action is set in the general area of Dun Huang, a desert city that was the last Chinese outpost on the route.


Church Pressure in Serbia
The Serbian Orthodox Church urged the President of Serbia to step aside and backed a boycott of elections for a new parliament.
Page A10.


Spelling Champ


Trenton Assembly Repeals Ban on Assault Guns
The Republican-controlled Assembly approved legislation today that would repeal New Jersey's two-year-old ban on assault-type firearms.
The vote was 55 to 18, more than the two-thirds required to override a veto.
In the Senate, where Republicans also hold a majority, the Judiciary, Law and Public Safety Committee held a hearing on similar legislation and agreed to send it to the full Senate for a vote.
The committee vote was 4 to 0, with the lone Democrat on the panel abstaining.


49ers Assistant Moves Up With Chiefs
LYNN STILES, the special-teams coordinator for the San Francisco 49ers, was named vice president of player personnel for the Kansas City Chiefs yesterday.
Stiles, 60 years old, replaces Whitey Dovell, who died May 11. (AP)


Bush Would Spend $1.1 Billion More to Ease Cuts in Military
Opening a three-day trip west that is freighted with political import, President Bush proposed today to spend an additional $1.1 billion to help a shrinking military-industrial complex shift to productive civilian work.
Mr.
Bush's budget for the 1993 fiscal year, now before Congress, already proposes spending $7.1 billion in the next two years to ease the pain of cuts in military spending.


The Spoken Word
GARRISON KEILLOR, Museum of Television and Radio, 25 West 52d Street, mid-Manhattan.
Mr.
Keillor will perform with the cast of his radio show, "American Radio Company." Sunday at 2 P.M.
Tickets: $25.
Information: (212) 621-6600.
READING, CBGB Gallery, 313 Bowery, at Bleecker Street, East Village, Manhattan.
Herbert Huncke, the author of "Guilty of Everything" (Paragon House), will read from his work.
Tonight at 8.
Admission: $5.
Information: (212) 677-0455.


Taking On the Most Insidious Assailant: Fear Itself
Aparent's nightmare: The mother turns from her shopping cart for an instant.
Her toddler disappears.
Store security locks the doors.
In the washroom, officers recover the missing boy, his clothes already changed, his head shaved.
A woman's nightmare: Emerging from the grocery at dusk, she spots two men converging across the parking lot.
She jumps into her car and locks the door as the men knock on her window.


Rivals Are Faulted in South Africa Strife
A senior judge appointed to investigate political violence has placed blame for the fighting on the rivalry between South Africa's two largest black political organizations, the African National Congress and the Inkatha Freedom Party.
The finding immediately drew criticism from the African National Congress, which has accused the Government of fostering violence among blacks.


House Supports Ending Ban On Funding Fetal Research
The House voted today to overturn the Bush Administration's ban on Federal financing of medical research using fetal tissue.
But President Bush nevertheless won the hard-fought contest over the legislation because opponents failed to muster enough votes to override an expected veto.
Mr.
Bush has promised to veto the bill because he says it encourages abortion, but many lawmakers who oppose abortion joined in passing it by a vote of 260 to 148.
Mr.
Bush says using fetal tissue from abortions would give women another motive to have an abortion if it was perceived to be for a good cause.


SENATE IN ALBANY BACKS POLICE GUNS OPPOSED BY DINKINS
Over the strong objections of New York City's Mayor and Police Commissioner, the State Senate today overwhelmingly approved a bill that would require the city to arm its 26,000 police officers with semiautomatic weapons.
The vote came after a raucous debate that included the spectacle of two New York City lawmakers waving the guns on the floor of the ornate Senate chamber here.


Art in Review
Joseph Beuys  Dia Center for the Arts 1548 West 22d Street Chelsea Through June 21
For ardent admirers of Joseph Beuys's achievement, who think that everything the influential German sculptor and performance artist touched was instantly converted to art, this exhibition could provide a nearly religious experience.
On view in the Dia Center's hushed and expansive third-floor gallery is "Arena," a rarely seen photographic installation that Beuys, who died in 1986 at the age of 64, created from 1970 to 1972.
The work consists primarily of 400 black-and-white photographs -- some of them faded or tantalizingly out of focus, others cryptically painted on.
All are displayed under glass, either singly or in groups, in 100 big gray metal frames that suggest unusually handsome developing pans.
The images recount Beuys's career from the late 1940's to the early 70's, alternating shots of the charismatic artist in performance with images of his enigmatic sculptures in fat or felt, and of his elegant line drawings.
For those of us who are less completely converted to the Beuysian faith, this show is informative but also irritatingly adulatory.
Granted, the cumulative effect of so many images conveys Beuys's enormous presence as a performer and the primitivistic resonance of his props and sculptures (although many of the images -- of Beuys holding a dead hare or standing before a white horse -- have been widely reproduced).
In one image, the artist wears one of his famous suits made of heavy felt, a material that, like fat, he associated with warmth and regeneration.
Other photographs show his felt-wrapped grand piano, an animalistic form that is one of his best and best-known sculptures.


New Assault Charges Filed Against 3 in Riot
Three men accused of the savage televised beating of a truck driver in the first hours of the Los Angeles riots had attacked 12 other people just before turning on the trucker, District Attorney Ira Reiner said today.
He filed 37 new felony charges against the three, Damian Williams, 19 years old, Henry K. Watson, 27, and Antoine Miller, 20.
All were identified by Mr.
Reiner as gang members.


Diner's Journal
Ollie's Noodle Shop and Grille
The shrewd owners of Ollie's Noodle Shop and Grille, now with three Manhattan locations, two on upper Broadway and a new one on West 44th Street off Times Square, make success look so easy that it could tempt the most wistful novice to jump into the perilous restaurant game.
Not only are all three Ollie's hotter than a Sichuan dumpling, but the group's other Manhattan dining spots in various overlays of partnerships have filled needs as well: Docks Oyster Bar and Seafood Grill on Broadway near 89th Street, a Docks on Third Avenue at 40th Street and Carmine's on Broadway near 90th Street.
The sparkling new Ollie's fills a void in the Times Square area for quick, tasty and inexpensive food in an agreeable environment.
It is particularly busy at lunchtime.


INSIDE
Ferraro Wins Backing
New York Democratic leaders endorsed Geraldine A. Ferraro for the Senate nomination, and assured her foes places on the ballot.
Page B1.
Court Acts on Canary Wharf
A British bankruptcy court put three administrators in charge of Olympia &amp; York's vast Canary Wharf office development in London.
Page A11.
Nets Hire Daly as Coach
The New Jersey Nets gave a three-year contract to a former Detroit Pistons coach, Chuck Daly.
Page B9.
Blow to a Defiant Symbol
Gov.
Zell Miller of Georgia wants to remove the Confederate symbol from the state's flag, which would revert to an earlier version.
Page A12.


Sports of The Times; Good Move: Hiring Coach Of Bad Boys
CLOTHES do not make the man, even if the clothes are a "simple two-button suit, a favorite of mine," with a Mani label, and cuffs, always cuffs.
"I always say there are two things you always look great in: a blue suit and a tux," Chuck Daly said yesterday after being announced as the new coach of the Nets.


On China: Beyond All or Nothing
Very soon, President Bush is expected to renew China's favorable trade status for one more year despite Beijing's horrendous abuses of human rights.
Before he does, he should consider a clever new proposal for using selective trade sanctions to advance human rights.
This fine-tuned approach was proposed by Holly Burkhalter of Human Rights Watch in a Times Op-Ed article this week.
It would smartly sidestep the all-or-nothing trap that doomed past Congressional efforts to pressure China by putting conditions on all trade.
If adopted by the President and Congress, it could rebuild consensus on China policy and restore Washington's squandered bargaining power with Beijing.


For Children
'Wonder Water'  Staten Island Children's Museum 1000 Richmond Terrace Livingston (718) 273-2060 Recommended for all ages
At the newest exhibition of the Staten Island Children's Museum, older children can peer into a video microscope and examine a water-bound brine shrimp, while younger children, down to the barely walking, can clamor and splash their way around an artificial brook as they learn how water (along with plastic boats and balls floating on it) moves downstream.
Adults may even observe the scientific parallels between water and children: that both are necessary, mutable and fickle.
The exhibition is painted in four comforting shades of blue, with perfectly aligned wave marks halfway up the wall.
The museum is prepared for a soaking: on any given day, the water tables and the brook are in full use, but the high-relief rubber floor accommodates spilled water and small feet.


On My Mind; The Israeli Inheritance
In Israel, governments change, and may again, soon.
But the life of the nation has certain constants.
They last from one election to another.
And they are the only certain inheritance of the winner.
The permanent realities of Israel are these:


Jury Incompetence Is Vastly Exaggerated
To the Editor:
More than 100 years ago Mark Twain quipped that "the jury system puts a ban upon intelligence and honesty, and a premium upon ignorance, stupidity and perjury."
Today many who are distraught over the jury verdict in the beating of Rodney King would probably agree.
But I fear that the charges of racism against the jury in this case may be accepted uncritically as valid criticism of the jury system generally.


A Revolt By Centel's Investors
Centel, which announced on Wednesday that it planned to merge with Sprint, appeared yesterday to be in the midst of a full-scale revolt by institutional investors outraged at Centel's tentative $3 billion sale price.
That price is far below the $4 billion or more that investors had expected the Centel Corporation to bring and that some of them still consider possible.
Centel's shares plunged nearly 25 percent in value yesterday in feverish trading.


Recorded Conversation Played In Civil Suit Against Giants
When Lance Hamilton, a free-agent defensive back, was cut by the Giants in early August 1986, he secretly recorded a conversation he had with Coach Bill Parcells before departing from the team's Pace University training camp in Pleasantville, N.Y.
That conversation was heard today by a jury of six men and two women as part of a civil suit Hamilton has brought against the Giants in the Superior Court of New Jersey.
Hamilton charges that the Giants broke a promise to hire him as an assistant coach, and he has sued the team for breach of contract and racial discrimination.


M.D. Picked as Health Chief Agrees to $60,000 Pay Cut
Nine months after he was nominated as commissioner of the State Health Department, Dr.
Mark R. Chassin has agreed to accept $60,000 less in salary than he was originally offered, and state lawmakers said today that they were prepared to move forward with his confirmation.
The state has been without a Health Commissioner since last February, when Dr.
David A. Axelrod, who held the post for 12 years, suffered an incapacitating stroke.
Even though no serious questions were raised about the qualifications of Dr.
Chassin, a Los Angeles researcher, businessman and former emergency-room physician, his nomination became bogged down in a bitter political fight over his salary.


Mets' Coleman Itching to Prove He's Not an Enigma
Vince Coleman, aware that there was a problem with his rib cage earlier this season, hid the injury from the Mets.
The left fielder, eager beyond measure to return from a strained hamstring that had sidetracked his season after only four games, would steal into the trainer's room and make off with a hot pack.
He would wear it or apply it under his uniform, keeping his hurt, his concerns and his treatment to himself.
"That's how badly he wanted to play," said Manager Jeff Torborg.


At the Bar; Gone are the tie-dyed shirts and marijuana as a Woodstock-era guitarist covets judicial robes.
For voters on either end of the demographic bell curve, the musical slogan on Barry Melton's letterhead and campaign placards does not make much sense.
But for people between, say, 35 and 50, it conjures up a host of images, among them the Vietnam War, Max Yasgur's farm and songs with lyrics like "be the first one on your block to have your boy come home in a box."
Mr.
Melton is a 45-year-old lawyer who is locked in a tight race for a seat on San Francisco's Municipal Court.
It is his second career.
From 1965 to 1970 he was lead guitarist for Country Joe and the Fish, the folk-rock group that produced what became the closest thing to the national anthem of the antiwar movement.


Art in Review
'Then and Now'  Philippe Staib Gallery 8 Greene Street SoHo Through tomorrow
This group show observes the 28th anniversary of the Aldrich Museum of Contemporary Art in Ridgefield, Conn., by gathering artists who had their first museum exposure there.
The show's most appealing feature lies in the chance it offers to compare the work of some of them -- to quote the show's title -- then and now.
Ross Bleckner, one is reminded, was an even more finicky and elegant painter in his spare, linear 1976 "Revolver" than in his 1991 painting "In Figures," with its abstract image of points of light.
And it's eye-opening to see David Diao's murky stain-painted abstraction from the heyday of Color Field in 1965, and a Neo-Geo-style painting with a mocking text from him a year ago -- a change in the artist's style that dutifully reflects a change in art fashion.
By comparison, Christopher Wilmarth's small graphite drawing on paper in several box-within-box layers is an exercise in inscrutability that comments intriguingly on the opaque glass sculpture that he was producing at roughly the same time.


Court Says U.S. Violated Law on Abortion Advice
A Federal District judge in Washington ruled yesterday that the Bush Administration violated the law when it changed regulations forbidding family-planning programs financed by the Government from doing abortion counseling.
The judge, Charles Richey, said that because of the change in regulations called for in March, which would allow doctors but not nurses to discuss abortion, the entire ban on abortion counseling could not be put into effect.


New York Needs a DNA Crime Data Base
To the Editor:
"Cuomo Seeks Genetic Data of Offenders" (news article, May 10) reports that New York's Governor has proposed a bill to establish a DNA data base that would require convicted murderers and sex offenders to provide blood samples for DNA cross-matching.
This is not a new concept.
Assembly Republicans have been advocating strikingly similar legislation as part of our crime victims' rights package for several years.
In addition to DNA "fingerprinting" analysis, we have advocated making such evidence admissible in court.
The Senate has already passed its version of this legislation.
It is an encouraging sign for crime victims that these bills, regardless of their origin, are finally getting the recognition they deserve.


Perot Investments in Land Thrive With Public Funds
Over the last five years, Federal, state and city governments have invested nearly $200 million in cash and tax breaks for an airport in the heart of an extraordinary private real estate development spanning more than 17,000 acres of land owned by Ross Perot's family interests here.
Where the Chisholm Trail once led cattle drives north, and longhorns still graze, lies Alliance Airport, paid for by taxpayers thanks to the kind of behind-the-scenes tactics and political favors that Mr.
Perot now decries -- hiring former government officials as consultants and deploying lobbyists to win over politicians whose campaigns he enriched.


Nanchang Journal; China Embraces U.S. Experts but There's a Limit
Karen A. Krusich earns less than the other M.B.A.'s in her class back home, just $200 a month, but in her current job she does get plenty of respect.
The first time she walked into a classroom here, the students applauded.
"Around here, they're not bitter and know-it-all," she said.
They tend to be adoring -- and persistent.


Art in Review
Curtis Mitchell  Andrea Rosen Gallery 130 Prince Street SoHo Through June 13
Curtis Mitchell is often lumped with a group of younger "scatter artists" who put together found materials in apparently haphazard arrangements.
Their sources are in the installation and performance art of the 1960's and 70's, to which they bring up-to-date concerns.
Mr.
Mitchell's recent work, for example, has dealt with homelessness and dispossession.
Two pieces in the current show also appear to refer to these themes.
They are mural-size collages of hundreds of torn photographs (all photo-lab rejects) attached to sheets of plywood.
The images themselves appear to be shots of residential interiors -- corners of rooms, close-ups of furniture and so forth -- notable for their blandness and for the absence of the human figure.
Unfortunately, blandness infects the work itself.
The countless ripped fragments, layered one on top of another, have a certain air of sadness (as almost any distressed material in a pristine gallery setting does), but the most striking thing here is that so much texture can generate so little energy.


Quotation of the Day
"There are some dangerous objects in this chamber today, and I'm not referring to these guns my colleagues are brandishing about. The danger is this bill." -- STATE SENATOR FRANZ S. LEICHTER of Manhattan, opposing legislation to require New York City police officers to carry semiautomatic weapons.  [ B2:1. ]


The State of the States of the Union
What a decade.
Those with jobs took 42 seconds longer to get to work in 1990 than they did in 1980.
Workers were less likely to car pool or use public transportation.
Americans were more likely to have graduated from high school, but their children were also more likely to be growing up in poverty.
The Census Bureau asked a lot of questions in 1990, and yesterday it released many of the answers.
The announcement included a comprehensive state-by-state look at a host of statistics -- on income, housing, migration into the country and among the states, and fluency in English.


Tired of Sparring, Bulls Prime for Quick Knockout
The Chicago Bulls say they have grown tired of doing things the hard way during the playoffs.
They have the Cleveland Cavaliers down.
Now the Bulls want to knock the Cavaliers out.
Quickly.
"We want to end it," said Michael Jordan, who scored 37 points during Chicago's 112-89 victory Wednesday night in Game 5 of the National Basketball Association Eastern Conference championship series.


Portrait of America; 3 States That Set a Pace For the 'Average' America
In the nation's self-portrait by numbers, New Jersey, Connecticut and in particular New York State can be found largely where they are on any map: at the edge.
The statistical average American would be a stranger in New York, though the person generally would find its neighboring states more like home.
But by many economic measurements in the 1990 census, all three states rank near one end of the spectrum or the other compared with the remaining 47 and the District of Columbia.


Debate On Response By Fire Dept. To Illnesses
The death of an 81-year-old Bronx resident, who lived half a block from a fire station, has renewed a debate over whether the city's fire stations should respond to cardiac arrest calls.
The man, Solomon Silver, died of a heart attack earlier this month after an Emergency Medical Services ambulance took more than 17 minutes to answer his son's call for help.


House Panel Approves Bill To Curb 'Baby Bell' Services
A House Judiciary subcommittee voted today to approve a bill that would bar the regional Bell companies from providing information services and from making equipment for years to come.
The 10-to-6 vote was denounced by the Bell companies and their allies, but it gave new momentum to newspaper publishers and other groups that have lobbied heavily to restrict the telephone companies.
The Bush Administration immediately repeated its threat to veto the measure.





CHRONICLE
STEPHEN KING has sued the producer and distributor of a film called "The Lawnmower Man," which is based on a short story he wrote.
"It deceives the public into believing he created the story in the movie, when he did not," his lawyer, PETER HERBERT, said yesterday.
The suit was filed yesterday in Federal court in Manhattan against the producer, Allied Vision of Britain and the New Line Cinema Corporation, the distributor.
It seeks to block further use of Mr.
King's name in connection with the movie.


BOTTLE-MAKING JOINT VENTURE IN BELARUS
Further strengthening its grip on the soft drinks market in the former Soviet Union, Pepsico yesterday signed a joint-venture deal to produce plastic bottles in the republic of Belarus.
Pepsico also operates two Pizza Hut restaurants in Moscow.
The deal, with revenues projected at $100 million over five years, involves Pepsi-Cola International, the Eastman Chemical Company and two Belarusan companies.


Fed Wants U.S. to Consider Prosecuting Former Official
The Federal Reserve Board's inspector general has asked the Justice Department to determine whether a former senior Fed official should be prosecuted for possible conflicts of interest.
The action was disclosed in the Fed's semiannual report, which said that the case, involving a reported post-employment conflict by an official who recently resigned, was still under review.


Not Winter, Not Summer, but Spring. At Last!


Corrections
An article yesterday about United States policy toward Haiti misidentified Lawrence S. Eagleburger in some editions.
He is Deputy Secretary of State, not Under Secretary.


Applications For Jobless Claims Fall
The number of Americans filing initial claims for unemployment benefits fell to a seven-month low in mid-May, the Government said today in a report that suggests the labor market is regaining vigor.
First-time claims fell to 403,000 in the week ended May 16 from 407,000 the previous week, the Labor Department said.


Jury Incompetence Is Vastly Exaggerated
To the Editor:
More than 100 years ago Mark Twain quipped that "the jury system puts a ban upon intelligence and honesty, and a premium upon ignorance, stupidity and perjury."
Today many who are distraught over the jury verdict in the beating of Rodney King would probably agree.
But I fear that the charges of racism against the jury in this case may be accepted uncritically as valid criticism of the jury system generally.


Vincent Dermody, 77, Prosecutor in Malcolm X Assassination Case
Vincent J. Dermody, a retired prosecutor who won the murder convictions of Malcolm X's assassins and was the chief of the homicide bureau in the Manhattan District Attorney's office, died on May 22 at the Lawrence Hospital in Bronxville, N.Y.
He was 77 years old and lived in Bronxville.
His family said that the cause of death was not known but that his health had been declining for the last year.


Home-Equity Lending Up
Home-equity lending by banks continued to grow rapidly last year, even though many banks tightened their credit standards, the American Bankers Association said in a study released yesterday.
Among large banks, which tend to be the most active home-equity lenders, 62 percent tightened credit standards last year, according to the association.
Among the 413 banks surveyed, 35 percent said they tightened credit standards last year, and 10 percent said they planned to tighten standards this year.
Bankers are concerned about the sluggish economy and weak real estate prices.


A Communal Home for Some Manhattan Arts Groups
The new home of several cultural organizations in New York City was officially opened yesterday as the Arts Consortium Building.
The building, at 1 East 53d Street, is owned by the William S. Paley Foundation. (The former occupant, the Museum of Broadcasting, is installed at 25 West 52d Street as the Museum of Television and Radio.) The Paley Foundation rents the 53d Street building to the nonprofit arts organizations at "extremely low rates that just cover the operating costs of the building," said Ellen Liman, the chairwoman of New York City's Cultural Affairs Advisory Commission.
The commission, an unpaid, nonpartisan group that assists the Department of Cultural Affairs, brought the foundation and the new tenants together in its role as a liaison between government, the private sector and the city's vast array of cultural organizations.


SERBIAN CHURCH ASSAILS BELGRADE
The Serbian Orthodox Church called on President Slobodan Milosevic today to step aside and supported calls by opposition leaders for a boycott of elections for the Parliament of the new rump Yugoslav state this weekend.
It was the church's sharpest criticism of any Belgrade Government since before the Communist era.


COMPANY NEWS
ALLTEL CORP., Hudson, Ohio, a utility holding company, said its Ocean Technology subsidiary had signed an agreement to sell substantially all of its business to Whittaker Corp., Los Angeles, a military contractor.
DIAGNOSTIC PRODUCTS CORP., Los Angeles, acquired Cirrus Diagnostics Inc., Chester, N.J., for shares of Diagnostic Products common stock valued at approximately $28 million.


Seniors Listen to Instincts, Not Advisers
Just as it is at every Senior PGA Tour event, the practice tee at this weekend's Nynex Commemorative will be a smorgasbord of one-of-a-kind golf swings.
Among the more eye-catching will be Gay Brewer's buggy whip, Lee Trevino's shove and Chi Chi Rodriguez's launch.
Unlike their younger counterparts on the regular PGA Tour, none of these players and very few of their peers will have an attentive teaching professional filming them or twisting them into specific swing positions.
Although they are indispensable to many of the game's so-called "flat bellies," the Senior Tour's "round bellies" tend not to believe in swing gurus.


Magic &amp; Son In Card Spots
To present trading cards as fun for children as well as collectors, a campaign for a new line of cards featuring United States Olympic athletes uses Magic Johnson and his 11-year-old son, Andre.
Television commercials for the line, called the U.S.
Olympicard 1992 U.S.
Olympic Hopeful Series, are the first from the cards' maker, Skybox International Inc., since signing Mr.
Johnson as its first corporate spokesman.
It was the first endorsement agreement Mr.
Johnson had made since announcing he had tested positive for the virus that causes AIDS.


Tokyo Stocks Stronger
Stock prices were higher in Tokyo today, buoyed by futures-linked buying.
At the close of trading, the Nikkei index of 225 issues rose 416.5 points, or 2.3 percent, to 18,347.75.
The index rose 108.69 points on Thursday.


James Aliferis, 78; Conducted and Taught
James Aliferis, a conductor, composer and teacher, died on May 22 at his home in West Chester, Pa.
He was 78 years old.
He died of cancer, said his wife, Shirley.


U.S. to Close Refugee Camp At Guantanamo to Haitians
Moving to bolster its policy on Haiti, the Administration said today that it would close the refugee camp at the United States naval base at Guantanamo, Cuba, and bar any ship that trades with Haiti from United States ports.
The measures are intended to tighten the hemisphere-wide embargo on Haiti's military Government and force it to restore the elected Government of the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide.


Perot Investments in Land Thrive With Public Funds
Over the last five years, Federal, state and city governments have invested nearly $200 million in cash and tax breaks for an airport in the heart of an extraordinary private real estate development spanning more than 17,000 acres of land owned by Ross Perot's family interests here.
Where the Chisholm Trail once led cattle drives north, and longhorns still graze, lies Alliance Airport, paid for by taxpayers thanks to the kind of behind-the-scenes tactics and political favors that Mr.
Perot now decries -- hiring former government officials as consultants and deploying lobbyists to win over politicians whose campaigns he enriched.


Hand Injury Forces Carbajal Off Card
MICHAEL CARBAJAL, the International Boxing Federation 108-pound champion, has withdrawn from the undercard of the LARRY HOLMES-EVANDER HOLYFIELD heavyweight bout because of an injured right hand.
Carbajal (24-0) injured the hand on April 30 while outpointing JOSE LUIS VELARDE in a 10-round nontitle fight.
The hand remained swollen, forcing Carbajal out of the fight card on June 19 in Las Vegas, Nev.
His opponent had not been selected. (AP)


Art in Review
John Virtue  Louver Gallery 130 Prince Street SoHo Through tomorrow
John Virtue lives and works in Devon in the south of England, and his huge near-abstract landscapes serve as a contemporary addendum to a show of British watercolors on view at the Pierpont Morgan Library.
Composed of several joined panels, the paintings are done entirely in black and white.
They have both the fluidity of ink drawing and the grand-scale gestural approach of Abstract Expressionism.
Jackson Pollock is, in fact, the obvious guiding spirit here; like his works, the paintings in this show appear to have been executed horizontally, with the paint thrown in spidery arcs and spattered to form Pointillist clouds.
Mr.
Virtue has added his own flourishes to this technique by working charcoal, ink and pencil into his surfaces until they have the bumpy texture, fine crackle and sheen of parchment.
As if in final confirmation of his authorial presence, Mr.
Virtue leaves his own handprints pressed into the black paint.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-11  U.S. PRESSES U.N. ON BELGRADE
The United States pressed the U.N.
Security Council to impose an immediate and virtually total economic embargo, including a ban on all oil sales, on the rump Yugoslav Government in Belgrade to force it to end Serbian intervention in neighboring Bosnia and Herzegovina.
A1  CHURCH PRESSURE ON SERBIAN
The Serbian Orthodox Church called on President Slobodan Milosevic to step aside and supported calls by for a boycott of elections for the Parliament of the new rump Yugoslav state this weekend.
A10
Yugoslav crown prince is finding an audience for his views.
A10  MORE U.S.
PRESSURE ON HAITI
The Bush Administration said it would close the refugee camp at the U.S. naval base at Guantanamo, Cuba and bar any ship that trades with Haiti from U.S. ports.
A2  BLAME IS PLACED ON BOTH SIDES
A senior judge appointed to investigate political violence has placed blame for the fighting on the rivalry between South Africa's two largest black political organizations, the African National Congress and the Inkatha Freedom Party.
A3  U.S.
POLICY ON IRAQ IN 1989
A secret policy directive on the Persian Gulf region signed by President Bush in October 1989 said the U.S. should use economic and political incentives with President Saddam Hussein as a way of moderating his behavior and increasing American influence in Iraq.
A3  ENGLISH TEACHERS FIND RESPECT
Today's foreign teachers in China are the latest in a long line of Western adventurers who have come to China to teach Western ideas, technologies or languages.
A4  AN ENVIRONMENTAL MODEL
Costa Rica offers a prime example of an achievement rarely attained by the world's poorer nations: economic development coupled with environmental preservation.
The country could provide solutions to leaders who will be attending the Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro in June.
A6  TAKEOVER OF OLYMPIA PROJECT
Olympia &amp; York Developments Ltd. lost control of part of its global real estate empire for the first time when a British bankruptcy court appointed three administrators to take charge of the vast Canary Wharf office development in London.
A11  UNMASKING COLLABORATORS
The Polish Parliament voted to release the secret police files of collaborators with the Communist Government from 1945 to 1990.
A8  RARE MOUNTAIN APE IS KILLED
A 400-pound male gorilla, the leader of a family of rare mountain apes that tourists spend thousands of dollars to see, has been found shot to death, apparently a victim of the civil war in Rwanda.
A9  National A12-19  ANOTHER PEROT CAMPAIGN
For five years, Federal, state and city governments have invested nearly $200 million in cash and tax breaks for an airport in the heart of an extraordinary Texas real estate development spanning more than 17,000 acres of land owned by Ross Perot's family interests.
That financing by taxpayers results from the kind of behind-the-scenes tactics and political favors that Mr.
Perot now decries.
A1
Perot, on TV, addressed abortion, homosexuality, even taxes.  A19
Bruised by polls, Clinton assailed both Bush and Perot.  A19
In the year of the woman, the state of the woman is California.
A19  THE WORKINGS OF THE ENERGY BILL
News analysis: Sixteen months after the nation went to war in the Persian Gulf, the focus of the energy legislation that is now taking final shape in Congress is everywhere except on oil.
A1  BLOW TO A SYMBOL OF DEFIANCE
Gov.
Zell Miller of Georgia said he would introduce legislation to eliminate the Confederate battle symbol from the state's flag.
A12  DEFEAT FOR FETAL RESEARCH
The House voted, but by less than a veto-proof majority, to overturn the Administration's ban on Federal financing of medical research using fetal tissue.
A13
A judge struck down Federal rules on abortion counseling.
A13  TURN IN HOUSE POSTAL INQUIRY
Federal prosecutors are looking into a postal employees' accusations that Representative Rostenkowski and two other House Democrats charged their expense accounts at the House post office to obtain cash.
A13  THE LATEST FROM THE CENSUS
The best evidence yet of a widening economic gulf during the 1980's between the relatively prosperous old and the struggling young was provided in newly released Census Bureau data.
The finding is part of a cornucopia of new information from the 1990 census showing growing differences among regions and population groups in a wide variety of categories.
A14
The new data's portrait of the New York region.  A15  DEEP ROOTS IN THE FAMILY TREE
The first vertebrates, the ancestral line of animals that led to the human race, appeared on earth at least 40 million years earlier than previously believed, according to British scientists studying fossils of wormlike creatures called conodonts.
A16  'A FREE RIDE' BACK HOME
In the wake of the riots in Los Angeles, Federal immigration agents rounded up thousands of illegal aliens there, one of the biggest such sweeps in the city's history.
Now the agents' tactics are under severe criticism.
A12  Law Page B16  Viewing the death penalty through the window of the Coleman case.
A court says "no" may not prove rape.
Metropolitan Digest, B1 LEGISLATING WEAPONS
After a raucous debate that included the waving of guns, the State Senate overwhelming approved a bill that would require New York City to arm its 26,000 police officers with semiautomatic weapons.
A1  NEWSPAPER DRIVERS ACCEPT PACTS
After weeks of stalemate, members of a newspaper drivers union voted last night to accept four contracts, in a shift of power in the New York newspaper industry that could assure labor peace for years.
A1  Business Digest, D1  Weekend C1-29  Suffering in luxury.
C1  Film: "Cousin Bobby." C1  Dance: For City Ballet, a vision of its future.
C1  Sports B8-13  Baseball: Mets still ponder the wisdom of getting Coleman.
B9  Column: Vecsey on Chuck Daly.
B9  Hockey: Penguins stop Blackhawks again.
B9  Obituaries B7  Editorials/Op-Ed A28-29  Editorials A28  Perot: Where's the beef?
China: beyond all or nothing.
David Anderson: Good cops.
Letters A28  A. M. Rosenthal: The Israeli inheritance.
A29  Leslie H. Gelb: The ultimate pro.
A29  Beverly G. Hudnut, William H. Hudnut 3d: G.O.P. and pro-choice.
A29  Richard C. Wade: Reading, writing, rehabilitation.
A29  Christopher Layne: Tragedy in the Balkans.
So what?
A29


Thai Coalition Struggles to Form New Government
Rival politicians struggled today to form a new Thai government amid implied threats from the nation's military leaders that they would oust any civilian government that attempted to punish them for last week's violent crackdown on democracy demonstrators.
The military leaders have made it clear that they will not tolerate a criminal investigation of their role in the crackdown, in which scores and possibly hundreds of people died, diplomats and Thai officials said.


Art in Review
Ron Gorchov  Jack Tilton Gallery 24 West 57th Street Manhattan Through tomorrow
More than ever, Ron Gorchov seems to be returning to a moment in painting that existed in the late 1950's, when he first started exhibiting in New York.
Abstract Expressionism was on the wane, and the Color Field painting of Helen Frankenthaler and Morris Louis was being touted as the next hot thing.
Mr.
Gorchov's new abstract paintings have their ups and downs, but in the main they seem to be negotiating a fairly credible truce between these two historically opposed styles.
The artist continues to use the eccentrically shaped canvases that have been a constant in his art for nearly 20 years: with top and bottom edges that curve forward and sides that hug the walls, these canvases create the rather welcoming effect of cupping the image and holding it out for consideration.
On these surfaces, Mr.
Gorchov works with increasing abandon, making big looping calligraphic strokes, near-shapes and shapes that are full of emotional tumult (they sometimes suggest big hands or drifting ghosts) but that are usually brought off in luminous tones suggestive of watercolors.


Newly Found Herpes Virus Is Called Major Cause of Illness in Young
A recently discovered herpes virus is a major cause of high fever and illness in young children, a new study shows.
The virus, called HHV-6, was linked to 14 percent of children 2 years of age or younger who were treated for fevers in an emergency room in Rochester, a team of doctors reported yesterday in The New England Journal of Medicine.
The doctors were from the University of Rochester, the Centers for Disease Control in Atlanta and DuPont Merck Pharmaceuticals in Wilmington, Del.


Press School Boards To Spend Effectively
To the Editor:
New York's Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez is to be commended for releasing the budget documents showing how the city's 32 school districts spend their money (news article, May 13).
His effort will help parents pressure community school boards to spend their money more effectively.
Information is the key to understanding and to change -- as painful as change might be.
School administrators and boards of education should be able to substantiate the educational effectiveness of every expenditure.
If this is bothersome or makes it hard to pursue "other agendas," they may be in the wrong job.


Jury Incompetence Is Vastly Exaggerated; No Possible Venue
To the Editor:
Even though Police Officer Lawrence Powell's overt use of force against Rodney King is anathema to me and most of civilized society, it is unfair to retry Officer Powell now because of the extreme publicity surrounding this debacle (news article, May 9).
There is no jurisdiction that would not bow to any of these stimuli and have the ability to adjudicate this case fairly.
ELI GRAUBART Woodcliff Lake, N.J., May 15, 1992


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows, performances and art exhibitions in the New York metropolitan region that will be closing soon.
Closing This Weekend
"ZORA NEALE HURSTON," American Place Theater, 111 West 46th Street, Manhattan.
Laurence Holder's play about the prolific black writer.
Directed by Wynn Handman.
Final performance: Tomorrow at 8 P.M.
Performance times: Today and tomorrow at 8 P.M.
Tickets: $22.
Information: (212) 840-3074.


Dodd to Seek a Third Term in Senate


The World League's Humpty Dumpty Act
For consistency, the ratings of World League football games have been a world-beater.
Too bad those ratings have been consistently abominable.
From the rarefied height of a 2.1 rating for the March 22 season opener, ABC's World League ratings plummeted toward the 1.0 Nielsen Mendoza line.
They were 1.1 on both May 3 and May 10 before recovering to 1.5 on May 17.


Review/Film; Whoopi Goldberg on the Run, Disguised as a Nun
The main lesson of "Sister Act," the sugary farce featuring Whoopi Goldberg as a lounge singer hiding out in a convent, is that many girl-group hits of the 1960's were even more divine than many of us originally realized.
The film's chief comic invention is that Ms.
Goldberg's Deloris Van Cartier, enlisted as the convent's new choirmaster, can teach nuns to sing slightly modified versions of songs like "My Guy" (now "My God") and "I Will Follow Him" and thus attract hordes of extra churchgoers, who love this hip and tuneful approach to religious music.
Apparently no one connected with "Sister Act" has ever heard a gospel choir.
Originally intended as a vehicle for Bette Midler, "Sister Act" has been retooled in a way that only partly suits Ms.
Goldberg's broadly demonstrative comic style.
When Deloris, on the run from the married mobster (Harvey Keitel) with whom she has been having an affair, is sent to the convent by an obliging police detective (Bill Nunn, who gives the only easygoing performance in the movie), she is scorned by the Mother Superior (Maggie Smith), who disdains her loud clothes and vulgar manners.
Scenes that might have played as mere snobbery with Ms.
Midler now have a hint of racism, which might have been dispelled if the film had addressed it head on.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
An energy bill is taking final shape 16 months after the nation went to war over oil, yet the focus is everywhere but on oil.
There was no shortage of proposals to cut consumption or increase the supply.
But all were rejected.
News Analysis.  [ Page A1. ]
The number of Americans filing initial jobless claims fell to a seven-month low in mid-May.  [ D1. ]


The State of the States of the Union
What a decade.
Those with jobs took 42 seconds longer to get to work in 1990 than they did in 1980.
Workers were less likely to car pool or use public transportation.
Americans were more likely to have graduated from high school, but their children were also more likely to be growing up in poverty.
The Census Bureau asked a lot of questions in 1990, and yesterday it released many of the answers.
The announcement included a comprehensive state-by-state look at a host of statistics -- on income, housing, migration into the country and among the states, and fluency in English.


North Korea Returns Remains of 15 U.N. Soldiers


RESULTS PLUS
GOLF  Toms Leads Kemper Open by a Shot  For newlywed David Toms, the honeymoon can wait.
Toms matched a course record with an eight-under-par 63 yesterday to take a one-stroke lead over Jay Don Blake after the first round of the Kemper Open in Potomac, Md.
Toms is a 25-year-old rookie playing in only his 14th tournament, so his bogey-free round was impressive.
But what made it simply amazing is that it occurred just five days after his wedding and on a course he had never seen.
"I was just going from one hole to the next," he said.
"Actually, that's probably the best way to do it because I couldn't look ahead to any particular hole." (AP) Swede Leads British Masters by a Stroke: Helped by an eagle on the 510-yard fourth hole, Ove Sellberg of Sweden shot a six-under-par 66 yesterday for a one-stroke lead after the first round of the $1 million British Masters at Woburn, England.
Among the five players tied for second were Bernhard Langer of Germany and Jose Rivero of Spain.
Two Americans, John Morse and Glen Day, and Nick Faldo of Britain were in a nine-man group at 68.
Another American, Paul Azinger, had a 71, and the defending champion, Seve Ballesteros of Spain, shot 72. (AP) Dickinson Rides Birdie String to Lead: Four straight birdies on the back nine led Judy Dickinson to a six-under-par 66 and a one-stroke lead yesterday after the first round of the Ladies Professional Golf Association's $500,000 Oldsmobile Classic at East Lansing, Mich.
Dickinson, who is president of the L.P.G.A., birdied the 12th through 15th holes, then parred in to stay ahead of Michelle McGann and Dottie Mochrie in the 72-hole event over the 6,166-yard layout at Walnut Hills Country Club.
Dickinson, who joined the L.P.G.A.
Tour in 1978, hadn't won since 1986 until she captured the Inamori Classic earlier this season. (AP)


Treasury Securities Move Higher
Prices of Treasury securities moved higher and interest rates dipped again yesterday, as traders chose to focus on news suggesting economic weakness and to largely ignore a report that may herald an improvement in labor markets.
Developments traders seemed to find important included a sizable drop in the Commodity Research Bureau's index of spot commodity prices, and declines in weekly money supply figures that were bigger than expected.


Virginia Execution Highlighted Politics of Death
When one of Virginia's largest newspapers reviewed the intensely publicized execution of Roger Keith Coleman on May 20, it saw a flawed, one-sided process that grievously distorted the evidence with a man's life at stake.
The breakdown portrayed in an editorial by The Norfolk Virginian-Pilot came not in the courts, but in the news media.


Blazers Silence Jazz And Return to Finals
There are easier places to win, but tonight the Portland Trail Blazers seemed intent on proving a point: They are capable of winning on the road, even here.
The Blazers, 0-4 at the Delta Center and appearing to fade quickly in the first half, rushed back for a furious finish, beating the Utah Jazz, 105-97, for the Western Conference title and advancing to their second National Basketball Association finals in three years.


What About Oil?; The Gulf War Put the Focus on Supplies, But a New Energy Bill Skips That Issue
Sixteen months after the nation went to war over oil in the Persian Gulf, an energy bill is taking final shape in Washington, yet the focus is everywhere but on oil.
Two similar versions, one passed by the House Wednesday and the other by the Senate in February, do, however, include a variety of significant measures, most importantly affecting electric utilities.
Those changes would increase efficiency in lights, appliances and motors, improve the natural gas supply for utilities and other customers, and, possibly, remove one of many stumbling blocks to building nuclear plants.


Ross Perot: Where's the Beef?
To watch Ross Perot's 1992 campaign is to recall Richard Nixon's in 1968.
Mr.
Nixon waged his real campaign on television.
So has Mr.
Perot.
Mr.
Nixon's message was disarmingly simple and maddeningly vague: Things are terrible; I'll change them.
Ditto Mr.
Perot.
Mr.
Nixon left conscientious citizens groping for a sense of what he believed and what manner of President he would be.
So has Mr.
Perot.
Mr.
Perot has actually gone the former President one better.
Mr.
Nixon maintained the pretense of a conventional campaign.
He traveled the country, addressed rallies, issued position papers -- all designed to keep the press busy and convey the impression that his campaign was more than a contrived sequence of paid television programs with hand-picked questioners and audiences.


Review/Dance; For City Ballet, a Vision of Its Future
INVITE an unusually large number of choreographers to present 11 new works for the New York City Ballet in five days, proclaim that the series is aimed at developing the classical ballet makers of the future and you are taking on one big self-imposed gamble.
Well, we may not have seen the future, but we have seen the opening of City Ballet's Diamond Project, and it works.


Audience Listening to Prince in the Wings
Ignored by most Western governments while his country fell apart and descended into civil war, the heir to the toppled throne of Yugoslavia has been heard at last by officials of both the United States and Britain.
The decisions by Washington and London to receive the heir, Crown Prince Alexander, was a symbol of a change in their policies.
On May 21, he talked in the White House with President Bush's national security adviser, Brent Scowcroft, and in the State Department with Assistant Secretary of State Thomas M. T. Niles; three days earlier, he had been received in London by Foreign Secretary Douglas Hurd.
What the West Should Do
In an interview today, Prince Alexander said he had argued unsuccessfully against the imposition of international sanctions against Serbia.
Its Government, led by Slobodan Milosevic, is being blamed by the United Nations and the European Community for instigating violence against Muslims and Croats in Bosnia and Herzegovina, the current focal point of the Yugoslav civil war.


2 Banks Closing Branches
As the Bank of America and the Security Pacific Bank move ahead with their merger, they have notified customers in four Western states of plans to close 82 branches by the fall.
In Washington, 32 branches were closed over the weekend, and other closings in Nevada, Arizona and Oregon are expected by autumn.
Branch closings in California, the home of the two merging banks, are not scheduled to start until September, according to Peter Magnani, a spokesman for the Bank of America.
The San Francisco Chronicle said yesterday that the banks were planning to close 300 of their 1,435 California branches, but Mr.
Magnani declined to confirm that report.
"When our plans are ready, we will give our customers 90 days' notice, then we will issue confirmations," he said.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Women; Where Ambition Meets Opportunity
Four years ago, Anna Eshoo finished a close second as the Democratic candidate in the 14th Congressional District on the peninsula south of here.
Now, Ms.
Eshoo, a county supervisor, is favored in the party primary on June 2 and is generally considered to have a good chance of winning in November, thanks in part to the district's new boundaries and the decision by the Republican incumbent, Tom Campbell, to run for the Senate.
A record number of women are running in California's primary at the Federal and state levels: two for the Senate, 35 for the House and 127 for the state Legislature.
Interviews with political experts indicate that about two dozen are considered strong candidates in the primary and general elections, buoyed by the widespread fervor to elect outsiders, by the anger among many women that they are not better represented, particularly at a time when abortion rights are at risk, and by the opportunities opened by reapportionment.


Leaders Back Ferraro's Bid For Senate
New York State's Democratic Party leaders today picked former Representative Geraldine A. Ferraro as their favored candidate to challenge Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato this fall, a distinction that has never helped a nonincumbent Senate candidate win a Democratic primary in the state.
At the same time, the Democratic State Committee went out of its way to insure that all three of Ms.
Ferraro's fellow Democratic contenders, including the Rev.
Al Sharpton, can appear on the primary ballot without having to collect signatures on nominating petitions from thousands of voters around the state.


Informer Details Route of Mob's Money
Switching his emphasis from murder to money, Alphonse D'Arco, a former acting boss of the Lucchese crime family, described in Brooklyn Federal Court yesterday how the crime organization collected money through gambling, loan-sharking, kickbacks and shakedowns.
Through its control of influential labor unions, the crime organization routinely forced major construction companies in the New York area to pay as much as $10,000 a month for labor peace, which the crime family could insure.


Psychiatrist Backs Police Version of Killing
A psychiatrist yesterday confirmed the account of two police officers who said they had acted in self-defense when they shot and killed an emotionally disturbed man in his care in a Brooklyn apartment.
The psychiatrist, Dr.
Saul Gorman, said that the victim, Earl Black, 42 years old, was acting delusional and speaking incoherently and that he turned violent soon after the police arrived to take him to the hospital at the doctor's request.
Mr.
Black, the doctor said, lunged at them with a knife and continued to advance on them after a first volley of shots and as they continued to back away.


Reviews/Film; A Director on the Verge Of a Cinematic Success?
It would have taken more than foresight, and not much less than X-ray vision, to detect the promise of Pedro Almodovar's subsequent success within "Pepi, Luci, Bom," a rough, unfunny comedy made in 1980.
Most notable for its bathroom jokes, humorous rape scenes and abysmal home-movie cinematography, this reputation-dimming mess finally opens in New York today at the Angelika Film Center.
Spanish critics at the time described the film as being "like a healthy, well-intentioned sock on the nose" (Tele-Express) and praised Mr.
Almodovar as "a stubbornly passionate defender of substandard movies" (El Periodico), maintaining that this one "upturns with true daring the most respected taboos of our ridiculous society" (El Pais).
Only in the context of an exceptionally taboo-ridden culture could this film's scatological silliness be construed as bold.


Ross Perot: Where's the Beef?
To watch Ross Perot's 1992 campaign is to recall Richard Nixon's in 1968.
Mr.
Nixon waged his real campaign on television.
So has Mr.
Perot.
Mr.
Nixon's message was disarmingly simple and maddeningly vague: Things are terrible; I'll change them.
Ditto Mr.
Perot.
Mr.
Nixon left conscientious citizens groping for a sense of what he believed and what manner of President he would be.
So has Mr.
Perot.
Mr.
Perot has actually gone the former President one better.
Mr.
Nixon maintained the pretense of a conventional campaign.
He traveled the country, addressed rallies, issued position papers -- all designed to keep the press busy and convey the impression that his campaign was more than a contrived sequence of paid television programs with hand-picked questioners and audiences.


Black Experience Fuels Suspicion About AIDS; Remember Tuskegee
To the Editor:
"The AIDS 'Plot' Against Blacks" (editorial, May 12) only makes it more evident to me why the chasm between the majority population and black people in this country will continue to grow.
Your labeling it as "bizarre" that many blacks believe that AIDS and the health measures used against it are part of a conspiracy to wipe out the black race in and of itself reeks of an insensitivity to the history of blacks in this country and why they would have good reasons to feel conspired against.


Corrections
A picture caption yesterday about an action by the New York City Board of Education to stress abstinence in teaching students about AIDS omitted the role of Evelyn Millman, the woman shown.
She spoke against the action.


Tax Quixote Shakes Town Hall
It was with an unmistakable air of satisfaction that George Hammer Jr., the son of a Manhattan real-estate appraiser and grandson of a Bronx developer, plunked a cardboard box with 97 property-tax complaints on the counter in the town assessor's office and demanded to be heard.
For three years, until an appellate court ruling last month, Mr.
Hammer, a realtor and owner of a Montauk hotel, had been something of a nonperson in East Hampton, ignored by officials as he battled for justice for overtaxed homeowners -- and a 50 percent contingency fee.


The Art Market
New Home for 'Guernica'
The board of directors of the Prado in Madrid voted last week to allow Pablo Picasso's "Guernica," now displayed within a huge bulletproof case in an annex of the museum, to move several blocks away to the Reina Sofia Art Center, Spain's national museum of contemporary art.
The Reina Sofia is also getting other works from the Prado, including Picasso's drawings for "Guernica," several Cubist works by both Picasso and Juan Gris (the bequest of the collector Douglas Cooper) and two Joan Miro paintings from the artist's family.
"It's a reorganization of the collection," said Maria de Corral, the director of the Reina Sofia.
"As the national museum of contemporary art, we are getting 20th-century works from the Prado, and in exchange the Prado will be getting some 19th-century art from us."


CHRONICLE
The Civil Rights Institute of the NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund observed the 38th anniversary of the Supreme Court's Brown v.
Board of Education decision yesterday at a luncheon and town meeting for civil rights leaders, educators and high school students from poor urban neighborhoods and affluent suburbs in New York, Connecticut and New Jersey.
One of the speakers was JONATHAN KOZOL, author of "Savage Inequalities." Before the luncheon he said he saw little to celebrate about the anniversary of the decision, which declared that "separate but equal" education was unconstitutional.


Angels' Felix Is Placed on Disabled List
The California Angels have lost their top offensive threat, outfielder JUNIOR FELIX, for at least two weeks.
The Angels placed the 24-year-old outfielder on the 15-day disabled list yesterday retroactive to Wednesday because of a strained left groin.
At the same time, the Angels activated catcher LANCE PARRISH from the disabled list.


Kellogg Price Rise Aids Food Stocks
The Kellogg Company set off a rally in food stocks yesterday with the news that it was raising prices on most of its breakfast cereals by an average of 3.5 percent.
Kellogg stock jumped $3.375, to $59.375, on the news, and shares in a number of other food companies climbed as well.


6 Vice Presidents Taking Early Pensions at Digital
It was a week of goodbye lunches at the Digital Equipment Corporation.
The financially troubled computer maker is losing at least six vice presidents today as part of an early retirement program aimed at reducing the head count in the $14 billion corporation.
More executives are expected to accept the severance plan.
Digital, based in Maynard, Mass., expects up to 7,000 of its 116,000 employees to take early retirement, which is aimed at those over 50 years old.


Jury Incompetence Is Vastly Exaggerated
To the Editor:
More than 100 years ago Mark Twain quipped that "the jury system puts a ban upon intelligence and honesty, and a premium upon ignorance, stupidity and perjury."
Today many who are distraught over the jury verdict in the beating of Rodney King would probably agree.
But I fear that the charges of racism against the jury in this case may be accepted uncritically as valid criticism of the jury system generally.


Review/Photography; 2 Goals in One Show: Diversity and Unity
In "More Than One Photography," his first exhibition as director of the Museum of Modern Art's department of photography, Peter Galassi presents works not only from his own department's collection but also from the museum's five other departments and the library.
The result is an ambitious if often confusing cross section of the amazingly varied work done in photography in recent years.
For anyone who hasn't kept up with the ferment in the medium over the last decade, Mr.
Galassi's exhibition, with 66 works by 61 artists, offers a rich harvest of important art.
In one section are pictures by appropriationist photographers like Cindy Sherman, Barbara Kruger and Laurie Simmons, who stormed the galleries in the 1980's with work that borrowed subjects and techniques from the mass media.
The narrative work of Conceptual artists like John Baldessari, William Wegman and Jean Le Gac is also prominently featured here.


Portrait of America; New Census Data Reveal Redistribution of Poverty
The best evidence yet of the widening economic gulf between the old and the young during the 1980's was provided today in newly released Census Bureau data that showed the elderly held their own during the decade's economic ups and downs while the nation's children increasingly slid into poverty.
The finding is part of a cornucopia of new information from the census showing growing differences between regions and population groups in areas as varied as the amount of schooling, type of disability, length of the commute, age of housing and ancestry of the nation's 250 million people.


HUGHES AND VICTOR COMPANY OF JAPAN FORM VENTURE
The Hughes Aircraft Company and the Victor Company of Japan said they would form a joint venture to make video projectors, to be offered in the coming market for advanced television systems.
The new California-based company, to be called the Hughes-JVC Technology Corporation, will start this fall marketing a professional model of a projection television set, which projects a video image on a large flat screen on a wall.
Additional models will follow next year, with a consumer version due in 1994.


Empire in Trouble; Ailing Developer 'Remains Confident' of Recovery in Canada
Olympia &amp; York Developments Ltd. said today that it "remains confident" that the restructuring of $14.9 billion (Canadian) of debt of its Canadian operations "will proceed as planned" despite the surrender of its Canary Wharf development project in London to British court control.
The Toronto-based company said the action taken Wednesday in London would not affect its 29 Canadian companies that filed for bankruptcy protection here May 14, or its five Canadian companies that filed for similar court protection under Chapter 11 of the Federal Bankruptcy Code of the United States.


In the New Sixth District, a Heated Race for Congress
Nowhere in New Jersey did the snaking lines and jagged indentions of the state's new Congressional map create more political upheaval than here in the Sixth District.
The appeal of a largely new district and a spirited fight by Frank Pallone Jr., a two-term Democrat whose own party offered him as a sacrifice in the rites of redistricting, has turned the race here into an orgy of mudslinging and negative advertising.


Quotation of the Day
"I cannot believe that Stalingrad was any worse than this." -- SULEJMAN SULIC, who is enduring the siege of Sarajevo.  [ 3:2. ]


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Political Memo; Some Feverish Speculation In an Unconventional Year
By its very existence, Ross Perot's unannounced independent Presidential campaign promises the unconventional.
Mr.
Perot is a businessman, not a politician.
Even in a day of wealthy candidates, he is richer than anyone else in sight.
He has devised a kind of self-nominating process, rooted in appearances on television talk shows.
And he has taken the lead in national opinion polls, something no other Presidential hopeful outside the two-party system has ever managed.


Cooper Arrested
Heavyweight BERT COOPER, who admitted he was a cocaine addict after quitting a fight with GEORGE FOREMAN in 1989, was arrested this week on drug charges in Chester, Pa.


Don't Single Out Pakistan on Nuclear Arms
To the Editor:
"Stop the Subcontinent's Bomb" (editorial, April 28) has got all its facts right, but its recommendation, that the United States embargo against Pakistan needs to be more tightly maintained, is likely to be counterproductive.
Significantly, in their May 18 letters in response, Robert F. Goheen, former U.S. ambassador to India, and the Indian ambassador himself have not endorsed the prescription of blockading Pakistan.


Religion Notes
Father Aristide's Hebrew
The Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide, the exiled President of Haiti, took more than a few Jewish organizational leaders by surprise yesterday when he addressed them in flawless Hebrew.


Classical Music in Review
Vineyard Musicke Vineyard Theater


Court Ruling Sets Stage For Battle Over Fossil
A Federal District judge has refused to issue a court order that would have quickly returned a fossil Tyrannosaurus rex to the South Dakota fossil dealer from which it was seized by the Federal Bureau of Investigation on May 14.
The action on Thursday by the judge, Richard H. Battey, in South Dakota, probably signals the beginning of a complex legal contest between the Justice Department, the Cheyenne River Sioux Tribe and the dealer, the Black Hills Institute of Geological Research.


Dinkins Heads for Europe as City's Salesman
Mayor David N. Dinkins will embark tonight on a seven-day trip to Europe to drum up investment from high-tech and service-oriented companies there.
The trip is also intended to improve the Mayor's standing with New York business leaders, 20 of whom will be accompanying him.
The trip to Britain, France and Germany represents an unusually strong personal appeal by a Mayor of New York for foreign investment, mayoral aides said, and reflects the thinking of the recently appointed Deputy Mayor for Economic Development, Barry F. Sullivan, who was instrumental in persuading Mr.
Dinkins to take the trip.


Your Taxes; I.R.S. Can Help New Businesses
For a fledgling entrepreneur or a moonlighter who hires part-time help, the tax code's reporting requirements for businesses can seem daunting.
No matter how modest their incomes and expenses, businesses face paperwork that far outstrips what individual taxpayers must deal with every year, from quarterly -- or even more frequent -- filing deadlines for reports to withholding employees' taxes.


RESULTS PLUS
GOLF  Four Tied for Lead, and More Are Close


Airline Pilots Are Wary Of Strict De-Icing Rules
New Federal rules on how long an airplane may delay taking off after ice is removed from its wings should be viewed only as guidelines, airline executives and pilots told the Federal Aviation Administration today.
The aviation agency has said it plans to impose mandatory limits on how long a plane may taxi in freezing rain or snow.
The aim is to avoid crashes like the one that killed 27 people at La Guardia Airport in New York in March.
In that accident, a USAir jet that had taxied for half an hour after having ice washed from its wings tumbled out of control while taking off in a snowstorm.


Sports of The Times; Knocking On the Same Closed Doors
Earlier this week, the commissioners of professional baseball, basketball and football shared the same table in New York as guests of the Association for Women in Sports Media.
The topic of this unprecedented meeting of sports czars was a view of sports in the 21st century.
Fay Vincent, the baseball commissioner, outlined a marketing plan designed to bring black and Hispanic fans back to the ball park.
Paul Tagliabue, the football commissioner, predicted that stadiums would be built with TV monitors at every seat and technology that would link home VCR's with satellites to give fans a 24-hour menu of programming.
David Stern, the basketball commissioner, talked about expansion into international markets.


Mob Informer Questioned on Life of Lies
Under blistering cross-examination yesterday, the former boss of the Lucchese crime family repeatedly acknowledged that he had led a life of violence and deceit that included years of lying to the same Federal Government he has now turned to in an attempt to protect himself and his family from gangland retribution.
The witness, Alfonse D'Arco, 59 years old, a longtime member of the Lucchese crime organization and its acting boss in 1991, said under questioning that he routinely gave the Federal Government false information for selfish gain.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Candidate's Wife; Back to College for an Image Makeover
Hillary R. Clinton, the wife of Gov.
Bill Clinton, criticized the Bush Administration's family policies here today.
And she used the occasion of the commencement speech at Wellesley College to try to reshape her public image, which has worried managers of her husband's Presidential campaign.
In her address to the 619 women graduates, Mrs.
Clinton, herself a Wellesley alumna, made a point of praising women who decide to stay at home and raise families as well as those who choose careers.


McColgan Hearing Footsteps In 10-K
Liz McColgan is the runner to beat in the 21st Advil Mini Marathon today, and Lisa Ondieki, who won the 1987 Mini and placed third in the New York City Marathon last fall, may be just the runner to beat her.
It won't be easy.
McColgan, who ran the fastest debut marathon ever in winning the New York City event last fall, is not only the world 10,000-meter champion and the world-record holder in the 10-kilometer road race (6.2 miles) with a time of 30 minutes 39 seconds.
She has also been setting a blistering pace as she prepares for that distance in the Summer Olympics in Barcelona, Spain.


COMPANY NEWS: Hold the Pickles; Counsel Adds a Twist To Vlasic vs. Claussen
A snappy television commercial for Claussen pickles has left a sour taste in the mouth of the industry leader, Vlasic Foods Inc.
The Claussen commercial uses a graphic test to demonstate the crispness of its pickles.
In the ad, Claussen pickles break crisply in two when bent.
In contrast, the less crisp rivals, which are unidentified, simply bend under pressure.


Warsaw Journal; Where Children Are Taught Survival
A young girl, her voice a shrill falsetto, her adolescent gait mimicking a high-heeled totter, scolded three boys for having their socks on the floor.
"And another thing," she said, wagging her finger.
"You should be in the library."
From the other side of the room, rows of children burst into giggles.
Blond heads bobbed, and hands, grubby from melted chocolate, shot into the air.
"You're Miss Barbara!" they shouted.
"You're Miss Barbara!"


Traffic Alert
TODAY
Because of the West Side Plantathon and Crafts Sale, the east side of Broadway will be closed between 72d and 86th streets from 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.
TOMORROW


Review/Film; Sandinistas in Retrospect
"Pictures From a Revolution" was shown as part of last year's New York Film Festival.
Following are excerpts from Vincent Canby's review, which appeared in The New York Times on Oct. 5, 1991.
The film -- in Spanish and English with English subtitles -- open
ed Thursday
at the Joseph Papp Public Theater, 425 Lafayette Street, at Astor Place, in Manhattan.
"Pictures From a Revolution" is a somber meditation on what sometimes looks like the futility of all social struggle.
It's a report on Nicaragua today, recorded by Susan Meiselas, an American photographer who covered the Sandinista revolution, its victory and its collapse.


Victory and Compromises For Shaper of Energy Bill
It has taken Representative Philip R. Sharp 18 years of quietly developing expertise on energy issues, but with Wednesday's House passage of an ambitious energy bill, the Indiana Democrat emerged from the shadow of John D. Dingell, the dominant Democrat on energy issues and one of the big powers in the House of Representatives.
Yet for Mr.
Sharp, a former political science professor who had taught a course in the legislative process, it was a bittersweet victory.


Review/Folk; A Rollicking Family Affair
Weill Recital Hall is a strange setting for a folk concert; its heavy olive draperies, neoclassical columns and parlor lighting stand in sharp contrast to the rural populist intent of the folk tradition.
On Wednesday night, in the first of a six-concert series called the Carnegie Hall Folk Festival, Bill Sky of the Bill Sky Family, a father-daughter duo from the Ozark foothills in Arkansas, broke the spell as soon as he walked onstage.
"Howdy!" he said.
"We say howdy where we're from." He then introduced his daughter Laurie as "my 1969 tax deduction" (she smiled demurely), and the pair launched into a bright, rollicking tune about Jesse James.
Mr.
Sky, wearing a gray suit and a bow tie, bounced up and down as he sang and picked his acoustic guitar.
His daughter, in a puffy-sleeved white blouse and ankle-length skirt, her long blond hair piled on her head, strummed a chorded zither with ladylike restraint.
She looked like a Victorian Vanna White.
The material delved deep into American folklore: songs by the country progenitors, the Carter Family; a white gospel standard Mr.
Sky said had been written in 1887, the folk classic "Tom Dooley."


Lawyer Gets Prison Term
Alvin Ashley, a disbarred divorce lawyer who pleaded quilty last year to stealing more than $1.28 million from his clients and friends in fraudulent investment schemes, was sentenced yesterday to three to nine years in state prison.
Mr.
Ashley, the 57-year-old former president of the New York chapter of the American Academy of Matrimonial Lawyers, will be eligible for parole in 1995.
On Sept. 24, 1991, he pleaded guilty to charges of defrauding dozens of clients and friends in nonexistent investment schemes.
He was sentenced in State Supreme Court in Manhattan.
He lives in Hartsdale, N.Y.


A Four-Year Wait for Redemption
For now, the present is shrouded by that one painful moment in the past and the moment of shining redemption he imagines in the future.
The intervening four years exist for Eric Griffin only as the means to erase one with the other.
With the Barcelona Olympics just ahead, little else matters.
"It wasn't like I was really hooked on drugs," he said.
"The only thing I ever did was marijuana. Never cocaine or crack or heroin or anything like that. I was just out partying, hanging around with friends. It's not what people thought, that I was selling or distributing drugs. It was a one-night stand, just hanging around with the wrong fellas."


Drexel Sues to Recover $5 Million From Boesky
The fallout from the Wall Street scandals of the 1980's continued yesterday when Drexel Burnham Lambert, the brokerage house that went bankrupt with the fall of its junk bond innovator, Michael R. Milken, sued Ivan F. Boesky, accusing him of having stolen millions from Drexel through his security frauds and insider trading deals with Mr.
Milken.
In a civil suit filed in the United States District Court in Manhattan, Drexel contends that Mr.
Boesky, the former arbitrager, aided Mr.
Milken and others at Drexel in using the firm as an "instrument of criminal schemes."


Company Briefs
CLOROX CO., Oakland, Calif., is considering the sale of its Prince Castle subsidiary, a specialty restaurant equipment concern.
GENERAL MILLS INC., Minneapolis, will record a net charge to discontinued operations of approximately $10 million when reporting results for the fiscal year ending May 31, 1992.


Guidepost; Caring for Carpets
As summer approaches, experts in the rug industry advise those planning on storing rugs, particularly those made of wool, to do so with care.
Here are some tips.
WOOL AREA RUGS


CHRONICLE
Thoughts of a world-renowned conductor and composer on the eve of his only daughter's wedding: "I don't worry at all when I'm conducting an orchestra, but I certainly do when I'm going to give my daughter away."
LUKAS FOSS was contemplating the prospect of escorting ELIZA FOSS, an actress, down the aisle in Manhattan this afternoon, when she marries PHILLIP TURINO, an architect.


Mets Get a Run, and the Fans Get on the Mets
It was about as good a Bronx cheer as can be mustered in Queens.
Those left at Shea Stadium rose and roared as Vince Coleman sped across the plate in the ninth inning last night.
The run possessed no real value in a 5-1 loss to the Atlanta Braves, but it wasn't without meaning.
For if a defeat had not been avoided, an unpleasant bit of history had.


Too Many Secrets on Child Abuse
Are New York authorities doing all they can to protect children from abuse?
That can't be answered because a state law requires confidentiality in abuse cases.
But the question demands answers, which is why proposals in Albany to relax the confidentiality law deserve support.
A series of child abuse cases in recent months dramatize the need for revision.
Among the most egregious was that of Shulamis Riegler, who pleaded guilty to the attempted assault of one of her sons, Israel, and was then placed under the supervision of probation officers.


INSIDE
A Positive Econonic Reports
The after-tax profits of American companies increased 8 percent in the first quarter, and the economy grew at a 2.4 percent annual pace.
Page 33.
Complaints at White House
President Bush's campaign chief has warned of confusion in the re-election effort, touching off speculation about a White House shake-up.
Page 8.
Split Verdict in Yale Killing
A New Haven teen-ager was acquitted of murder in the slaying of a Yale sophomore, but jurors convicted him on one count of robbery.
Page 25.


New York Faults on Tennis Center Deal
To the Editor:
Bernard Haber, chairman of Community Board 11 in Bayside, Queens (no relation to the undersigned) and I have the same surname, but when it concerns New York City's willingness to give the United States Tennis Association 34.7 more acres of land in Flushing Meadows-Corona Park, the similarity ends (letter, May 21).


METRO DIGEST
THE NEW DRIVERS' CONTRACT
Labor leaders said new contracts ratified by newspaper delivery drivers would set the pattern for reshaping the industry.
Many drivers said they had voted for the contracts, which will extensively change their jobs, only because they needed their paychecks.
Page 25.
NEW YORK CITY  ANOTHER PROBLEM FOR LINCOLN HOSPITAL


More Drug Allegations Against Accused Officer Emerge
Police officials looking into the arrests this month of five Brooklyn officers and a retired colleague on cocaine charges are investigating an allegation, made 14 months ago, that one of the suspected ringleaders also worked for a Dominican drug gang, investigators said yesterday.
The arrests of the officers, who are accused of buying drugs in Brooklyn and selling them to distributors in Long Island, were made by the police in Suffolk County and have raised questions about New York City's efforts to root out police corruption.


Low Tolerance for Political Commercials? Just Count to 10
After all the tirades against campaigns that are waged through commercials, perhaps it is time to say something in defense of the 30-second advertisement.
Just think, it could be a 10-second ad.
In California, where advertising costs are high and tolerance for politicians low, some candidates are now offering voters a chance to get to know them in just one-sixth of a minute, roughly the amount of time it takes most people to write their names.


It's a Challenge Making Head or Tail of Arazi's Future
In April, when the future beckoned like a siren's song, Arazi's handlers could not agree whether their wonder colt would race for the Triple Crown after winning the Kentucky Derby or return to Europe for the Epsom Derby.
As it turned out, Arazi could do no better than eighth place at Churchill Downs.
Now, as June begins, the goals are less lofty for Arazi, but the internal debate continues.
Just as before, the answers about Arazi's future depend on who is responding to the questions.


Prosecutors Widen Inquiry In House Post Office Case
A Federal grand jury investigating the House post office has expanded its inquiry and is trying to determine whether lawmakers used low-level postal clerks to run errands and perform campaign-related services, people close to the investigation said today.
The widening of the inquiry came to light on Thursday with the announcement on the House floor that subpoenas had been served on three low-level postal employees, two clerks and a secretary to Robert V. Rota, the former House postmaster, who resigned in March.


Jets Take Major Step Toward Keeping O'Brien
The Jets have taken the first step toward retaining Ken O'Brien for next season.
The team has offered O'Brien a one-year contract for $1.45 million, which is 100 percent of his 1991 salary, to retain his National Football League rights.
The procedural move does not mean that the 31-year-old O'Brien is under contract.
It means that the Jets have secured the exclusive rights to negotiate with O'Brien and that any negotiations will begin from a floor of $1.45 million.
If they had not made the offer to re-sign O'Brien at last year's salary by midnight Monday, he would have become an unresticted free agent and could have signed with any team in the N.F.L.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.25-6.5
6.25-6.5
8.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.62
3.87
5.92
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.68
3.66
5.53
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.82
3.82
5.67
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.95
6.99
7.90
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.83
7.85
8.26
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.76
8.80
9.30
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.63
6.64
7.21
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


A Sign of the Times: Lendl Shown the Exit In the Second Round
In his two-year absence from the French Open, Ivan Lendl has attracted calamity like so much lint.
His body, that renowned machine of sinew and steel, has become a temple for aches and pains.
His confidence has been shaken, his reputation for invincibility more a memory than a factor of the moment.
In his match strategy, losing passionately has been substituted for winning inevitably.
"I have to go for the shots and if I lose, I am going to lose by swinging, not by being pushed around," said Lendl, who nonetheless wound up outswung and pushed out of the tournament in the second round by a bolder opponent this afternoon.


U.S. to Reject Pact on Protection Of Wildlife and Global Resources
Less than a week before the start of a global environmental summit conference, the Bush Administration said today that it would not sign an international treaty recently negotiated by 98 countries to preserve the world's plants, animals and natural resources.
The treaty, the product of almost two weeks of intense negotiations in Nairobi, Kenya, this month, is considered one of the two main achievements of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, which begins on Wednesday in Rio de Janeiro.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Primary; Enthusiasm Is Lacking On Ohio Ballot Choices
Ohio is so representative of America that some political analysts half-seriously say that Ohioans should nominate Presidential candidates in a single primary and be done with the long, noisy national campaigns.
But instead of having a leadership role, this bellwether state is holding a primary next Tuesday that is expected to draw fewer than a third of the state's voters and do little more than help shutter up the long primary season.


What Dressy Gadgets Will Wear
It is known informally as "the igloo" among Thomson Consumer Electronics executives, who have high hopes for the 13-inch television set with a smooth, bulbous back and curvy front.
The distinctive shape is one strategy that Thomson, which sells the RCA and General Electric brands, is using to try to convince consumers that they need more color sets, now that 97 percent of American households have at least one.
"The U.S. market is becoming more fashion-conscious," said James A. Gatman, a Thomson general manager, who added that the look of a television's back is especially important when it sits on a counter instead of against a wall.


Reynold Says He'll Run
BUTCH REYNOLDS said he would defy an international ban and compete in the Bruce Jenner Classic at San Jose, Calif., today.
"I'm running, and I'm going to run fast," Reynolds said.
The international governing body for track and field had warned Reynolds, the world record-holder at 400 meters and the 1988 Olympic silver medalist, not to run at San Jose for fear of "contaminating" other competitors in the meet.


EXODUS FROM HAITI APPEARS TO HASTEN DESPITE U.S. SHIFT
Less than a week after the introduction of a new American policy of returning fleeing Haitians directly to their country, there are signs that far from slowing down, the exodus has accelerated.
When the new procedure was introduced on Sunday, officials here said it was expected to quickly take the wind out of the exodus of thousands of boat people.
They said it would send a strong message that those who leave the country in that manner would have almost no chance of traveling far beyond Haiti's coastal waters.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Undeclared Candidate; Perot, Using Satellite, Addresses Rallies in Six States
Ross Perot, whose flirtations with a Presidential campaign have mainly been played out in the electronic news media, today made his first use of modern communications technology to simultaneously appear at campaign rallies in six states.
While the diminutive Texan who is looming ever larger in the Presidential sweepstakes appeared in the flesh before a crowd of screaming partisans at a fairgrounds in this resort city, his image, voice and rebellious oratory were beamed via satellite to gatherings in Alabama, Idaho, Kansas, Ohio and Wyoming.


Off-Duty Investigator Is Slashed in Subway
An off-duty investigator in the Brooklyn District Attorney's office was slashed repeatedly in the face, arm and back of the head last night in an argument with another man in a Brooklyn subway station, the transit police said.
It was not immediately known what provoked the attack, but the officer, Detective Investigator Robert Raines, responded by drawing his .38-caliber revolver and firing it five times, striking the assailant at least twice in the stomach, said Lieut.
Brian O'Connor of the transit police.


Thomas Out on Bail
DERREL THOMAS, a former major league player awaiting trial on charges that he purchased cocaine from undercover police officers, was released early yesterday in Los Angeles after posting bond.
A preliminary hearing was scheduled for June 12. (AP)


Young Bear, Picked On, Heads for Paramus Mall
It was not a hallucination.
A young black bear today popped up in this mecca of malls and busy highways.
And the chase was on -- as the chases are in New Jersey almost every spring when bears' age-old territorial instincts collide with man's need to put up buildings on any available land.


Hospital Overcharge Was $5,000 Mistake
To the Editor:
In re Jacques Liwer's May 6 letter on hospital overcharges, three years ago the same Blue Cross-Blue Shield, acting for Medicare, paid their 80 percent of my nearly $10,000 in hospital charges.
I had stayed a week for rearrangement of a dislocated ankle and repair of three bone breaks.
No challenge by Blue Cross or Medicare apparently.


Barrett Sues Red Sox
MARTY BARRETT, a former Boston Red Sox second baseman, has sued the team and its physician and part-owner, ARTHUR PAPPAS, charging that they were negligent in handling his knee injury in 1989.
Pappas and a team representative, JIM SAMIA, declined to comment on the suit.


Yankee Comeuppance Instead of Comeback
No lead is safe when the Brewers and Yankees play.
Right?
Usually.
But last night was a different story as the Brewers danced to a 5-0 lead in the fourth inning and barely got knocked off their feet after that.
They stumbled for a step or two but eventually waltzed to an 8-3 victory.
After four comeback-laden games between the two teams at Yankee Stadium last weekend, the venue for this party shifted to County Stadium.
Would there be just as many comebacks?
The emphatic answer to that question was provided by Bill Wegman, who halted the Yankees for eight innings and helped insure that any comebacks would have to wait until Saturday.
Shaky Situation for Cadaret
Wegman brushed aside home runs by Charlie Hayes and Roberto Kelly and stranded four runners in the sixth and seventh to win his fourth game in a row against the Yankees.
Greg Cadaret was ripped for seven earned runs in five innings and tried brushing off another miserable start by blaming two errant fastballs.
It was more than two pitches that sent Cadaret to his fourth loss in five decisions and turned his position in the rotation tenuous.


A Study Suggests Ways to Eliminate Playground Hazards
Most public playgrounds have hidden perils that too many children somehow discover.
Each year, playground accidents cause almost 150,000 injuries requiring hospital treatment and more than 17 deaths.
"A lot needs to be done about American playgrounds," said Mary Ellen Fise, product safety director of the Consumer Federation of America, an advocacy group.
"Playgrounds do not have to be hazardous to children's health."


SMITHKLINE BEECHAM SETS PACT WITH BOLTON GROUP
SmithKline Beecham P.L.C. said yesterday that it would swap its interest in Maneti Robert to its partner, the Bolton Group, for full control of the Beecham Italia business, plus a small, undisclosed sum.
SmithKline currently owns 51 percent of Beecham Italia, which owns Maneti Roberts.
Under the agreement, effective July 1, Bolton will get Maneti Robert from Beecham Italia and SmithKline Beecham will get the 49 percent it does not already own of Beecham Italia from Bolton.


No Wrinkles, No Sweat: A Bike-to-Work Bag
Commuting to work by bicycle can save time and money.
It can also provide you with a bike ride's worth of exercise.
But if your job demands that you dress in traditional business clothes, bicycling to work can be a nuisance.
If you bike in your office clothing, it is likely to get sweaty, even dirty.
And if you roll up a suit or a dress and put it in a backpack, it is apt to come out wrinkled.


CHRONICLE
PRINCESS STEPHANIE of Monaco has disclosed in a magazine interview that she is expecting a baby in November and said that the father is a bodyguard for the royal family, Italian newspapers reported yesterday.
The Associated Press in Rome quoted ANSA, the Italian news agency, which carried excerpts of an interview with the 26-year-old daughter of Prince Rainier and the late Princess Grace that is to be published in the next issue of Oggi, the Italian weekly magazine.


Ultimate Test Now Looms for Blazers
The question about the Portland Trail Blazers was never whether they could win the Western Conference championship series.
Eventually, they were bound to eliminate the Utah Jazz, which they did here Thursday night in Game 6.
The real question is whether the Trail Blazers are capable of winning at the ultimate level, whether they can wipe away their recent past and win their first National Basketball Association title in 15 years.


Public Toilets (New and Improved) for the Public
Walking west on 42d Street toward Avenue of the Americas, Norma Schnuderl turned left at midblock into Bryant Park and abruptly pulled up short.
As her companion went blithely into the city's newest public restroom, Ms.
Schnuderl, a pleasant-faced woman with glasses, stood outside, puffing on a cigarette, muttering aspersions.
"I wouldn't go in there," she said. "I hate public johns."


Cher Postpones Shows
Cher has postponed her five-night engagement at the Paramount, which was to begin tonight, because of bronchitis.
The opening was originally scheduled for Wednesday night, but was pushed back.
Yesterday the singer's doctor ordered her not to perform at all.
New dates will be announced next week, but anyone wishing a refund may request it at the place where tickets were purchased.
For information on new dates: (212) 465-6741, starting on Monday.


Bridge
A major upset marked second-round play in the prestigious Reisinger Knockout Team Championship Wednesday night.
A group of world-renowned players, Jim Cayne, Zia Mahmood, Alan Sontag, Russ Ekeblad, Edgar Kaplan and Brian Glubok lost by 25 imps to a New York City foursome: Win Allegaert, Jared Lilienstein, Arjun Ray and Fred Chang.
Play was at the Manhattan Club, which this week abandoned its premises at 23 West 73d Street and returned to its earlier home at 27 West 72d Street.
Quarterfinal play in the Reisinger Thursday and yesterday was at the Beverly Club, 130 East 57th Street.
At the midpoint the scores by captain were: David Rosenberg led John Roberts by 14 imps; Allegaert led Jon Greenspan by 81; Mel Colchamiro led Larry Cohen by 59; Seymour Reich led Andy Goodman by 15.


Ex-Soviets Road to Capitalism Hits a U.S. Bump
A half- dozen newly independent republics in the old Soviet Union, still fumbling their way toward free markets and fast food, received a bracing lesson in American capitalism today.
The Commerce Department said they were selling uranium at unfairly low prices and proposed a punitive import tariff that would more than double the price.
The preliminary ruling, which will be followed by a final determination in early fall, was issued in response to complaints from American uranium producers.
The decision puts the Bush Administration in the embarrassing position of moving to cripple exports from some of the most impoverished republics while the United States is rallying international aid for them and criticizing Western Europe for excluding goods from Eastern Europe.


Review/Film; Some Serious Singing in the Shower
"The Adjuster" was shown as part of last year's New York Film Festival.
Following are excerpts from Janet Maslin's review, which appeared in The New York Times on Sept. 26, 1991.
The film opened yesterday at Lincoln Plaza Cinemas, Broadway and 63d Street, Manhattan.
Atom Egoyan, the director of "The Adjuster," takes quiet glee in laying out the individual elements of his film as if they were clues in a detective story or pieces of a puzzle.
Mr.
Egoyan finds even greater satisfaction in the off-balance, mischievously witty way in which those pieces finally fit together.


To Help Itself, Utility Aids Riot Area
For the Southern California Edison Company, the response to last month's riots did not end when it finally got the power back on.
The utility, whose profits from selling electricity are directly dependent on the economic health of the Los Angeles area, saw that the unrest would be another blow to the long-term prospects of the region.
The area was already being hurt by a severe recession and by a flight of companies and jobs to other states.


U.S. Aide Cites Tampering With Records on Iraq Sales
The chief Commerce Department lawyer told a Congressional committee today that Commerce officials had tampered with records sent to Congress last year concerning exports of technology to Iraq before its invasion of Kuwait.
He said such tampering was "absolutely" wrong.
The Justice Department is investigating whether Bush Administration officials altered the list of United States exports to Iraq to disguise the shipment of militarily useful equipment and technology, and whether the changes violated Federal law.


Macedonia Is More Than a Name to Greece; Skopje to Explain
To the Editor:
"They've Been Macedonians for 1,400 Years" by Pavlina Proeva and Sheila Krstevski (letter, May 2) serves as evidence why Greek opposition in naming a new neighboring state "Macedonia" is fully justified.


Observer; Time For a Change
For a real bummer, how about Senator Bob Dole trying to cut us off from "Masterpiece Theater"?
This could make me revise my high opinion of Dole.
When he ran against George Bush for the Republican nomination in 1988 he looked like first-rate Presidential timber, which is to say genuine oak in comparison with George Bush's balsa wood.
When he lost, the media wizards said it was because Dole was "mean." What some saw as meanness seemed to me something more interesting: an authentic capacity for outrage and a genuine wit.
These aren't bad qualities for a President, but a television electorate bred to admire the phony and laugh when a laugh track laughs is unlikely to admire either authenticity or wit.


Leader Watches the Birdies in First Round of Nynex
On a day when the nearby Hudson River was shimmering, the birds singing and the bees buzzing, Don Bies made a nestful of birdies today to take a one-shot lead after the first round of the Nynex Commemorative.
Bies, who has won five Senior Tour events but is without a victory since 1989, fired a six-under-par 64 under ideal conditions at the Sleepy Hollow Country Club to take a one-shot lead over Gay Brewer, Simon Hobday and Ben Smith.


Brokers Tilt Field More Against Buyers
To the Editor:
The General Accounting Office study on arbitration demonstrates, once again, that arbitration is an essentially conservative forum ("Wall St. Arbitration Programs Criticized," Business Day, May 12).
It found that even claimants who win recover only 60 percent of their losses.


CONCERN ABOUT GROWTH PAINS AT SBARRO REMAIN
The management of Sbarro Inc. yesterday failed to dispell investor concerns about growth pains at the national chain of cafeteria-style Italian restaurants.
The stock fell $2.875, to $22.625, yesterday after top management met with Wall Street analysts to discuss the company's disappointing performance in the first quarter.


Review/Film; A Party-Crasher Finds A Bit of Nuttiness Helps
"Why did I come to New York?" muses Richard Osterweil, a painter and notorious party crasher, in the opening moments of Andrew Behar's documentary film, "Painting the Town." "Well, I came here for the same reason most people do, though they will not admit it. I came to see celebrities and to spy on celebrities."
There is certainly much truth in Mr.
Osterweil's description of the allure of big-city glamour.
The difference between him and everybody else is that he has refused to settle for the vicarious pleasures of the society columns.
By scouring the newspapers, forging invitations, adopting disguises and accents, and exercising sheer chutzpah, he has succeeded in attending many of New York's grander social events over the last two decades without an invitation.


The Real Martinez Shows Up at Last
Dodgers 1, Cubs 0
CHICAGO, May 29 (AP) -- This was the Ramon Martinez the Los Angeles Dodgers have been waiting for.
Martinez pitched a three-hitter and Todd Benzinger drove in the run with a ninth-inning sacrifice fly to give the Dodgers a 1-0 victory over the Chicago Cubs today.


From Finish to Start
Secretary of State Baker has finally obtained a commitment to carry out last year's strategic arms reduction treaty from all four former Soviet nuclear republics.
And three of them -- Ukraine, Kazakhstan and Belarus -- have pledged to become nuclear-free, leaving Russia as the sole heir to Soviet nuclear arms.
Mr.
Baker's treaty-making has thus been brought to a successful finish.
But the task of reducing the nuclear risks in that unsettled part of the world has barely begun.


Corporate Profits Post Rise of 8%
Benefiting from severe cost-cutting and moderately higher sales, American companies increased after-tax profits by 8 percent in the first quarter, as the economy at large grew somewhat faster than initially estimated, the Government reported today.
The profit figure, the best performance in four years, was the highlight of the Commerce Department report, which put growth at a 2.4 percent annual pace during the first three months of the year instead of the 2 percent pace estimated a month ago.


Review/Dance; A Troupe of Extremes
Iso Dance is a creature of wild extremes, to judge by the program the company presented on Tuesday at the Joyce Theater (175 Eighth Avenue, at 19th Street), where it performs through tomorrow.
Iso at its best was represented by "Slow Fade to Roger," a new work choreographed by Jamey Hampton and Ashley Roland and danced to music by John Paul Jones and the Lounge Lizards.
"Woomen," a 1983 duet choreographed and performed by Mr.
Hampton and Daniel Ezralow, was Iso at its most puerile.
It was hard to tell what its creators had in mind in the premiere.
Was Roger the man dressed like a surgeon?
Were the two men and two women churning about him the asylum inmates they resembled?
None of it made much sense, and perhaps it was not intended to, but senselessness tends to get boring after a while.
Then just as one had settled down for a spate of generic flux, an intriguing little dance surfaced that had Ms.
Roland flapping like a woebegone rag doll, parts of her body seeming eerily disconnected from the rest.
Around her, sometimes led by her, was a chorus of bodies inching their way along the floor like worms.
It was an apocalyptic vision fully realized in movement but all too short, for soon it was back to episodic prat-falling.


Joseph Trerotola, Unionist, 82; Led Teamsters Unit for 26 Years
Joseph Trerotola, who started as a milk deliverer and rose to power in the International Brotherhood of Teamsters, died on Tuesday at St.
Lawrence Hospital in Bronxville, N.Y.
He was 82 years old and lived in Yonkers.
He died of a heart attack, his family said.


Chamber Symphony
The New York Chamber Symphony's final concerts of the season are to take place tonight at 8 o'clock and tomorrow at 3 P.M. at the 92d Street Y, on Lexington Avenue in Manhattan.
Gerard Schwarz will conduct Henri Lazarof's Clarinet Concerto (David Singer, soloist), Bruch's First Violin Concerto, (Elmar Oliveira, soloist), Honegger's Second Symphony and Mozart's Symphony No. 39.
Tickets are $25 and $30.
Information: (212) 996-1100.


Bond Prices Up on Modest Growth Outlook
Prices of Treasury securities moved higher and interest rates fell for the third straight session yesterday, as traders seemed to become increasingly comfortable with the view that the nascent economic recovery will be neither explosive nor inflationary.
Data released yesterday appeared to support that sense.


Florio Battles G.O.P. Again With 2 Vetoes
Gov.
Jim Florio said today that he would use his second and third vetoes in two weeks to try to force the Legislature's Republican majority to amend two bills that backers say will help New Jersey keep jobs and business.
He was reluctant to veto the bills, Mr.
Florio said, because "they reflect the need to do everything possible to help our state's business deal with the devastating effects of this national recession."


City College Is 'on the Frontier,' Writer Says
The Nigerian novelist Chinua Achebe addressed the 1,900 graduates at the City College of New York's 146th commencement yesterday, where he was awarded an honorary doctorate of letters.
Sitting in his wheelchair, Mr.
Achebe, a Bard College professor who was paralyzed in an automobile accident five years ago, addressed the graduates at the Lewisohn Plaza in Manhattan by relating his higher education in Nigeria to the students' experience at City College, which he said was "positioned on the frontier of despair."


Quenching a Thirst in Brooklyn


Opponents Of Gun Bill Pessimistic
With police unions lobbying dozens of members of the Legislature for a measure that would require New York City to arm all its officers with semiautomatic weapons, opponents of the bill conceded today that the only way they could stop it would be to block it from coming to a vote.
"If this bill comes to the floor, it is destined for passage," said Alexander B. Grannis, a Manhattan Democrat, who opposes the measure.
He predicted that most of his colleagues' concerns about an unprecedented intrusion into decisions normally made by the police command would be overridden by political considerations.


Corrections
An article and charts yesterday about the 1990 Census contained a number of errors.
Detailed corrections and a corrected map appear today on page 7.


Broom Is Less Likely If Hawks Play Clean
When the Chicago Blackhawks were in the midst of their recent 11-game playoff winning streak, the actor Jim Belushi came to a game at Chicago Stadium armed with a little broom.
When it became clear that his beloved Hawks would beat the Detroit Red Wings in four games in their second-round series, Belushi threw the broom on the ice.
Sweep!
Get it?
He is their honorary celebrity captain, part of the league's 75th-anniversary celebration.
So why not rub it in?


Defendant Is Found Not Guilty of Murder but Guilty of Robbery in Yale Slaying
A Superior Court jury today found a local 17-year-old not guilty of murder in the 1991 slaying of a Yale sophomore.
The jury deadlocked on two other charges and reached a guilty verdict only on one robbery count.
Judge William L. Hadden Jr. declared a mistrial on the two counts on which the jury was deadlocked -- attempted first-degree robbery and felony murder -- and dismissed the jurors after suggesting that they remain silent about their four days of deliberations.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: On the Sidelines; Bradley, a Noncandidate, Is Still New Jersey's Favorite (No. 2) Son
Senator Bill Bradley, who spent a great deal of his 1990 re-election campaign explaining that he was not really running for President, is now insisting that he is not running for Vice President either, although a majority of New Jerseyans say they would like him to do so.
Mr.
Bradley most recently disavowed interest in the No. 2 spot on the Democratic ticket on Tuesday, when he said in Philadelphia that he had repeatedly promised New Jersey voters in 1990 that he would serve out his current Senate term.


Silas Leaving the Knicks To Join Daly With Nets
Chuck Daly's hiring as head coach of the Nets on Thursday had an immediate impact on the Knicks yesterday.
Paul Silas, a Knicks assistant coach for the last three seasons, resigned yesterday to join Daly's staff, which will also be joined by Brendan Suhr as soon as Suhr and the Nets agree on contract terms.


Classical Music in Review
Maya Beiser  Cellist 92d Street Y


Classical Music in Review
'La Senna Festeggiante' Alice Tully Hall


Correction: The 1990 Census
An article yesterday about the 1990 Census incorrectly reported two statistics on disability in some copies.
The fraction of people age 16 to 64 limited in mobility or ability to care for themselves was 10 percent, not 1 percent.
The proportion of those 65 or older in this category was one third, not two thirds.
Charts about the Census also contained several errors in some copies.


After the Cold War: Views From Latin America; Sweeping Political Changes Leave Latin Poor Still Poor
Nowhere across the developing world does a new order appear more evident than in Latin America.
Armies that ruled much of the hemisphere barely a decade ago are shut in their barracks; most of the leftists they so dreaded are in a shambles.
Countries that had barricaded their economies against the outside world have found the same new answers: Trade barriers are falling like dominoes, and state enterprises are everywhere up for sale.


Gillian Barr Rudd, 49; Aided Businesswomen
Gillian Barr Rudd, who ran a marketing firm and was a leader in national efforts to foster business ownership by women, died on Tuesday at Sibley Hospital in Washington.
She was 49 years old and lived in Washington.
She died of ovarian cancer, her company said.


Helping 'Deadbeat Dads' Get Jobs and Pay Support
Fourteen men sat in a room, leafing through the classified ads with varying degrees of enthusiasm, poring over a tip sheet of companies that might have openings, calling to set up job interviews.
Each man had children with a woman who receives welfare.
Each was unemployed and thousands of dollars behind on his court-ordered child-support payments.
And each was here by court order, getting help with the search for a job.


Patents; Implantable Lens For Cataracts
Ioptex Research Inc. of Irwindale, Calif., a subsidiary of Smith &amp; Nephew P.L.C. of Britain, has patented a new implantable eye lens for cataract patients that is designed to allow a person to focus on objects either close up or far away.
The lens, which is being tested in human patients, is one of many attempts by companies to develop "multifocal" lenses that are analogous to bifocal spectacles but do not have the visible dividing lines most such eyeglasses have.
At the moment, cataract patients receive "monofocal" lenses, which give them much greater clarity than they had before surgery but which can focus only either up close or at a distance.
The 3M Corporation and Iolab, a subsidiary of Johnson &amp; Johnson Inc., have both completed clinical trials on two other approaches.


Patents; Balloon, a Really Big One, for High-Altitude Research
Hoping to give scientists a new tool to study the earth's atmosphere and peer into outer space, a small Texas company has developed what is almost certainly the world's most astonishing high-altitude balloon.
Huge and filled with helium, the unmanned balloon has a diameter that is longer than a football field, can carry up to four tons of scientific equipment and, its inventors say, can drift more than 22 miles above the earth, near the edge of outer space, for as long as a year at a time.


BUSINESS DIGEST
International
A half dozen Soviet republics got a bracing lesson in American capitalism when the Commerce Department said they were selling uranium at unfairly low prices and proposed a punitive import tariff that would more than double the price.
The preliminary ruling, issued in response to complaints from U.S. uranium producers, puts the Administration in an embarrassing position.  [ Page 1. ]
Alan Bond was sentenced to two and a half years in prison for fraud.
He was charged in connection with efforts to save the Rothwells merchant bank, which was hit by a run on its funds after the October 1987 market crash.  [ 35. ]
Nissan reported that annual profits more than doubled, to $762 million, because of one-time gains from the sale of real estate.  [ 35. ] The Economy
U.S. companies increased after-tax profits by 8 percent in the first quarter, helped by severe cost-cutting and moderately higher sales, as the economy at large grew somewhat faster than initially estimated, the Government reported.  [ 33. ]
Demand for business and consumer loans strengthened in the last three months, the Fed reported.  [ 34. ]
Prices that farmers received for their goods in May remained unchanged from the previous month.  [ 34. ]
With House passage of an energy bill, Rep.
Philip Sharp emerged from the shadow of John D. Dingell, the dominant Democrat on energy issues.
But it was a bittersweet victory.  [ 33. ]
New rules on delays on plane takeoffs should be viewed as guidelines, airline executives and pilots told the F.A.A.  [ 6. ] Companies
Zenith and A. T.&amp; T. successfully transmitted crisp, vivid images over a 75-mile distance between Milwaukee and Glenview, Ill., providing real evidence that their system for broadcasting high-definition TV had overcome an important hurdle.  [ 33. ]
Many products at the Consumer Electronics Show highlight the way companies are putting more emphasis on design to create new demand for established products.  [ 33. ]
A snappy TV commercial for Claussen pickles has left a sour taste in the mouth of Vlasic Foods.  [ 35. ]
Cascade International's chairman and president were ordered by a judge to step down as soon as replacements can be found.  [ 35. ]
Drexel sued Ivan F. Boesky, accusing him of having stolen millions from Drexel through his securities frauds and insider trading deals with Michael Milken.  [ 37. ]
For Southern California Edison, the response to the Los Angeles riots did not end when it finally got the power back on.  [ 33. ]
Newspaper delivery drivers rode warily into the future on new labor contracts that will chart the way to extensive changes in the way they do their jobs.  [ 25. ] Markets
The dollar settled sharply lower after early waves of aggressive dollar selling by the Bank of Japan to support the yen.  [ 33. ]
The stock market closed mixed after a broad early rally failed to hold.
The Dow, well past 3,400 earlier, closed at 3,396.88, down 1.55 for the day but up 10.11 for the week.  [ 36. ]
Prices of Treasury securities moved higher and interest rates fell again.  [ 36. ]
Soybean futures prices jumped more than 10 cents a bushel amid uncertain prospects for rain in the Midwest.  [ 43. ] Today's Columns
An unmanned balloon with a diameter longer than a football field that can carry up to four tons of scientific equipment is intended as a new tool to study the earth's atmosphere.
Edmund L. Andrews: Patents.  [ 34. ]
For a fledgling entrepreneur or a moonlighter who hires part-time help, the tax code's reporting requirements for businesses can seem daunting.
John H. Cushman Jr.: Your Taxes.  [ 34. ]


Mother Denies Police Version of Son's Killing
The mother of a psychiatric patient shot and killed by the police this week said yesterday that her son was not violent and was not threatening anyone when officers fired at him in the family's Brooklyn apartment.
In her first interview since her son was killed, Ivy Black, who was in the bedroom with her son, Earl, when he was shot Wednesday morning, said he was agitated at the time, but unarmed.


Israel Seizes Lebanon Village
Israeli troops backed by tanks crossed from their imposed "security zone" in southern Lebanon today, seized a village and evicted its residents, security officials said.
The move came in apparent retaliation for a guerrilla raid this week in which an Israeli soldier was killed.
The officials said the Israelis had blown up six houses in the village of Arnun, north of the security zone, and banned villagers from returning.


Review/Opera; A Donizetti Work Is Resurrected, Sets and All
Donizetti's opera "Il Duca d'Alba" -- left incomplete by its author, unperformed until more than 30 years after his death, then unheard for three-quarters of a century -- is receiving its first full staging in the United States at the Spoleto Festival.
On Thursday night at the Gaillard Municipal Auditorium here, the opera had, for better and worse, the characteristics of a butterfly preserved in amber -- or rather, in layers of amber.
It was charming in parts, a bit clouded, but portrayed well enough to reveal some neglected virtues.
It was also almost as interesting for the layers of preservation as for the object itself.
The most remarkable aspect of this production is the sets, which were all used in the work's Rome premiere in 1882.
They are almost uncanny evocations of Brussels and Antwerp in 1573, created simply from painted backdrops and hangings.
Brussels' main square is extraordinary, the arches and ornaments shown in exquisite detail; the Duke's office in the Town Hall, with its pillars and carvings, dark wood and polished marble, is entirely constructed of painted paper.
The sense of perspective in these modest hangings makes many of today's more elaborate stage effects seem pretentious and overwrought.


Member of School Board Pushed to Alter AIDS Vote
In a highly unusual action, Fernando Ferrer, the Bronx Borough President, has publicly reprimanded his appointee to the Board of Education for her vote favoring a resolution that requires the schools' AIDS program to stress abstinence more forcefully.
He urged her to reverse her stand.


Lincoln Hospital to Lose Gynecology Accreditation
Lincoln Hospital has been told it will lose its accreditation to train residents in obstetrics and gynecology beginning next summer, hospital officials acknowledged yesterday.
They said the national accrediting body based its decision on its determination that medical residents in that department do not receive enough training.
The decision by the Accreditation Council for Graduate Medical Education was made in January.
New York Medical College, which runs all the residency programs at the troubled hospital in the South Bronx, is in the process of filing an appeal.
If the appeal is denied, Lincoln will not be allowed to hire and train medical residents for the obstetrics and gynecology department.


Review/Dance; New at the City Ballet: Works by 2 Old Hands
Hoping to stimulate creativity, the New York City Ballet is in the midst of its novel Diamond Project, an intensive weekend showcase for new works by 11 choreographers.
The souvenir program even carries an inspirational message credited to that celebrated art critic Winston Churchill: "Without tradition, art is a flock of sheep. Without innovation, it is a corpse." A more apt quotation might be from Virgil: "They can because they think they can."


New TV Signals Are Sent 75 Miles in Test
Zenith and A.T.&amp;T. successfully transmitted crisp, vivid images over a 75-mile distance between Milwaukee and Glenview, Ill., on Thursday evening, providing real evidence that their system for broadcasting high-definition television had overcome an important hurdle.
The over-the-air test, though not conclusive, indicates that the system can cover the distances required for conventional television today.


It's Bulls Against Blazers As Jordan Rules Again
For three quarters tonight, the Chicago Bulls carried Michael Jordan when he was struggling.
Then, in the fourth quarter, with the outcome in the balance, Jordan returned the favor, leading Chicago back to the National Basketball Association finals.
Scoring 16 of his 29 points in the final period, Jordan propelled the Bulls to a series-ending 99-94 victory over the Cleveland Cavaliers in Game 6 of the Eastern Conference finals.
The Bulls won the series, four games to two, and returned to the championship series, in which they will defend their title against the Portland Trail Blazers in a four-of-seven-game series beginning Wednesday night in Chicago.


Smoking and World Health
America is finally kicking the habit.
The days when conversation, cocktails and coffee were incomplete without a cigarette appear to be gone.
Thanks to a powerful public health campaign, legislation and rising cigarette prices, Americans are smoking less and less.
At this rate, the Centers for Disease Control reported recently, only 15 percent of Americans will be smoking by the year 2000.
Sadly, it will be years before the drop is reflected in a decline of premature deaths -- before age 70 -- attributed to cigarettes.
The damage done to Americans who were smoking two or three decades ago will show up for many more years, especially among women -- whose smoking rate began to rise just as men's began to drop.


T.W.A. PLANS TO LAY OFF 300 WORKERS STARTING IN JUNE
Trans World Airlines is laying off 300 workers here starting in June, citing a reduction in contract maintenance work on other airlines' planes.
James R. Jensen, T.W.A.'s senior vice president of maintenance and engineering, said Thursday in a notice to workers at its overhaul base that the airline continued to seek outside contract work.
"Depending on the degree of success," the notice said, T.W.A.
"will recall furloughed employees as quickly as possible." T.W.A. grounded several planes in the Persian Gulf war last year because of reduced traffic.
This created less work at the base.


Plastic Keys to Phone Wizardry
The big long-distance carriers are flooding the country with advertisements for telephone calling cards.
For customers of A.T.&amp; T., MCI and Sprint, these wallet-size pieces of plastic can open a new and bewildering array of telecommunications wizardry.
What should a consumer look for in a calling card, and which card offers the most services?


Fernandez, More Out of Sorts Than Outplayed, Loses
Progress as a professional seems to be a luxury Mary Joe Fernandez has yet to enjoy, especially at the French Open.
Fernandez, seeded sixth, was eliminated in the third round, 7-6 (7-1), 6-2, today by the same player she beat here in last year's second round, Sabine Hack of Germany.


Mentally Ill Defendants Lose in Ruling
To the Editor:
As one who has often been a defense expert witness (and an unconvincing one in most instances) in capital cases involving the insanity plea, I find your headline "High Court Rulings Provide Mentally Ill Defendants With New Protections" (news article, May 19) in part misleading.


Macedonia Is More Than a Name to Greece
To the Editor:
On two separate occasions The New York Times has editorialized about the controversy surrounding international recognition of the former Yugoslav republic of Macedonia ("The Two Macedonias," April 5, and "The Name Game in Macedonia," May 15).
I take strong exception to your trivialization of the problem.


Redistricting: Albany's Duty
The latest plan for redrawing New York State's Congressional lines is the best reason yet for the State Legislature to go back to work and come up with a reasonable plan of its own.
The new proposal risks failure on every important point: it could reduce rather than increase minority representation and hurt the state's influence by eliminating Congressmen with seniority.
The plan was devised by former Federal Judge Frederick Lacey at the request of a Federal court panel, because the Legislature failed to do its job.
Population shifts mean that the Congressional delegation has to shrink from 34 to 31.
Since the Democratic Assembly and Republican Senate could not agree on which incumbents should go, the courts stepped in.


Newspaper Drivers, After Accord, Go Back to a New Job
Newspaper delivery drivers rode warily into the future yesterday on new labor contracts that will chart the way to extensive changes in the way they do their jobs.
Labor leaders said the contracts, ratified on Thursday by the Newspaper and Mail Deliverers' Union of New York and Vicinity, would set the pattern for reshaping the industry into the next century.
The contracts, which ended a three-week labor dispute pitting the drivers against The New York Times and a newspaper distributor, call for smaller, more efficient work forces in exchange for lifetime job guarantees and other benefits for existing employees.


John E. Ivey Jr., 73, a Champion of Using TV in Education, Is Dead
John E. Ivey Jr., an innovator in using electronic communications for teaching, died on Sunday at North Carolina Memorial Hospital in Chapel Hill, N.C., his hometown.
He was 73 years old.
His family said the cause of death was pneumonia as a complication of Parkinson's disease.


I.B.M. Line Is Expected
I.B.M. is expected to announce next Thursday the details of plans to sell inexpensive clones of its personal computers in Europe.
Stephen Smith, an analyst at Paine Webber Inc., said Thursday that he expected the new machines, which will be known as the Ambra product line, would be priced very competitively.
But, he added, the machines might confuse customers "who might wonder why they should buy an expensive computer from I.B.M."
The new computers will not be sold by the regular sales force of the International Business Machines Corporation, Mr.
Smith said, and are expected to be offered first in Britain.
The offering of lower-priced clones of its regular PC's will be similar to a program started last October in Southeast Asia.


SERBIAN GUNNERS POUND SARAJEVO
Defying international threats of sanctions against Belgrade, Serbian forces in Bosnia and Herzegovina pounded Sarajevo with artillery and rocket fire early today in the heaviest bombardment the capital of the war-torn republic has faced, and kept up the shelling throughout the day, officials and witnesses there said.
At least six people were reported killed in Sarajevo and scores more wounded in the latest barrages, officials in the city said.
Serbian gunners also shelled the ancient Croatian port of Dubrovnik for the first time since December, damaging the stone tower that guards the old city's harbor.


A Black-Hispanic Struggle Over Florida Redistricting
The Florida Legislature's effort to distribute the electoral fruits of the state's rapid population growth during the 1980's has become a source of conflict between blacks and people of Hispanic descent over how many minority districts should be created and who should control them.
The ethnic and political tussle between two minority groups of almost equal size has hampered the reapportionment of Florida's 23 Congressional districts and the Legislature's 40 Senate and 120 House seats.


Classical Music in Review
The Ussachevsky Festival Cathedral of St. John the Divine Tomorrow and June 7


NEWS SUMMARY
International 2-5  HAITIANS UNDETERRED BY U.S. NET
Less than a week after deciding to escort fleeing Haitians directly back to their country, United States officers concede that the exodus may actually be gaining speed.  1  SERBS BATTER BOSNIAN CAPITAL
Seemingly disregarding the sanctions being prepared against the Serbian-controlled Government of Yugoslavia, Serbian forces bombarded Sarajevo in the most severe attack the capital of Bosnia and Herzegovina has seen, officials said.  1  U.N.
MAY TIGHTEN THE NOOSE
The Security Council seems to have won backing from Russia and an abstention by China that will permit a full trade embargbo to be imposed on Yugoslavia.
Envoys at the U.N. also discussed naval and air action against Serbia.  3  U.S.-EUROPEAN TENSIONS
News analysis: The crisis in Yugoslavia is aggravating tensions between Washington and several European capitals, particularly Paris.  3  NEW PRISM IN LATIN AMERICA
Stripped of the geopolitical import that the cold war imposed on their region, Latin American nations are struggling to reinvent themselves and find new sources of aid.  1  BUSH SPURNS WILDLIFE TREATY
The Administration said President Bush would not sign an international treaty to preserve the world's plants, animals, and microbial species at an environmental summit meeting in Brazil next week.  1  LESSON FOR EX-SOVIET EXPORTERS
A half-dozen newly independent Soviet republics received a bracing lesson in capitalism when the Commerce Department said that they were selling uranium at unfairly low prices and proposed a punitive import tariff of 116 percent.  1  ALTERING DATA ON IRAQ ARMS SALES
A Commerce Department lawyer told a Congressional committee that department officials had tampered with records sent to Congress last year concerning exports of military technology to Iraq before its invasion of Kuwait.2  OASIS FOR THE ORPHANED
Warsaw Journal: A freewheeling orphanage survives, granting children self-government and even courts of justice with the possibility of trying their peers and teachers.  4  National 6-9  HELPING FATHERS PAY UP
The newest front in the nation's battle against welfare dependency is the effort to force absent fathers to keep up with child support payments.
And an increasingly vital element on that front is experimental programs that help poorly skilled fathers get jobs and keep them.  1  PROGNOSTICATING ABOUT PEROT
Political Memo: After a month of Perot-mania, some political people are awed, some are fearful, some are angry, and some are skeptical.
Some think that Mr.
Perot will make a misstep and that it will finish his Presidential ambitions.
Some think that he will make a misstep and that it will change nothing.
Some think he will avoid the potholes.
A few think he has already tripped.  1  PEROT VIA SATELLITE
Mr.
Perot thanked supporters in Florida for getting his name on the ballot, as his image, voice and rebellious oratory were beamed via satellite to rallies in five other states.  8  In Ohio, as elsewhere, Perot is drawing much of the interest.  9  RESHAPING HER PUBLIC IMAGE
At Wellesley College, Hillary Clinton criticized the Bush Administration's family policies and used her commencement address to try to recast her public image, which some view as a hard-edged careerist.  9  Bradley repeatedly disavows interest in the Vice Presidency.  9  In pricey California, some political ads run just 10 seconds.  9  SHOWDOWN IN FLORIDA
The Florida Legislature's effort to distribute the electoral fruits of the state's rapid population growth has become a source of conflict between black and Hispanic groups over how many minority districts should be created and who should control them.  6  HOUSE POSTAL INQUIRY WIDENS
A Federal grand jury looking into the House post office has expanded its inquiry and is trying to determine whether lawmakers used postal clerks to run errands and perform campaign-related services.  7  DISAGREEMENT ON DE-ICING RULES
The F.A.A. has said that it plans to impose mandatory limits on the length of time a plane may taxi in freezing rain or snow without again having ice removed from its wings.
But airline executives and pilots are telling the agency that those rules should be only guidelines.  6  GAIN IN DIABETES RESEARCH
Joseph Trerotola, unionist.
Arts/Entertainment 11-13, 46  Film: "Painting the Town." 13  "The Adjuster." 13  "Pictures From a Revolution." 13  Music: "Il Duca d'Alba." 11  Folk at Carnegie.  11  Classical reviews 12  Dance: New York City Ballet.  11  Iso, troupe of extremes.  13  Consumer's World 48  Plastic keys to phone wizardry.
Eliminating playground hazards.
A bike-to-work bag.
Guidepost  Editorials/Op-Ed 18-19  Editorials 18  From finish to Start.
Redistricting: Albany's duty.
Smoking and world health.
Child abuse secrets.
Letters 18  Russell Baker: Time for a change.  19  Greg Mitchell: Media politics -- how it began.  19  Alexander Brash: Seagull slaughter at Kennedy Airport.  19  Lionel Rosenblatt: If drought becomes famine . . .  19


Clinton Differs With Perot on Hiring
Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas said today that Ross Perot was wrong when he said he would not hire homosexuals or adulterers in his administration.
"I disagree with what he said about that and about the private behavior of married couples," Mr.
Clinton said in response to reporters' questions about Mr.
Perot's comments on hiring homosexuals.
"I don't know how he's going to know about private behavior of married people who work for him, and whether he's going to have his own inspection force or something like that."


U.N. Is Said to Be Ready On Yugoslav Sanctions
At least 13 of the 15 members of the United Nations Security Council, including Russia, appear ready to support tough economic sanctions against the Government of Yugoslavia when the issue comes to a vote on Saturday, diplomats said tonight.
They said that after a day of consultations, it appeared that four of the five Security Council members with veto power would support the sanctions resolution drafted by the United States, and that the fifth, China, would abstain.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: White House; As Bush Campaign Falters, A Request for Restructuring
Robert A. Mosbacher, general chairman of President Bush's re-election campaign, has complained to Mr.
Bush about the drifting and confusion in his re-election operation, touching off renewed speculation that the President might reorganize his political staff, officials said today.
The officials said that no immediate changes were expected, but did not rule out the possibility that Mr.
Bush would review both his campaign and White House teams in light of what one friend of Mr.
Bush described tonight as "near panic" over Ross Perot, who is widely expected to make an independent bid for the Presidency this fall.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League


Corrections
A picture caption yesterday about winners in the National Spelling Bee misidentified the home state of the runner-up, Erik Wallace.
It is Idaho.


Burns Leaves Montreal To Coach Maple Leafs
PAT BURNS quit yesterday as coach of the Montreal Canadiens to coach the Toronto Maple Leafs.
Burns had two years left on his contract, worth $350,000 next season and $400,000 for 1993-94.
Burns will sign a four-year deal with the Maple Leafs, a Toronto spokesman, BOB STELLICK, said.


Balancing Success in Schools and a Lie on the Record
One recent afternoon, William E. Ubinas, the beleaguered superintendent of Manhattan's School District 1, gave a whirlwind tour of his fiefdom, which comprises 18 schools and some 9,500 students on the Lower East Side.
During the course of a couple of hours, he stopped in four schools and a dozen different classrooms, striding the halls with the loping, loose-limbed gait of an ex-basketball athlete, taking the stairs two and three at a time, picking up litter and working up a serious sweat as he greeted everyone in sight, teachers, parents and students, many of them by name.
He was fed bread baked by some 5-year-olds and serenaded by a clarinet-heavy band of 10- and 11-year-olds.


Strain Among Allies
The question of how to deal with the crisis in Yugoslavia has brought to the surface some of the simmering tensions between the United States and its European allies, particularly France.
A Bush Administration official, summing up the American contempt for the supposedly meager role the Europeans have played in quelling the Yugoslav conflict, said, "These people could not organize a three-car motorcade if their lives depended on it."


Transferring Skills to the Private Sector
To the Editor:
I was delighted to read "After the Pay Revolution, Job Titles Won't Matter" (May 17).
My transition from work in the interdisciplinary arts to business was hampered by the traditional view of employees and resumes.


Corrections
A brief report in Styles of the Times last Sunday about producing charity events, with an article on the anatomy of the benefit known as Don't Bungle the Jungle II, misidentified the organizer of the Seventh on Sale benefit.
It was produced by Robert O'Rourke.


A View From the Top


A Baritone Gives Voice To a Patchwork of Emotions
At this stage in the long roll call of AIDS it can scarcely register as startling news that William Parker, the American lyric baritone so admired for his performances of classic and modern song repertory, has the disease; at least three established singers in his voice category alone have already died of it.
Like all the others, the 48-year-old Mr.
Parker has been making his choices about what to fight and what to accept, what to do with his time and what to do when his time comes.
Somewhere along the line he decided he wanted to make a connection between the way he has spent his life -- singing songs -- and the experience that was promising to end it prematurely.
On Thursday evening, under the auspices of the new-music organization Meet the Composer and John Gingrich Management, Mr.
Parker will present "The AIDS Quilt Songbook 1992," a cycle of 18 songs by American composers written for baritone voice and (mostly) piano accompaniment.
The cycle is modeled in part after the AIDS Memorial Quilt.


German Police Ban a March by Neo-Nazis


Dorothy Chute, Peter Jankowski
Dorothy Louise Chute, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Mortimer H. Chute Jr. of Garden City, L.I., was married yesterday in Nantucket, Mass., to Dr.
Peter William Jankowski, the son of Walter Jankowski of Garden City and the late Bernice Jankowski.
The Rev.
John Wing performed the Episcopal ceremony at St.
Paul's Church.
Mrs.
Jankowski, 29 years old, is a clinical social worker at Mount Sinai Medical Center in New York.
She graduated from Princeton University and received master's degrees in social work and public health from Columbia University.
Her father is a vice president of Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in New York.


Clinton Loses Title on Technicality
A controversial disqualification in the final event, the 1,600-meter relay, cost DeWitt Clinton of the Bronx the boys' team title yesterday in the Public Schools Athletic League track and field championships at Columbia University's Wien Stadium in Upper Manhattan.
Clinton, leading for the title going into the last event, apparently clinched the crown when Solomon Humphrey ran a blistering 46.8-second anchor leg.
But meet officials said one of Humphrey's teammates crossed in front of the automatic timer as the race finished and this led to the disqualification of the Clinton relay.
Bill Wagner, the Governors' coach, protested vehemently but the officials stood by their decision.


Update; No Bias Arrests Yet, But a Special Unit Lives On
As far as anyone in the West Village knew, the police had suspended an unusual decoy unit in which officers posed as homosexuals to attract people known as "gay bashers." After all, three months after the program began in October, the unit had failed to make a single bias-related arrest.
But the police said last week that the unit was still in operation, though on a smaller scale.
And the decoys still have not arrested anyone for attacking gay men or lesbians.


Corrections
A review on May 10 about "The Campaign of the Century: Upton Sinclair's Race for Governor of California and the Birth of Media Politics," by Greg Mitchell, misidentified the president and publisher of The Los Angeles Times in the 1930's.
He was Harry Chandler, not Otis Chandler, his grandson.


Aimee Loughran, George G. Bower
Aimee Cushwa Loughran, a daughter of Judge and Mrs.
Charles Hill Loughran of Greensburg, Pa., was married there yesterday to George Graydon Bower, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Bruce F. Bower of West Hartford, Conn.
The Rev.
Stephen West performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Joseph Chapel at Seton Hill College.
Mrs.
Bower, 26 years old, graduated from Mount Holyoke College.
She was until recently a personal banking representative at the Connecticut National Bank in Farmington, Conn.
Her father is a judge of the Westmoreland County Court of Common Pleas in Greensburg.


Fresh Faces and Legends, Too
It was not as if Dawn Staley was familiar with Nancy Lieberman's game, or, for that matter, her face.
She couldn't create images of Lieberman, the way she could for Julius Erving's airborne grace or Magic Johnson's exquisite vision.
For Staley, a young girl in North Philadelphia in the early 80's whose hero was the 76ers point guard, Maurice Cheeks, Lieberman was a famous yet distant explorer, like Bob Cousy, or Christopher Columbus.
"When Nancy was playing, they didn't put women's games on television, so I could only read about her in the history book," said the 22-year-old Staley, sounding like a child of the MTV generation confronted with the question of Sinatra.
"Don't tell her I said that."


Miss Goldsmith, Mr. Rittmaster
Gillian Suzanne Goldsmith, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert S. Goldsmith of Scarsdale, N.Y., was married last evening in White Plains to Peter David Rittmaster, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
D.
Paul Rittmaster of New York.
Rabbi Mark Winer performed the ceremony at the Jewish Community Center.
Mrs.
Rittmaster, 26 years old, is a recruiter of management associates for Citibank in New York.
She graduated from the University of Michigan.
Her father is the sales manager for Marcus Brothers Textiles, a manufacturer of clothing fabrics in New York.
Her mother, Juliet Goldsmith, is the director of public information for the Westchester division of the New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center in White Plains.


CONFERENCE IN RIO/The Rich Vs. the Poor; Cooling the Globe Would be Nice, But Saving Lives Now May Cost Less
One of the frustrations for planners of the Earth Summit in Rio has been the inability of the world's nations to reach agreement on an idea that seems relatively obvious: that something must be done to keep the earth from slowly getting hotter.
Despite the possibility of floods, famines and droughts within the next 50 or 100 years -- though not all scientists are convinced that global warming is a real threat -- the pre-conference talks have already badly split on the issue.
Rich nations want poor ones, with their rapid birth rates, to stop scrambling to get more factories and more cars, even if that means they will stay poorer for a while.
Poor nations, by contrast, furious that the rich ones have produced far more pollution per person for the last 200 years, want the industrialized countries to be the ones to drive less, plug in less and put expensive scrubbers on their smokestacks -- and they want them to admit that it's more important for poor nations to get out of poverty than to be ecologically pristine.


Yvonne Pasccoe, Peter Carson
Yvonne Elizabeth Pascoe, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William W. Pascoe Jr. of Alexandria, Va., was married there yesterday to Peter David Adams Carson, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
David E. A. Carson of Bridgeport, Conn.
The Rev.
Morgan Porteus performed the Episcopal ceremony at Woodlawn Plantation, a local landmark.
Mrs.
Carson, 27 years old, graduated from the University of Virginia and is an operations manager with Source Office Suites in Arlington, Va.
Her father is a vice president of First American Bankshares Inc. in Washington.


Corrections
The Travel Watch chart on page 23 of the Travel section today carries outdated fares for domestic routes as a result of reductions announced on Wednesday and Thursday, after the section went to press.
An updated chart appears today in this section, on page 27.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-17  U.N. ACTS AGAINST SERBIA


Bashing Columbus
To the Editor:
In the middle of Nicolas Shumway's review of "The Buried Mirror," by Carlos Fuentes (April 26), I discovered an odd line that was tossed out almost as a side note but gives some insight into what goes on in the academic world.
Mr.
Shumway writes, "In a year when bashing Columbus and the Spanish conquest is becoming a popular parlor game among the politically correct and minimally informed. . . ." Having recently written a book on the Caribbean that bashes Columbus ("A Continent of Islands"), I found this statement irritating.


World Markets; Money Still Pours Into Hong Kong
Fiduciary Trust International, a global fund manager, is one of the reasons the Hong Kong stock market has continued to soar.
Fiduciary has done what many big institutional investors have done in the last several months: put a lot more money into Hong Kong.
Funds that have been there for some time, like Fiduciary, have added to their stake.
In the beginning of May, Fiduciary increased the share of its portfolios in Hong Kong by one percentage point, or about $33 million.
Funds that were not there jumped in.


Traffic Alert
Because of the Sailors' and Soldiers' Street Fair, Lexington Avenue will be closed today between 34th and 42d streets from 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.


Still Another Spring
Call it a marriage of high-tech Western razzmatazz and the fin-de-siecle elegance of a salon in Mitteleuropa.
A grand piano stands in the middle of the office, but the only music is Bruce Springsteen's "Human Touch" on the sound system.
Moldings of violins adorn the cornices, but the only instruments in use are cellular telephones and computers.
"I hope," says Jean-Claude Van Gansen, "that this mix makes my clients confident."
Whatever the appeal of Mr.
Van Gansen's headquarters in the music room of a 19th-century mansion, its eclectic style is appropriate.
For this former jeans retailer from Belgium is trying to make a fortune by wedding the financial savvy of the West with the myriad opportunities in an East Europe emerging from years of Communist inertia.


Casa Italiana
To the Editor:
Your article on April 12 entitled "Renovating a Campus Curio" brought back a host of memories.


Increasing Our Dirty-Word Power: Why Yesterday's Smut Is Today's Erotica
MIDWAY through Nicholson Baker's best-selling novel, "Vox," Jim on the telephone sex line offers Abby on the sex line an imaginary pair of self-arousal options: an X-rated videotape or "some book of Victorian pornography." Abby responds at once: "The Victorian pornography, no question."
Amazed at first, Jim proceeds to muse on his recent brainstorm that "in general people would prefer written porn. . . . I guess insofar as verbal pornography records thoughts rather than exclusively images, or at least surrounds all images with thoughts, or something, it can be the hottest medium of all. Telepathy on a budget."


She Goes One Way, He Goes Another
Psychologists are unriddling a mystery that drives women wild -- why men, when obviously lost, steadfastly refuse to ask directions.
The study also illumines an enigma for men -- why women, when giving directions, describe exhaustive details at each intersection.
The reason?
Males and females guide by different strategies, says Dr.
Thomas Bever, a psychologist and linguist at the University of Rochester.
Both work: men and women get from A to B just as efficiently.
Neither sex gets lost more often than the other.
The explanation lies in prenatal effects of sex hormones, according to Dr.
Bever, that promote slightly different brain wiring.


Lisa Greenman, Paul A. Leder
Lisa Greenman, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert Greenman of Brooklyn, was married yesterday in Washington to Paul A. Leder, a son of William Leder of Kalamazoo, Mich., and the late Edythe P. Leder.
Rabbi Deborah Zecher officiated at the Henley Park Hotel.
Ms.
Greenman, who is 31 years old and will keep her name, is a lawyer with the Public Defender Service of the District of Columbia.
She graduated from Yale University and New York University Law School.
Mr.
Leder, 35, is an assistant director of the office of international affairs at the Securities and Exchange Commission in Washington.
He graduated from the University of Michigan, from which he also received his law degree.


Ms. O'Connell, Raymond Peloso
Kathleen Ann O'Connell, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Philip R. O'Connell of Southport, Conn., was married yesterday in Fairfield, Conn., to Raymond James Peloso, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
William M. Peloso of Bronxville, N.Y.
Archbishop Theodore E. McCarrick of Newark and the Rev.
Aloysius P. Kelley, president of Fairfield University, performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Egan Chapel of St.
Ignatius Loyola at the university.
Mrs.
Peloso, 25 years old, graduated from Georgetown University, where until recently she was the coordinator of graduate business admissions and services.
Her father, a lawyer and consultant, retired as the senior vice president and secretary of the Champion International Corporation in Stamford, Conn.


Corrections
An article in the Times Magazine last Sunday, about the selection of a President by the House of Representatives, misstated the system for counting electoral votes.
The 12th Amendment says the Vice President "shall, in the presence of the Senate and House of Representatives, open all the certificates and the votes shall then be counted." The votes are not opened and counted by the House of Representatives.


Rabbit Run? Rabbit, Run!
FOR humans, possession is nine-tenths of the law.
For rabbits on the Long Island Expressway, possession means hares today are gone tomorrow.
"The rabbits are squatters," said Mel Cooperman of the State Transportation Department.
"They wouldn't have had a habitat on the expressway if we hadn't put shrubbery on the median."
Now the state is tearing up that median for car-pool lanes between Exits 49 and 57.
That means thousands of expressway rabbits are losing their homes.
"But it's not like we're laying out a concrete desert and saying they have no place to go," Mr.
Cooperman said.
"They can go to the sides of the road. There is ample greenery and shrubbery there."


Making a Difference; Chapter 3 From Apple
After months of leaks and rumors, Apple Computer Inc. last week gave the world the first glimpse of its Newton technology, the key to a new line of portable pen-based computing devices.
Apple expects these devices to bridge the gap between personal computers and consumer electronics.
Lawrence G. Tesler, Apple's vice president for the Newton group, said the aim of the four-year-old project was to create devices that "you would hold in your hands, that would be portable and very easy to use, but that would still have some computer-like properties."


Charting the Delaware's Future Course
Bill Hupalo loves the upper Delaware River for its bountiful shad fishing.
And he fully supports a far-reaching plan to preserve the high quality of the water in the river's northernmost 121 miles, even if the plan curbs development along the rural southern fringes of the Catskills.
"If they could protect this river, it's worth every cent to keep buildings and sewers out, because you can never bring a river back," said Mr.
Hupalo, who lives in Swan Lake, 20 miles from here.
"You've got to give up something to preserve something."


Books for Vacation Reading
Biography, Autobiography, Memoir
THE ABANDONED BAOBAB: The Autobiography of a Senegalese Woman.
By Ken Bugul. (Lawrence Hill, cloth, $18.95; paper, $9.95.) This pseudonymous personal history takes a brave, ambitious young woman from her village in Senegal to Brussels, where she barely rescues herself from a course of self-destruction.
AFTER GREAT PAIN: A New Life Emerges.
By Diane Cole. (Summit, $20.) An autobiographical account of the courageous -- and finally triumphant -- reconstruction of one woman's life after an almost unimaginable run of grief and misfortune.
AN AMERICAN ENGINEER IN STALIN'S RUSSIA: The Memoirs of Zara Witkin, 1932-1934.
Edited by Michael Gelb. (University of California, $29.95.) This fascinating memoir relates the struggles of an American socialist and civil engineer, in love with a Russian movie actress, in a country where nothing worked.
THE CHAIRMAN.
John J. McCloy: The Making of the American Establishment.
By Kai Bird. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $30.) A life of the friend and adviser to nine Presidents, perhaps the most powerful American who was never really famous.
CHURCHILL: A Life.
By Martin Gilbert (Holt, $35.) Rather than attemping a historian's judgment, the author stitches together bits of a million documents and lets Churchill be his own interpreter.
DEAR DEPARTED.
By Marguerite Yourcenar. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $25.) First published in French in 1974, 13 years before the author's death, this investigation of Yourcenar's mother's family captures a superb sense of bourgeois life in the comfy Belgian aristocracy.
DE GAULLE: The Ruler 1945-1970.
By Jean Lacouture. (Norton, $29.95.) This final volume in Mr.
Lacouture's monument to the colossus particularly features de Gaulle's foreign policy (alliance but independence) and his theatrical methods of getting his way.
DRIVEN PATRIOT: The Life and Times of James Forrestal.
By Townsend Hoopes and Douglas Brinkley. (Knopf, $30.) This book unravels many mysteries about the Wall Street whiz who became our first Secretary of Defense and who killed himself in 1949.
EDGAR A. POE: Mournful and Never-Ending Remembrance.
By Kenneth Silverman. (HarperCollins, $27.50.) Mr.
Silverman sifts the evidence to yield an authoritative life of the unhappy hack who produced a handful of poems and stories the world cannot forget.
ELEANOR ROOSEVELT: Volume One, 1884-1933.
By Blanche Wiesen Cook. (Viking, $27.50.) A feminist biography that regards its subject not only as a mostly 19th-century woman who invented her own life with very little help, but also as a self-created political figure of considerable significance.
ELIZABETH I. By Anne Somerset. (Knopf, $30.) A comprehensive, reliable, readable, relentlessly detailed biography of the often vain and sometimes bad-tempered Good Queen Bess.
ELTON JOHN.
By Philip Norman. (Harmony, $22.50.) An eloquent, analytical and well-researched examination of the spectacle who is rock's most devoted scholar and most brilliant emulator.
HITLER AND STALIN: Parallel Lives.
By Alan Bullock. (Knopf, $35.) Borrowing a trick from Plutarch, Lord Bullock sets forth the two dictators' lives and careers chronologically, showing who did what first and to whom; often enough, it was the Fuhrer who learned tricks from his neighbor to the East.
INTELLECTUAL MEMOIRS: New York 1935-1938.
By Mary McCarthy. (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, $15.95.) In this last volume of her memoirs, written just before she died in 1989, McCarthy looks back at her bohemian life in New York, shows the slipperiness of retrospect and hands out more
clefs
to her
romans
.
"I'VE SEEN THE BEST OF IT." By Joseph W. Alsop with Adam Platt. (Norton, $29.95.) The lively autobiography of a born patrician who made himself an outstanding reporter, columnist and Washington insider; completed after his death in 1989.
JEFFERSON DAVIS: THE Man and His Hour.
By William C. Davis. (HarperCollins, $35.) Mr.
Davis (no relation) has written the best and fullest biography so far of a man who, despite his faults, was probably the best available leader for the doomed Confederacy.
KEEPER OF THE MOON.
By Tim McLaurin. (Norton, $19.95.) A disturbing and poignant memoir of growing up in the rural South in the 1960's, by a man who seems to have forgotten nothing of his hardscrabble life.
THE LAST YANKEE: The Turbulent Life of Billy Martin.
By David Falkner. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $22.) From a childhood in a brawling family to the management of a team in decline, this is a memorable and absorbing account of the lurid and monotonous life of a useful Yankee.
MALCOLM: The Life of a Man Who Changed Black America.
By Bruce Perry. (Station Hill, $24.95.) Mr.
Perry places the man beside the myth -- including his autobiography -- to portray a figure who is still a compelling presence in black political life.
THE MAN TO SEE.
Edward Bennett Williams: Ultimate Insider; Legendary Trial Lawyer.
By Evan Thomas. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $27.50.) Though an authorized biography, this life of the justly celebrated lawyer spares none of Williams's faults.
PATRICK WHITE: A Life.
By David Marr. (Knopf, $30.) A beautifully constructed account, integrating letters, interviews and narrative, of the difficult and often nasty novelist who in 1973 became the only Australian to win the Nobel Prize in Literature.
SALEM IS MY DWELLING PLACE: A Life of Nathaniel Hawthorne.
By Edwin Haviland Miller. (University of Iowa, $35.) Mr.
Miller doesn't look for what isn't to be found in Hawthorne's secretive life, and renders well the lively flavor of his times.
SMALL CRAFT ADVISORY: A Book About the Building of a Boat.
By Louis D. Rubin Jr. (Atlantic Monthly, $21.95.) A distinguished scholar's fine and atypical memoir-cum-boat book, combining a 55-year passion for sailing with wise insights into the relation of work to play.
TROLLOPE: A Biography.
By N. John Hall. (Clarendon/Oxford University, $30.) With tact, wit and what looks like an absolute knowledge of Trollope and his works, Mr.
Hall gives us the novelist who made both life and art into marvelous comic ironies.
UNQUIET DAYS: At Home in Poland.
By Thomas Swick. (Ticknor &amp; Fields, $19.95.) This engaged, intriguing memoir of an American living in Poland during the Solidarity revolution and the declaration of martial law is also a literary appreciation of the Polish people.
WOODROW WILSON.
By August Heckscher (Scribners, $35.) and WOODROW WILSON: A Life for World Peace.
By Jan Willem Schulte Nordholt (University of California, $34.95.) Two lives that differ in approach; Mr.
Heckscher's primary interest is the man himself and his intimate relationships, while Mr.
Schulte Nordholt explores Wilson's flaws of intellect and temperament.
THE WORLD IS MY HOME: A Memoir.
By James A. Michener. (Random House, $25.) This haphazardly narrated book by the prolific writer of solid historical fiction shows the many facets of his unusual mind.
THE WORLDS OF CHRISTOPHER COLUMBUS.
By William D. Phillips Jr. and Carla Rahn Phillips. (Cambridge University, $27.95.) A conscientious, compendious biography that sticks to the primary sources and concludes that social ambition was Columbus's main motive.
Children's Books
I SAW ESAU: The Schoolchild's Pocket Book.
Edited by Iona Opie and Peter Opie.
Illustrated by Maurice Sendak. (Candlewick Press, $19.95.) (Ages 5 and up) These exuberant British children's rhymes, collected firsthand by two famous British folklorists, have been illustrated with wonderful drawings that provide answers to the riddles and make jokes.
TALKING LIKE THE RAIN: A First Book of Poems.
Selected by X. J. Kennedy and Dorothy M. Kennedy.
Illustrated by Jane Dyer. (Little, Brown, $17.95.) (Ages 3 and up) The mix of mood, tone, humor and rumination in this collection is broadly representative, and the illustrations are so jovial, skilled and consonant with the mood of the poetical selection they make the combination a joy.
ONE DAY, TWO DRAGONS.
By Lynne Bertrand.
Illustrated by Janet Street. (Clarkson Potter, $14.) (Ages 4 to 7) This story of a visit by two charming young dragons to their pediatrician sets out the numbers 1 to 20 in the text and illustrations with wit and style.
Crime
THE BLACK ECHO.
By Michael Connelly. (Little, Brown, $19.95.) A Los Angeles detective named Hieronymus Bosch is plagued by memories of his war days when he investigates the death of a heroin addict who turns out to be a marine from his own unit in Vietnam.
THE HANGMAN'S BEAUTIFUL DAUGHTER.
By Sharyn McCrumb. (Scribners, $19.) A dark, elegiac Appalachian mystery, in which some characters are haunted by loneliness, and one is haunted by visions.
"I" IS FOR INNOCENT.
By Sue Grafton. (Holt, $18.95.) In the "I" volume of Ms.
Grafton's alphabet mysteries, Kinsey Millhone hits her stride again as she takes on the sobering and sordid case of a high-living architect and his murdered wife.
PLAY DEAD.
By Peter Dickinson. (Mysterious Press/Warner, $17.95.) The adroit and suspenseful tale of a 50-year-old woman named Poppy Tasker and her circle of park-going nannies, who become suspects in the murder of an unwelcome man on the playground.
A STAINED WHITE RADIANCE.
By James Lee Burke. (Hyperion, $19.95.) A Cajun police detective given to reverie sees his beloved bayou country transformed into a menacing and corrupt landscape.
STRANGE LOYALTIES.
By William McIlvanney. (Morrow, $20.) A ruminative, demon-driven detective of the Glasgow police department turns his searching mind to the death of his younger brother.
Current Affairs and Social Commentary
THE "ABORTION PILL": RU-486, a Woman's Choice.
By Etienne-Emile Baulieu with Mort Rosenblum. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $22.) The discoverer of the antihormone RU-486 lucidly explains the discovery and its workings, his views on social responsibility and the political barriers, here and elsewhere, the drug has run into.
AFTER APARTHEID: The Future of South Africa.
By Sebastian Mallaby. (Times Books/ Random House, $22.) A British journalist who has covered Africa extensively believes the hardest parts will be achieving democracy and raising living standards.
AMERICA: WHAT WENT WRONG?
By Donald L. Barlett and James B. Steele. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, paper, $6.95.) This expanded newspaper series by two Pulitzer Prize winners finds that the economy has been altered to favor the already favored.
A COMPLICATED WAR: The Harrowing of Mozambique.
By William Finnegan. (University of California, $25.) A brilliant, sometimes devastating eyewitness report of the civil war, sponsored by South Africa, that has killed a million Mozambicans.
THE CONSEQUENCES OF THE PEACE: The New Internationalism and American Foreign Policy.
By James Chace. (20th Century Fund/Oxford University, $22.95.) Tailoring his book for the post-cold-war world, Mr.
Chace elegantly restates Walter Lippmann's idea that America's diplomatic ambitions must be balanced by economic realities.
CRAPSHOOT: Rolling the Dice on the Vice Presidency.
By Jules Witcover. (Crown, $25.) After racing through the careers of every Vice President from John Adams to Dan Quayle, the author sets out to persuade us that we should take our choice for the second spot more seriously.
DEBATING P.C.: The Controversy Over Political Correctness on College Campuses.
Edited by Paul Berman. (Laurel/Dell; paper, $8.) A well-chosen selection of interviews, articles and lectures on multiculturalism by some of its best-known supporters and detractors.
THE DISUNITING OF AMERICA.
By Arthur M. Schlesinger Jr. (Norton, $14.95.) A sane and temperate discussion of how ethnic historians are creating intellectual ghettos, fragmenting society and undermining the ideal of political unity.
FREEDOM FROM FEAR: And Other Writings.
By Aung San Suu Kyi. (Viking, cloth, $25; Penguin, paper, $12.) This collection of work by the 1991 Nobel Peace Prize winner offers her insights into Burmese political history and philosophy; liberal democratic movements, she believes, have been suppressed but not extinguished by the Japanese occupation and by the Burmese military.
A FULL SERVICE BANK: How BCCI Stole Billions Around the World.
By James Ring Adams and Douglas Frantz. (Pocket Books, $22.) A penetrating treatment of the underlying forces in the Bank of Commerce and Credit International scandal and of the detective work by several nations that ran the thieves to earth.
HEAD TO HEAD: The Coming Economic Battle Among Japan, Europe, and America.
By Lester Thurow. (Morrow, $25.) A professor and cogent analyst of economics argues that other societies, operating by other rules, are likely to leave the United States behind; his probable winner is Europe.
THE IDEA OF THE UNIVERSITY: A Reexamination.
By Jaroslav Pelikan. (Yale, $30.) Without sounding pious, Mr.
Pelikan, a professor at the Yale Divinity School, gracefully defends the idea of the liberal university, including "the embalming of dead genius," the imperative to publish or perish and the university's duty toward the community at large.
I'M DYSFUNCTIONAL, YOU'RE DYSFUNCTIONAL: The Recovery Movement and Other Self-Help Fashions.
By Wendy Kaminer. (Addison-Wesley, $18.95.) The author, a lawyer and journalist, offers a witty, occasionally harsh account of people who call their troubles diseases and blame other people for them.
KILLING THE WIZARDS: Wars of Power and Freedom From Zaire to South Africa.
By Alan Cowell. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) The Rome bureau chief of the New York Times reflects on his days as a correspondent in Africa and ponders the hidden reasons why all the Western journalists who cover it emerge with identical views.
LIFE ITSELF: Abortion in the American Mind.
By Roger Rosenblatt. (Random House, $20.) Arguing that most people are in their hearts somewhat ambivalent about abortion, Mr.
Rosenblatt offers a solution: permit abortion but discourage it, and let all parties learn to live with less than they really want.
THE MAKING OF MIDDLEBROW CULTURE.
By Joan Shelley Rubin. (University of North Carolina, cloth, $34.95; paper, $14.95.) An intelligent study of several 20th-century American efforts to sell culture to the plebs, which did much for some of the plebs.
THE MISMEASURE OF WOMAN.
By Carol Tavris. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) A social psychologist examines the scientific study of fundamental differences between men and women; she finds much of it just plain wrong, even when its agenda is feminist.
MOLEHUNT: The Secret Search for Traitors That Shattered the CIA.
By David Wise. (Random House, $22.) In his seventh nonfiction book on intelligence, Mr.
Wise tells how the agency was crippled in the 1960's by a paranoid hunt for a Soviet penetrator.
OCTOBER SURPRISE: America's Hostages in Iran and the Election of Ronald Reagan.
By Gary Sick. (Times Books/ Random House, $23.) Mr.
Sick lays out his case, which is circumstantial and not conclusive, that the 1980 Reagan campaign made a deal with Iran not to release the hostages during Jimmy Carter's term.
ONLY MAN IS VILE: The Tragedy of Sri Lanka.
By William McGowan. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $25.) How the people of a terrestrial paradise (still remembered as Ceylon) turned it, with the assistance of India, into a hell on earth in barely a decade.
THE OVERWORKED AMERICAN: The Unexpected Decline of Leisure.
By Juliet B. Schor. (Basic Books, $21.) Since about 1970 the American workweek has been increasing, according to Ms.
Schor, who perceives a "structural crisis of time" in our lives.
RACE: How Blacks and Whites Think and Feel About the American Obsession.
By Studs Terkel. (New Press, $24.95.) Conversations with people, mostly from the Chicago area, a number of whom seem still to have convictions that encourage us to hope.
REBUILDING RUSSIA: Reflections and Tentative Proposals.
By Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $14.95.) This sometimes breathless essay suggests introducing democracy at the village level, with no secret ballot and no encysted minorities.
REINVENTING GOVERNMENT: How the Entrepreneurial Spirit Is Transforming the Public Sector.
By David Osborne and Ted Gaebler. (Addison-Wesley, $22.95.) A vision and a road map for the sort of government that the authors think will decentralize authority, promote competition and limit bureaucracy.
RETHINKING SOCIAL POLICY: Race, Poverty, and the Underclass.
By Christopher Jencks. (Harvard University, $27.95.) Mr.
Jencks, a down-to-earth liberal sociologist, zeroes in on what we know and what we don't about some so far insoluble problems.
SEIZE THE MOMENT: America's Challenge in a One-Superpower World.
By Richard Nixon. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $25.) A forceful argument for a classical, geopolitical American internationalism.
THE SEVEN FAT YEARS: And How to Do It Again.
By Robert L. Bartley. (Free Press, $22.95.) Partly a memoir of the supply-side revolution of the 1980's and partly a learned polemic against people who refuse to applaud the achievements of that revolution, by the editor of The Wall Street Journal.
TELLER'S WAR: The Top-Secret Story Behind the Star Wars Deception.
By William J. Broad. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $25.) This accessible but heavily documented account of the Strategic Defense Initiative, by a reporter for The Times, argues that Mr.
Teller sold President Ronald Reagan an unworkable turkey.
TWO NATIONS: Black and White, Separate, Hostile, Unequal.
By Andrew Hacker. (Scribners, $24.95.) The thesis of this challenging book by a distinguished political scientist is that unto this day black people have not received a fair shake as American citizens -- and that most white Americans don't believe this.
WAKE UP LITTLE SUSIE: Single Pregnancy and Race Before Roe v.
Wade.
By Rickie Solinger. (Routledge, $25.) A scholar's grim analysis of the treatment -- and the difference in treatment -- accorded women and girls who became extramaritally pregnant.
WHO WILL TELL THE PEOPLE: The Betrayal of American Democracy.
By William Greider. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $25.) Mr.
Greider, a former assistant managing editor at The Washington Post, presents a comprehensive guide to the American political system, which, he argues, is now a "grand bazaar" of moneyed interest groups and a grand attempt to obscure this fact.
Essays, Criticism, Letters
AFTER HENRY.
By Joan Didion. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $22.) Reporting from coast to coast, Ms.
Didion, who dedicates this collection of essays to the memory of her editor, Henry Robbins, shows that sensibility is still her strength and cool irony still her style.
Above all, she knows how to analyze the stories people make up to make sense of public events.
BEGINNING WITH MY STREETS: Essays and Recollections.
By Czeslaw Milosz. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $30.) The 1980 Nobel laureate discusses a variety of themes: time and ephemerality, nationalism and religion, the cardinal sins, his literary friends.
A DAY AT THE BEACH: Recollections.
By Geoffrey Wolff. (Knopf, $22.) Nine personal essays, or autobiographical reflections, by a skilled writer who has learned certain lessons in human frailty.
INTOXICATED BY MY ILLNESS: And Other Writings on Life and Death.
By Anatole Broyard. (Clarkson Potter, $18.) Urbane, lyrical, witty and gracious essays by a former editor of The New York Times Book Review, written mostly in his last 14 months.
JOURNEYS IN DREAM AND IMAGINATION.
By Artur Lundkvist. (Four Walls Eight Windows, $17.95.) An amazing, lyrical out-of-body travel book by a Swedish poet and essayist who returned from a two-month coma with a remarkable store of imagery.
KEEPING A RENDEZVOUS.
By John Berger. (Pantheon, $21.) These reflections on art and philosophy demonstrate the astounding range of a British-born essayist, novelist and playwright.
KURT WOLFF: A Portrait in Essays and Letters.
Edited by Michael Ermarth. (University of Chicago, $24.95.) The invaluable correspondence, intoxicating recollections and, best of all, engaging voice of perhaps this century's most discriminating publisher, whose authors and artists included Franz Kafka, Marc Chagall, Lou Andreas-Salome and Boris Pasternak.
THE LETTERS OF EVELYN WAUGH AND DIANA COOPER.
Edited by Artemis Cooper. (Ticknor &amp; Fields, $27.50.) A wonderfully engaging exchange of observations and entertainments over more than 30 years between the novelist and the almost unimaginably golden aristocrat Lady Diana Cooper.
LETTERS OF GUSTAVE COURBET.
Edited by Petra ten-Doesschate Chu. (University of Chicago, $55.) Intense stuff by the great painter, who was a raving democrat when looking above him in society, a solid bourgeois when looking down.
MIGRATIONS TO SOLITUDE.
By Sue Halpern. (Pantheon, $20.) A provocative book of essays, chiefly about privacy and independence and their rarity in our part of the 20th century.
OH CANADA!
OH QUEBEC!
Requiem for a Divided Country.
By Mordecai Richler. (Knopf, $23.) An unsystematic, powerful jeremiad against a law requiring that all public activities in Quebec be conducted exclusively in French -- a piece of legislation that Mr.
Richler sees as an exercise in cultural small-mindedness, xenophobia and even anti-Semitism.
PLAYING IN THE DARK: Whiteness and the Literary Imagination.
By Toni Morrison. (Harvard University, $14.95.) With her critic's hat on, Ms.
Morrison argues for the sort of literary scholarship (called "American Africanism") that will bring the black experience to all Americans and break us of the polite habit of ignoring race.
POETS, POETICS, AND POLITICS: America's Literary Community Viewed From the Letters of Rolfe Humphries, 1910-1969.
Edited by Richard Gillman and Michael Paul Novak. (University Press of Kansas, $35.) The view of a smart, honest poet who knew everybody and did not go in for malice.
SISTER'S CHOICE: Tradition and Change in American Women's Writing.
By Elaine Showalter. (Clarendon/Oxford University, $21.95.) Ms.
Showalter's latest book of literary criticism takes its title from a quilting pattern that becomes an organizing metaphor for some of the distinctions she makes between women's writing and men's.
STILL LIFE WITH A BRIDLE: Essays and Apocryphas.
By Zbigniew Herbert. (Ecco, $19.95.) Restless essays and sublime short fictions celebrating and revivifying the Dutch 17th century, by one of Poland's most distinguished writers.
A WOMAN, A MAN, AND TWO KINGDOMS: The Story of Madame d'Epinay and the Abbe Galiani.
By Francis Steegmuller. (Knopf, $23.) A colorful, lively, teasing, often moving account of an 18th-century friendship (much of it by correspondence) between a female
philosophe
and a Neapolitan intellectual, diplomat and spy.
Fiction
AN ACT OF TERROR.
By Andre Brink. (Summit, $25.) A compulsively readable, tautly handled novel whose hero, a 13th-generation Afrikaner, becomes an antiapartheid terrorist.
ALL THE PRETTY HORSES.
By Cormac McCarthy. (Knopf, $21.) Overwhelmingly seductive, dark and difficult, this novel about a 16-year old with a talent for breaking horses who leaves Texas to work on a vast ranch in Mexico is the first volume of a planned trilogy and the most accessible of Mr.
McCarthy's six novels.
ALMANAC OF THE DEAD.
By Leslie Marmon Silko. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $25.) With a cast of some 70 obsessed, vengeful characters, this wild, mordant novel grapples with the cruelty of a nation founded on the deracination of American Indian culture.
AT WEDDINGS AND WAKES.
By Alice McDermott. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $19.) This lovely novel, the author's third in a decade, perceives events in a large but dwindling Brooklyn Irish family as the memories they later become.
BILLIE DYER AND OTHER STORIES.
By William Maxwell. (Knopf, $18.) Tales partly true yet wholly imagined, located in the childhood of the distinguished writer and editor, now in his 80's.
BLACK WATER.
By Joyce Carol Oates. (William Abrahams/Dutton, $17.) A 26-year-old woman drowns when a senator's car goes off a bridge; but the point of view in this powerfully imagined novel belongs to the victim, whom we are made to know and whose tragedy we are made to comprehend.
BLOOD.
By Janice Galloway. (Random House, $19.) A Scottish writer's striking first collection of short stories, marked by a sense of menace, pain and emotional rawness.
BLUE CALHOUN.
By Reynolds Price. (Atheneum, $23.) The narrator of Mr.
Price's ambitious ninth novel is a loquacious 65-year-old salesman in Raleigh, N.C., who relates his life story to his granddaughter in order to win her mercy.
BLUE GLASS. by Sandra Tyler. (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, $19.95.) An unusual first novel that follows the arc of an adolescent girl's changing relationship with her mother without identifying either participant as victim or perpetrator.
THE BRIDE PRICE.
By Grete Weil. (Godine, $20.95.) Mrs.
Weil's beautiful novel, her first to be published in English, interleaves a narrative of King David and his infidelities with her own life as a German Jew who returned to Bavaria in 1947.
THE BUSINESS OF FANCYDANCING: Stories and Poems.
By Sherman Alexie. (Hanging Loose Press, cloth, $18; paper, $10.) A collection (the author's first) that deals comically and poignantly with basketball, convenience stores, cars and other artifacts of everyday life; set mostly in the Pacific Northwest.
CAETANA'S SWEET SONG.
By Nelida Pinon. (Knopf, $24.) This wonderfully original, down-and-dirty, slow-motion picaresque, set in a rural Brazilian backwater, is the second of this Brazilian writer's eight novels to appear in English.
CAMBRIDGE.
By Caryl Phillips. (Knopf, $19.) Mr.
Phillips's splendid and tragic novel tells two stories that ought to be one -- that of a thoughtful Englishwoman in the 19th-century West Indies and that of Cambridge, a proud and powerful slave.
A CASE OF CURIOSITIES.
By Allen Kurzweil. (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, $19.95.) Mr.
Kurzweil's first novel sets a 20th-century narrator in quest of an 18th-century mechanical genius; the result is a witty, curious and studied account of a mentally lively age.
CAT SCRATCH FEVER: Fictions.
By Robert Kelly. (McPherson &amp; Company, cloth, $20; paper, $10.) Some 30 stories that rummage brilliantly in post-apocalyptic fantasy or shroud preoccupations with sheltered boyhoods, mythology, sex and demonology.
COWBOYS ARE MY WEAKNESS.
By Pam Houston. (Norton, $19.95.) Short stories, mostly first-person, told with verve and perfect pitch by women entangled with wild men in a cruel world.
CRYSTAL RIVER: Three Novellas.
By Charlie Smith. (Linden/Simon &amp; Schuster, $20.) Extraordinary tales that explore the weaknesses and needs that drive people together and apart.
THE DISTANT LANDS.
By Julian Green. (Marion Boyars, $24.95.) Quietly shelved in the 1930's, when "Gone With the Wind" came out, this languorous 900-page novel of the antebellum South, written by a lifelong Parisian, re-creates the feeling of eternal childhood afternoons filled with adults' talk.
DUCK AND COVER.
By Brenda Peterson. (HarperCollins, $20.) Narrated by nine different characters, this wicked black comedy centers on the reunion of an eccentric family that is strangely tuned into the vibrations of the nuclear age.
THE END OF THE NOVEL.
By Michael Kruger. (Braziller, $17.50.) The writer-narrator of this very funny novella by a German poet, publisher and editor decides to have his hero commit suicide, and to remove from the book all episodes that might provide a motive.
An elegant entertainment results.
THE FACADE: M.N.O.P.Q.
By Libuse Monikova. (Knopf, $23.) In a novel about the restoration of a castle in Bohemia, a Czechoslovak writer creates a house of mirrors to reflect the political distortions of reality in her native land.
FALSE GODS.
By Louis Auchincloss. (Houghton Mifflin, $21.) The author's 34th work of fiction, a collection of six chilly, stylized tales, explores, once again, the dangers of being male, idealistic and WASP.
THE FIELD DAY ANTHOLOGY OF IRISH WRITING.
Edited by Seamus Deane. (Field Day Publications/Norton, $150.) With 4,044 pages in three volumes, this whopping, generous collection takes the Hibernophile reader right up to 1991.
FIELDS OF GLORY.
By Jean Rouaud. (Arcade/Little, Brown, $18.95.) This accomplished first novel, which has sold more than half a million copies in France, deals with the wounds wrought by World War I on a French provincial family.
FOOLSCAP.
By Michael Malone. (Little, Brown, $19.95.) The author of "Handling Sin" captures in another novel the sort of absurdity we are apt to think goes on all the time -- but unlike us, he has the sharp eye and sensibility to capture it in motion.
THE FORGOTTEN.
By Elie Wiesel. (Summit, $21.) Mr.
Wiesel, whose art is so intensely a witness to the Holocaust, confronts in this novel the horror that befalls a psychotherapist and survivor of the Nazis who is developing Alzheimer's disease.
FORTUNATE LIVES.
By Robb Forman Dew. (Morrow, $20.) This quiet -- virtually silent -- novel depends on the characters and the musings of a family during the summer before their son departs.
THE GATE OF ANGELS.
By Penelope Fitzgerald. (Nan A. Talese/Doubleday, $19.) A slim, concentrated novel about randomness in physics and luck in human affairs, exemplified in the collision of a physics student's bicycle with a young woman in 1912.
GOOD GOSSIP.
By Jacqueline Carey. (Random House, $19.) A witty, appealing collection of short stories featuring a continuing cast of men and women trying to end their extended adolescence.
HIGH COTTON.
By Darryl Pinckney. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $21.) A rich, dense first novel whose wordy, alienated narrator, a black fourth-generation college graduate, is obsessed with racial scenarios but will not conform to any of them.
I AM ZOE HANDKE.
By Eric Larsen. (Algonquin Books of Chapel Hill, $16.95.) In highly mannered but precisely controlled prose, this novel pursues a daughter's struggle with the most destructive and terrifying of childhood emotions: abandonment and loss.
JAZZ.
By Toni Morrison. (Knopf, $21.) In this novel, Ms.
Morrison conjures up with absolute authority the Harlem of the 1920's, its scenes and its inhabitants, especially Joe and Violet, a couple who learn again and again that life does not keep its promises.
THE KIND OF LIGHT THAT SHINES ON TEXAS.
By Reginald McKnight. (Little, Brown, $18.95.) Stories that exploit their author's uncannily sharp ear, bleak vision and incendiary humor.
LIFE FORCE.
By Fay Weldon. (Viking, $21.) The author, a generous satirist and feminist student of modern mores, delivers a sex comedy that is also a parable about the act of creativity itself.
THE LITTLE BROTHERS OF ST.
MORTIMER.
By John Fergus Ryan. (Delta, paper, $10.) A bunch of rogues drive across Arkansas in this picaresque novel full of disorderly sex and black humor.
THE LIVING.
By Annie Dillard. (HarperCollins, $22.50.) Ms.
Dillard's novel, in a genuine epic mode, concerns what befell nearly everyone in the 19th-century Washington Territory.
LIVING AFTER MIDNIGHT.
By Lee K. Abbott. (Putnam, $21.95.) In this collection of five short stories and a novella, Mr.
Abbott's prose exhibits high intensity, tight focus and a concentration on the depths and dimensions of more or less ordinary people.
THE LOST FATHER.
By Mona Simpson. (Knopf, $22.) A lyrical, astute novel that eloquently renders the tumultuous emotional state of a woman totally consumed with looking for her father.
LOVE JUNKIE.
By Robert Plunket. (HarperCollins, $20.) A comedy of manners, dancing on its toes, about a heroically innocent housewife from Bronxville who falls in love with a gay porno star.
THE LOVE QUEEN OF THE AMAZON.
By Cecile Pineda. (Little, Brown, $19.95.) A droll novel about sex and stuffy society on the upper Amazon, full of well-handled incongruities and characters who insist on making theatrical fools of themselves and others.
A MAN'S PLACE.
By Annie Ernaux. (Four Walls Eight Windows, $15.95.) An autobiographical novel that confronts the author's painful growth into incomprehension as she becomes a French intellectual while her father remains a hardworking shopkeeper.
MEN WHO WOULD BE GOOD: A Novella and Six Stories.
By Gordon Weaver. (Triquarterly Books; cloth, $18.95, paper, $9.95.) Full of gritty details of mills, bars and shopping malls, these sad, unnerving tales all concern men driven by existential problems.
MR.
MANI.
By A. B. Yehoshua. (Doubleday, $22.50.) A kaleidoscopic novel of Jewish history that slips back from 1982 to the 18th century through generations of one family, its exiles and returns.
ON MOZART: A Paean for Wolfgang.
By Anthony Burgess. (Ticknor &amp; Fields, $19.95.) Mr.
Burgess, himself a skilled composer when not novelizing, sets his homage in heaven, where the dear departed utter truths about music that are not easily available on earth.
OUTERBRIDGE REACH.
By Robert Stone. (Ticknor &amp; Fields, $21.95.) A shapely and powerful novel with a seafaring adventure in it, built around a triangle of husband, wife and her film-maker lover, suggesting that post-Vietnam disillusionment and skepticism may not after all be the whole end of life.
PARADISE NEWS.
By David Lodge. (Viking, $21.) In Mr.
Lodge's witty, entertaining ninth novel, a herd of English people descend on Hawaii for a two-week holiday, while a family death and a few other ugly things try to develop in their midst.
POSTCARDS.
By E. Annie Proulx. (Scribners, $22.95.) This lovely novel of the 1940's-80's era turns on a murderer's exile and the decline of the family and landscape he left behind in Vermont.
PRIMITIVE PEOPLE.
By Francine Prose. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $20.) Everyone is pretending, disguising, dressing up in a novel so funny it hardly matters that it's about a society in decay.
REGENERATION.
By Pat Barker. (William Abrahams/Dutton, $20.) Ms.
Barker takes brilliantly to semihistorical fiction with a polemic-free tale of war, manhood and madness, about the rebellion, the psychiatric treatment and the return to the front of the poet Siegfried Sassoon in World War I.
RISING SUN.
By Michael Crichton. (Knopf, $22.) A shocking and ominous murder mystery that taps into the fear that the Japanese have declared a full-scale economic war on the United States and are winning it because we refuse to fight.
SAN CAMILO, 1936: The Eve, Feast, and Octave of St.
Camillus of the Year 1936 in Madrid.
By Camilo Jose Cela. (Duke University, cloth, $45.95; paper, $14.95.) A Spanish Civil War novel with a difference: the apolitical vision of its Nobel Prize-winning author is a ringing rejection of fanaticism in any form.
SCAR LOVER.
By Harry Crews. (Poseidon, $19.) Mr.
Crews's 12th novel, set among country folk in Florida, concerns a man running from a wound in his heart that will not heal.
THE SHRINE AT ALTAMIRA.
By John L'Heureux. (Viking, $19.) A stark, cleanly told novel of guilt and redemption following a hideous act of child abuse; the climax is unspeakably terrible.
STARDUST, 7-ELEVEN, ROUTE 57, A&amp;W, AND SO FORTH: Stories.
By Patricia Lear. (Knopf, $19.) A nifty debut collection by yet another language-stoked Southerner, mixing syncopated syntax, down-home insight and far-out yet believable characters.
THE TANGO PLAYER.
By Christoph Hein. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $20.) A professor jailed for a trifle in East Germany is the focus of a fictional inquiry into the nature of freedom.
THE TAX INSPECTOR.
By Peter Carey. (Knopf, $21.) This disturbing Australian novel chronicles life in the Catchprice family, a clutch of loonies who enlarge our sympathies and our understanding as we see more of them and the world around them.
TIME AND TIDE.
By Edna O'Brien. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $21.) Subtly conjuring up the combined misfortunes of Emma Bovary, Anna Karenina and Hedda Gabler, Ms.
O'Brien displays, once again, her imagination for disaster in this melancholy novel about an Irishwoman living in London who is victimized by ordinary life, children, parents and especially men.
THE TRAINING GROUND.
By Siegfried Lenz. (Holt, $24.95.) An East Prussian family's wartime escape to the West and to prosperity becomes a symbol of the development of postwar Germany in this open-ended tale by a Hamburg novelist.
TURTLE MOON.
By Alice Hoffman. (Putnam, $21.95.) Ms.
Hoffman's lovely novel insists that there is magic in our lives; its chief characters, two damaged adults and a troubled child, not only believe in happy endings, they are willing to work for them.
UNDER THE 82ND AIRBORNE.
By Deborah Eisenberg. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $20.) Dark, complex, thematically opulent short stories conveying an atmosphere of beleaguered disorientation.
UNDERWORLD.
By Peter Conrad. (Poseidon, $21.) Mr.
Conrad's first novel -- dense, hermetic, allusive and striking -- takes place in a futuristic metropolis divided by a valley of criminals and deftly walks the line between parable and naturalistic narrative.
VERY OLD BONES.
By William Kennedy. (Viking, $22.) The sixth novel in the author's Albany cycle is a sort of excavation into the past of his own career as a writer, where the undoing of gloom and the reconciliation of family members are central themes.
VIOLENCE.
By Richard Bausch. (Seymour Lawrence/ Houghton Mifflin, $19.95.) A masterly novel that explores public and private forms of violence with persistence and sensitivity.
VOX.
By Nicholson Baker. (Random House, $15.) This imagined erotic telephone call between two characters on an adult party line is breathtaking, funny and perversely tender.
THE WAR OF DON EMMANUEL'S NETHER PARTS.
By Louis de Bernieres. (Morrow, $25.) It looks like Latin American magical realism, but it's a romance by a Briton; when the war (a mistake, mostly) is over, everybody moves to an arcadian mountain valley.
WHO WAS DAVID WEISER?
By Pawel Huelle. (Helen and Kurt Wolff/Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, $17.95.) Mr.
Huelle's beautifully written first novel is an elegy for the ancient port city of Gdansk in Poland and for a group of 12-year-old boys.
WISE CHILDREN.
By Angela Carter. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $21.) Carter's 11th and last work of fiction is a mock memoir that is narrated by an endlessly imaginative post-modernist old woman.
THE WRECKING YARD: Stories.
By Pinckney Benedict. (Nan A. Talese/Doubleday, $19.) Stories, often violent, steeped in the physical world, ultimately moved by the mess man has made of it.
History
ALIEN INK: The FBI's War on Freedom of Expression.
By Natalie Robins. (Morrow, $27.50.) This admirable history of the F.B.I.'s dossier collection on intellectuals shows that the bureau's agents weren't really up to the task set for them by their crazed boss.
BENEVOLENCE AND BETRAYAL: Five Italian Jewish Families Under Fascism.
By Alexander Stille. (Summit, $25.) Mr.
Stille's meticulous research and comprehensive understanding yield a fresh perception of the victims, casualties, heroes and villains, Jews and gentiles alike, who arose in that terrible time.
THE BLACK MAN'S BURDEN: Africa and the Curse of the Nation-State.
By Basil Davidson. (Times Books/Random House, $24.) A British journalist who lost his heart to Africa during World War II faces the tragic truth: though Europe robbed Africa of its history, its culture and its nations, many of its countries are worse off now as independent nations than they were as colonies.
THE BURIED MIRROR: Reflections on Spain and the New World.
By Carlos Fuentes. (Houghton Mifflin, $35.) Looking for continuity in the cultural history of Spain and Spanish America, from the caves of Altamira to the streets of East L.A., Mr.
Fuentes has written an anachronistic history but a sweeping and forceful narrative.
BYZANTIUM: The Apogee.
By John Julius Norwich. (Knopf, $30.) The second of a projected three volumes, this readable and provocative history takes the Eastern Roman Empire from Charlemagne's coronation, in 800, to the late 11th century.
THE CIVIL WAR IN THE AMERICAN WEST.
By Alvin M. Josephy Jr. (Knopf, $27.50.) A learned and powerful narrative that reveals how intimately joined the war and the Western expansion were.
THE END OF HISTORY AND THE LAST MAN.
By Francis Fukuyama. (Free Press, $24.95.) A quixotic, tightly argued work of political philosophy whose rallying cry is "Back to Hegel" and whose central argument is that liberal democracy is the natural and inviting end of history.
THE GOLDEN AGE OF AMERICAN GARDENS: Proud Owners, Private Estates, 1890-1940.
By Mac Griswold and Eleanor Weller. (Abrams/Garden Club of America, $75.) Meticulous documentation by horticultural historians of over 500 great gardens created when wealth was bold and showy.
MYSTIC CHORDS OF MEMORY: The Transformation of Tradition in American Culture.
By Michael Kammen. (Knopf, $40.) Mr.
Kammen, a brilliant cultural historian, explores the creation of a usable American past (Margaret Mitchell's Southland, for instance) in the teeth (or behind the back) of the facts.
NATURAL ALLIES: Women's Associations in American History.
By Anne Firor Scott (University of Illinois, $32.50.) This clearheaded but impassioned survey shows that women's volunteer societies, far from being frivolous, were the force behind countless civic projects, from the building of schools to the establishment of welfare agencies.
THE NEW EMPERORS: China in the Era of Mao and Deng.
By Harrison E. Salisbury. (Little, Brown, $24.95.) A fascinating and detailed picture of the personal relationships and private lives of China's rulers for 40 years; by a veteran of The New York Times.
ORDINARY MEN: Reserve Police Battalion 101 and the Final Solution in Poland.
By Christopher R. Browning. (Aaron Asher/HarperCollins, $22.) A historian's penetrating account of some men -- most of them not even Nazis -- who killed about 83,000 Jews.
OVER THE EARTH I COME: The Great Sioux Uprising of 1862.
By Duane Schultz. (Thomas Dunne/St. Martin's, $21.95.) A taut, capable narrative of the abominable doings by both sides that set the tone for America's post-Civil War expansion.
OWEN LATTIMORE AND THE "LOSS" OF CHINA.
By Robert P. Newman. (University of California, $30.) This landmark work on American politics at the end of World War II tells us how an obscure scholar came to be seen as the Red Menace itself.
THE RADICALISM OF THE AMERICAN REVOLUTION.
By Gordon S. Wood. (Knopf, $27.50.) Mr.
Wood argues with learning and grace that if social change is the measure of radicalism, our revolution was as radical as anybody's.
ROWAN'S PROGRESS.
By James McConkey. (Pantheon, $22.) Well-written and sensible, this 100-year history shows how a doctor and a hospital helped ease Appalachia's Rowan Country into the modern world.
THE SCRAMBLE FOR AFRICA: 1876-1912.
By Thomas Pakenham. (Random House, $32.) Exercising both detachment and judgment, Mr.
Pakenham relates the endless movements of the Europeans (and their African enemies) across the huge continent they snatched from its inhabitants and divided among themselves.
SOLDIERS OF THE SUN: The Rise and Fall of the Imperial Japanese Army.
By Meirion Harries and Susie Harries. (Random House, $30.) A history of the state-within-the-state that was the Japanese Army before 1945, an organization addicted to aggression and to exceeding the instructions of its Government.
UNTO THE SONS.
By Gay Talese. (Knopf, $25.) Mr.
Talese has brought his enormous reportorial industry to bear on his own family, especially on his Italian-born father's side, and has meticulously reconstructed a personal history and a way of life now distant.
Poetry
AN ATLAS OF THE DIFFICULT WORLD: Poems 1988-1991.
By Adrienne Rich. (Norton, cloth, $17.95; paper, $7.95.) In passionate, flowing cadences, our most visible poetic proponent of feminism finds ways to balance the conflicting demands of poetry and ideology.
THE LOVE POEMS OF MAY SWENSON.
By May Swenson. (Houghton Mifflin, paper, $9.95.) A rare, authentic poet of celebration, this American original who died at 76 in 1989 wrote high-spirited, unruly, risky poems that reveal a writer filled with sexual ebullience and emotional candor.
PROVINCES.
By Czeslaw Milosz. (Ecco, $19.95.) In new poems of penetrating honesty, this famous immigrant from Poland, who won the Nobel Prize in Literature in 1980, presents a lucid, deceptively straightforward, unforgettable portrait of the artist as an old man.
QUILTING: Poems 1987-1990.
By Lucille Clifton. (BOA Editions, cloth, $18; paper, $9.) This urban African-American poet's work is personal, visionary, celebratory, passionate, mercurial, angry, prophetic, vulnerable, funny -- and always surprising.
SELECTED POEMS.
By Derek Mahon. (Viking, $20.) Ironic, self-questioning and skeptical, this outstanding Northern Irish poet writes, with self-lacerating wit and existential grief, cosmopolitan verse about modern displacement, about necessary departures and guilty homecomings.
WHAT WORK IS.
By Philip Levine. (Knopf, $19.) America's pre-eminent poet of working life makes severe poetry out of the wounds inflicted on people and the earth by industry, and pays magnificent tribute to the humanity of ordinary workers.
Popular Culture and the Arts
THE AGE OF MISSING INFORMATION.
By Bill McKibben. (Random House, $20.) Two dramatic, intertwined reports -- one an account of the world as reflected in a 24-hour period in the Adirondacks, the other an account of the world as broadcast on 103 television channels in a single day.
ARCHITECTURE: The Natural and the Manmade.
By Vincent Scully. (St. Martin's, $40.) In what is nothing less than an interpretation of the whole history of Western architecture, Yale's revered teacher of architecture for some 40 years explores the relationship of buildings to landscape.
FOR A COWBOY HAS TO SING.
By Jim Bob Tinsley. (University of Central Florida, $39.95.) A collection of 60 cowboy songs from the golden age -- 1905-57 -- with brisk, witty, informative introductions to the songs and their composers in Brooklyn, Cleveland, Dublin, Hollywood and other homes on the range.
FRANK CAPRA: The Catastrophe of Success.
By Joseph McBride. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $27.50.) A comprehensive biography of the wizard director of "common-man" movies, which were actually informed (as the author shows) by Capra's right-wing politics.
GEORGE CUKOR: A DOUBLE LIFE.
A Biography of the Gentleman Director.
By Patrick McGilligan. (St. Martin's, $24.95.) A full-bodied account of the brilliant film maker's works, the man himself and his elegantly gay life in a Hollywood that pretended to celebrate all the middle-class decencies.
HIRSCHFELD: Art and Recollections From Eight Decades.
By Al Hirschfeld. (Scribners, $50.) An abundant retrospective of the work of this great visual chronicler of the theater.
THE LAST DANDY, RALPH BARTON: American Artist, 1891-1931.
By Bruce Kellner. (University of Missouri, $34.95.) A sympathetic, informative and just biography of the compulsively workaholic magazine illustrator and restless man about town.
LITTLE LEAGUE CONFIDENTIAL: One Coach's Completely Unauthorized Tale of Survival.
By Bill Geist. (Macmillan, $17.) A good-humored romp through the terror and delight of Little League players and their ambitious parents.
LOUIS I. KAHN: In the Realm of Architecture.
By David B. Brownlee and David G. De Long, with essays by others. (Museum of Contemporary Art/ Rizzoli, cloth, $60; paper, $40.) The first comprehensive account of the career of the man who was probably America's most important post-World War II architect; gloriously illustrated.
THE MAESTRO MYTH: Great Conductors in Pursuit of Power.
By Norman Lebrecht. (Birch Lane/Carol Publishing, $22.50.) This juicy, garish and tendentious book of more than 50 thumbnail biographies explores the conductor's place in the byzantine world of music and in society.
NO MINOR CHORDS: My Days in Hollywood.
By Andre Previn. (Doubleday, $22.50.) An amiable, intelligent memoir of Mr.
Previn's early life as a movie music maker, with anecdotes of many first-rate colleagues, producers, directors and stars.
PRODIGAL SON: Dancing for Balanchine in a World of Pain and Magic.
By Edward Villella with Larry Kaplan. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) How a guy from Queens became a great American dancer, and how a great choreographer created through him a new way of dancing.
It wasn't all fun.
TO THE END OF TIME: The Seduction and Conquest of a Media Empire.
By Richard M. Clurman. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) The smooth, brisk story of how Time Inc., the straitlaced journalistic company, was courted by and married to Warner Communications, the racy movie venture, to form the biggest American media conglomerate ever; written by a former chief of correspondents for Time magazine.
UNSILENT REVOLUTION: Television News and American Public Life, 1948-1991.
By Robert J. Donovan and Ray Scherer. (Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars/Cambridge University, cloth, $49.95; paper, $17.95.) A history of the broadcast images that have largely molded our minds over the last 40 years.
VESTED INTERESTS: Cross-Dressing &amp; Cultural Anxiety.
By Marjorie Garber. (Routledge, $35.) This erudite and exhilarating book explores how culture creates transvestites and transvestites create culture.
VIEW: Parade of the Avant-Garde.
An Anthology of View Magazine (1940-1947).
Edited by Charles Henri Ford.
Compiled by Catrina Neiman and Paul Nathan. (Thunder's Mouth, $35.) Breton, Duchamp, Stevens, Camus, Magritte, O'Keeffe and a host of other woozy and astute writers and artists appear in this vivid anthology of the short-lived magazine that celebrated New York's international status.
THE WALLS AROUND US: The Thinking Person's Guide to How a House Works.
By David Owen. (Villard, $21.) Solid research, experience and personal enthusiasm inform this guide to the reasons for keeping the outdoors out and the methods of doing it.
Religion and Mythology
THE FEMININE FACE OF GOD: The Unfolding of the Sacred in Women.
By Sherry Ruth Anderson and Patricia Hopkins. (Bantam, $20.) Sensitive portraits of the spiritual lives of more than 100 women, as seen through the eyes of two feminists.
FUNDAMENTALISMS OBSERVED.
Edited by Martin E. Marty and R. Scott Appleby. (University of Chicago, $40.) The first of five volumes in an encyclopedic study of fundamentalist movements in just about all the religions and regions of the earth.
A MARGINAL JEW: Rethinking the Historical Jesus.
Volume One: The Roots of the Problem and the Person.
By John P. Meier. (Anchor Bible Reference Library/Doubleday, $25.) This gently skeptical but old-fashioned study of Jesus's birth, development and cultural background is the first part of a planned two-volume work on the historical Jesus.
SANTIAGO: Saint of Two Worlds.
By Joan Myers, Marc Simmons and Donna Pierce. (University of New Mexico, cloth, $45; paper, $25.) Words and pictures (by Ms. Myers) exploring the legend of St.
James in Spain and America.
THE WORLD OF BIBLICAL LITERATURE.
By Robert Alter. (Basic Books, $23.) These addictive essays analyzing the Hebrew Bible as a literary work try to break down the wall between modern readers and ancient texts.
Science and Medicine
THE ASPIRIN WARS: Money, Medicine, and 100 Years of Rampant Competition.
By Charles C. Mann and Mark L. Plummer. (Knopf, $25.) A fascinating and thoroughly researched history of a most remarkable little pill.
BRIGHT AIR, BRILLIANT FIRE: On the Matter of the Mind.
By Gerald M. Edelman. (Basic Books, $25.) In a brave attempt to elucidate his own theory of neural Darwinism, a neuroscientist argues that the brain is not like a computer but rather like the immune system, molding itself to the contours of the outside world.
EARTH IN THE BALANCE: Ecology and the Human Spirit.
By Al Gore. (Houghton Mifflin, $22.95.) The junior Senator from Tennessee assesses the decay of the planet and proposes an environmental Marshall Plan in this perspicacious, heartening book.
EXTINCTION: Bad Genes or Bad Luck?
By David M. Raup. (Norton, $19.95.) In a breezy tone, a biologist and statistical analyst says that mass extinctions, triggered by meteorites, are likely to happen every 26 million years and we should now be looking to ward off the next one.
MAPPING THE NEXT MILLENNIUM: The Discovery of New Geographies.
By Stephen S. Hall. (Random House, $30.) Mr.
Hall's fascinating thesis is that the vast gobs of data generated by modern scientific research yield the clearest and most useful results when rendered in graphic form -- that is, as maps.
THE MIND OF GOD: The Scientific Basis for a Rational World.
By Paul Davies. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $22.) In this personable and crisp metaphysical quest, a physicist asks whether scientific inquiry can lead us to ultimate answers about creation
THE MIND'S SKY: Human Intelligence in a Cosmic Context.
By Timothy Ferris. (Bantam, $22.50.) An audacious, chatty book that explores the connection between the universe of the mind and the universe of the stars.
THE MINER'S CANARY: Unraveling the Mysteries of Extinction.
By Niles Eldredge. (Prentice Hall, $20.) One of the world's leading evolutionary theorists argues that the biggest threat to our species is posed not by meteorites but by ourselves.
NIELS BOHR'S TIMES: In Physics, Philosophy and Polity.
By Abraham Pais. (Clarendon/ Oxford University, $35.) What did the 1922 Nobel laureate in physics actually do to be so much admired?
This first major biography of Bohr illuminates his contributions.
PRISONER'S DILEMMA.
By William Poundstone. (Doubleday, $22.50.) An open and multifaceted work that explores how the premier paradox about choice and conflict was formulated by the mathematicians Emile Borel and John von Neumann, and how it came to be connected with nuclear strategy.
THE THIRD CHIMPANZEE: The Evolution and Future of the Human Animal.
By Jared Diamond. (HarperCollins, $25.) With great wit, a physiologist ponders what it is that makes chimps and humans, who share 98 percent of their DNA, so different.
UNCERTAINTY: The Life and Science of Werner Heisenberg.
By David C. Cassidy. (W. H. Freeman, $29.95.) A fascinating, well-documented biography of the man who, in his scientific life, concluded that quantum mechanics had destroyed the determinism of classical mechanics and who, in his personal life, seemed to sympathize with the Nazis.
Science Fiction
KING OF THE DEAD.
By R. A. MacAvoy. (Morrow, $19.)This worthy sequel to "The Lens of the World" continues the adventures of Nazhuret, a reluctant hero whose deadly weapons are swordplay and wordplay.
AND THE ANGELS SING.
By Kate Wilhelm. (St. Martin's, $19.95.) Positioned on the border between fantasy and mainstream fiction, these 12 stories provide pleasure and provoke thought by undermining the reader's expectations at every turn.
CHINA MOUNTAIN ZHANG.
By Maureen F. McHugh (Tom Doherty/Tor, $19.95.) A beautifully realized first novel that portrays the 22d century as dominated by a nominally socialist China.
A FIRE UPON THE DEEP.
By Vernor Vinge (Tom Doherty/Tor, $21.95.) Thoughtful space opera at its best, this book delivers everything it promises in terms of galactic scope, audacious concepts and believable characters both human and nonhuman.
MURASAKI.
Edited by Robert Silverberg. (Bantam Spectra, $20.) For this exemplary "shared-world" anthology, six Nebula Award-winning authors have created deftly interlinked stories set in a bizarre planetary system invented by two of the contributors, Poul Anderson and Frederik Pohl.
Spies &amp; Thrillers
ANGLE OF ATTACK.
By Robin A. White. (Crown, $20.) This fine novel about flying starts just before the beginning of the Persian Gulf war, with American naval forces off the coast of Libya and with Israel targeted for destruction.
FROST THE FIDDLER.
By Janice Weber. (St. Martin's, $19.95.) Ms.
Weber is an American concert pianist who writes as well as she plays; her heroine, a sort of female James Bond, is a violinist who doubles as a spy for a secret United States agency.
THE KING'S PRIVATEER.
By Dewey Lambdin. (Donald I. Fine, $21.95.) Like Mr.
Lambdin's other sea stories, set 200 years ago, his newest one, with its cast of intriguing characters, stands up very well even against those of the master, C. S. Forester.
A LANDING ON THE SUN.
By Michael Frayn. (Viking, $21.) A philosophical fable, a satire on bureaucracies and finally a spy thriller that employs to fine effect many of Mr.
Frayn's numberless talents.
LET US PREY.
By Bill Branon. (Black Seal Press, paper, $12.95.) In this raunchy, cynical book about the inherent rottenness of big government, one man decides to do something about the inequities of the Internal Revenue Service.
MOSCOW MAGICIAN.
By John Moody. (Thomas Dunne/St. Martin's, $17.95.) Mr.
Moody, a correspondent for Time magazine, has written an absorbing novel about a small-time operator in Moscow during the 1980's who finds himself on the K.G.B. blacklist.
Travel, Nature, Adventure
BANDIT: Dossier of a Dangerous Dog.
By Vicki Hearne. (Aaron Asher/HarperCollins, $22.) Not just a baroque story about a dog who bit his master but an eccentric lesson in justice, linguistics, racism and teleology.
BARCELONA.
By Robert Hughes. (Knopf, $27.50.) An elegant, often witty, survey of the history and culture of a great city that fate has made relatively unfamiliar, by an art critic for Time magazine.
IMAGINED PLACES: Journeys Into Literary America.
By Michael Pearson. (University Press of Mississippi, $24.95.) In this unusual and sometimes dispiriting mix of travel and autobiography, the author gathers up his best-loved books and tries to find the worlds they evoked -- Ernest Hemingway's Key West, Mark Twain's Missouri, Flannery O'Connor's South.
LAND OF THE EAGLE: A Natural History of North America.
By Robert McCracken Peck. (Summit, $30.) The companion volume for a BBC television series portrays the continent as it appeared to the first European explorers.
THE LOST UPLAND.
By W. S. Merwin. (Knopf, $22.) In this agile, semiautobiographical short-story trilogy, an esteemed American poet portrays the sleepy Dordogne region of France as only an impassioned outsider can.
MEN AND WHALES.
By Richard Ellis. (Knopf, $40.) An impressive, lavishly illustrated history of one of our most significant and complex relationships with nature, from Neolithic whale hunts to the world ban on commercial whaling.
THE MOON BY WHALE LIGHT: And Other Adventures Among Bats, Penguins, Crocodilians, and Whales.
By Diane Ackerman. (Random House, $20.) These four natural history pieces by an unsqueamish, hands-on reporter contain many gems of description and an incredible amount of sensory detail.
NATIVE STRANGER: A Black American's Journey Into the Heart of Africa.
By Eddy L. Harris. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $22.) A black American writer who has a gift for opening himself up to strangers travels to Africa to see how African he really is.
WHITEOUT: Lost in Aspen.
By Ted Conover. (Random House, $20.) Mr.
Conover spent two years roaming the streets and slopes of Aspen, Colo., the trendiest place on earth; he had a wonderful time, almost lost his soul, escaped and wrote a fascinating book.
THE WORLD AND THE BO TREE.
By Helen Bevington. (Duke University, cloth, $39.95; paper, $15.95.) A poet and tireless tourist with a taste for comfortable hotels records her travels and quotes voluminously from her reading.


A QUESTION OF LIFE
Nora Frenkiel is right.
There are no guarantees, and those of us who live with a cancer diagnosis are, perhaps, forever transformed by that reality.
I hope that, in retrospect, Frenkiel
will
consider herself a survivor, for there is no magic line we cross, after which our "guarantees" can be reinstated.
We can only go forward.
There is only that "healthy denial." ALLISON H. WILCOX
Austin, Tex.


Does 'Murphy Brown' Reflect Our Norms, or Set Them?; Ideological Values
To the Editor:  Vice President Quayle's comments on "Murphy Brown" (news article, May 20) are just another example of a pervasive (and, to many, frustrating) attribute of our political system: the frequent mismatch between the immediate incentives that drive politicians and the real nature of the problems that bedevil us.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
PAST AND FUTURE
"The Future of the American City in the 21st Century: What Will Our Children Inherit?" is the topic of a lecture to be delivered by Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr. during today's 10 A.M. service at the United Church on the Green in New Haven.


Miss Kennedy, James Duke 2d
Elizabeth Jackson Kennedy, a daughter of Jackson W. T. Kennedy of Toms River, N.J., and Joan Friedman Martin of Virginia Beach, Va., was married yesterday in Media, Pa., to James Buchanan Duke 2d, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Duke of Durham, N.C.
The Rev.
John Francis performed the ceremony at Christ Episcopal Church.
Mrs.
Duke, 26 years old, graduated magna cum laude from the University of Pennsylvania and will receive an M.B.A. from Harvard University in June.
Her father is a project manager for Coastal Group, a real-estate developer in Colts Neck, N.J.
Her mother is a partner in the law firm of Williams Kelly &amp; Greer in Norfolk, Va.


Additional Services For Alzheimer's Cases
As an attorney on the Legal Advisory Board of the Alzheimer's Association, Nassau-Suffolk Counties chapter, I lecture regularly to family members of Alzheimer's victims.


Louise Warmuth, Matthew Nelson
Helen Louise Warmuth, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William Warmuth of Old Greenwich, Conn., was married yesterday in Austin, Tex., to Matthew Peter Nelson, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
James J. Nelson of Austin.
The Rev.
John Collins performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Austin's Church.
Mrs.
Nelson, 29 years old, is known as Louise.
She graduated from Princeton University and is an account director at the Maritz Performance Improvement Company, an efficiency expert in Bridgewater, N.J.
Her father is a consultant to the International Business Machines Corporation in Armonk, N.Y.
Her mother, Bruce Warmuth, is an elementary-school teacher at Greens Farms (Conn.) Academy.


Taking a Look At Lewis Enigma
To the Sports Editor:
I'm not a track and field fan, but I have always wondered why Carl Lewis is not accepted by the public ("Another Attempt at America's Heart," The Times, May 20).
He is an utterly amazing athlete and seems a very decent person.
His brother's suggestion seems accurate, i.e., a definite but unknown element of racism, plus something else.
Thanks to Michael Janofsky and The New York Times for giving this some comment.
NORM ZEMKE Chicago


The Islamic Wave
Zahida Kandil, an Algerian businesswoman, began to have fears the day her young cousin returned home from school and announced that he could no longer kiss her good night.
His teachers had told him that kissing women was
haram,
forbidden by God.
In the Sudan, a university student lay on a cot in a dingy hospital in Khartoum.
His head was bandaged.
His hands and back were discolored by burns, some still oozing.
In February, during a demonstration by an Islamic youth group, he was hit with a bottle of flammable liquid, setting him afire.
No one has been arrested for the attack.


G.O.P. Fears It May Lose Goodhue's Safe Seat
MARY GOODHUE, State Senator for 14 years and Assemblywoman for four years before that, sat in her Mount Kisco law office last week, still stunned by the eruption in Republican Party ranks that followed her decision to retire and then, two days later, to seek "one more term in Albany."
"I have no quarrel with George Pataki," she said of the former Peekskill Mayor and State Assemblyman whose decision to challenge Ms.
Goodhue set the political wheels in motion.
"I said to him, when he told me he was going to force a primary, 'Why do that? I only want one more term.' "


McColgan Tops Field Of 3,500 In Race
Threading her way through Central Park while dodging joggers, cyclists, rollerbladers and the occasional stroller who froze dead in her path, Liz McColgan of Scotland pulled away from Lisa Ondieki of Australia -- and some 3,500 other women -- yesterday to win the Advil Mini Marathon.
McColgan, the world 10,000-meter champion and the undisputed queen of the distance on road or track, covered the 6.2 miles in 31 minutes 41 seconds.


All-Day Tribute to American Music
HAVE you ever dreamed of playing Gershwin with the New Orchestra of Westchester or singing Beethoven with the Westchester Choral Society?
If so, grab your clarinet (or whatever), your music stand and your score and head over to "Marathon II: World Music America," an all-day celebration at the County Center.
Adele Dowling of the county's Department of Parks, Recreation and Conservation calls today's free event "a musical tribute commemorating the 500th anniversary of Christopher Columbus's journey to the Americas, saluting music that was brought to America as well as music that originated here."


New York Starting Its Biggest Week
Every morning at 5:30 or so, by the dawn's early light, they start walking from the barns at Belmont Park and head toward the track, some carrying exercise riders on their backs, others carrying star jockeys, all of them headed for workouts for the week's performances.
And before long, 50 or more thoroughbreds are working at different speeds and tempos, even in different directions in a whirl of color and speed.
They are rehearsing for the biggest week of the year in New York racing: Belmont Week.
It starts with a kind of overture on Wednesday, the $75,000 Hyde Park Handicap for fillies and mares.
It picks up the pace on Thursday with the $100,000 Genuine Risk, a Grade II stakes for fillies and mares.
It continues on Friday with the $75,000 Jaipur Stakes for 3-year-olds and upward.


A QUESTION OF LIFE
Frenkiel's article was right on target.
There are no absolute guidelines for women who want a baby after breast cancer.
Seven years ago, at age 38, I was diagnosed with the disease.
One mastectomy was performed and, six months later, a second, prophylactic one, followed.
Although I already had two sons, I very much wanted another child.
Was it safe for me to have a baby?
Three doctors offered three opinions: 1.
Never become pregnant again because the hormones released during gestation would act like gasoline on a fire if any cancer cells remained. 2.
Wait at least two years before conceiving. 3.
Go ahead; pregnancy should be as safe for me as for any woman because I had had no chemotherapy and was node negative and thus, presumably, cancer-free.
My husband and I were confused but decided to try to conceive.
The prophylactic mastectomy was done, in part, for this reason.
One doctor believed pregnancy would be safer if all breast tissue were removed.


In the Region: Long Island; Recent Sales
East Meadow 185,000
2747 Woods Avenue  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 9-year-old high ranch; dining room, eat-in kitchen, family room, 1-car garage; taxes $5,200.
Fort Salonga 269,000
45 Wayne Court  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath 18-year-old colonial; family room with fireplace, finished basement, pool; taxes $7,300.
Levittown 155,000
42 Schoolhouse Road  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 41-year-old Cape Cod; dining room, eat-in kitchen, den, family room; taxes $4,700.
Massapequa 335,000
129 Ocean Avenue  4-bedroom, 3-bath, 19-year-old high ranch; dining room, eat-in kitchen, family room, 2- car garage; taxes $7,900.
St.
James 227,000
116 Hobson Avenue  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 17-year-old colonial; dining room, family room, finished basement, 2-car garage; taxes $5,300.
Stony Brook 141,500
58 University Heights  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 26-year-old colonial; dining room, eat-in kitchen, 1-car garage; taxes $3,200.
OTHER AREAS Mount Kisco, N.Y. 565,000
12 Kitchel Road
4-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 37-year-old colonial; 2 fireplaces, formal dining room, library, family room, playroom, 1.2 acres; taxes $9,779.
Stamford, Conn. 190,000
70 Tremont Avenue  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 48-year-old cape cod; large eat-in kitchen with pantry, secluded and fenced-in yard, 0.25 acre; taxes $2,346.
Freehold Township, N.J. 260,900
27 Majestic Drive
4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, new colonial; fireplace, full basement; taxes $6,078.


Trying to Change the Way People Mow the Lawn
AS the familiar sounds of lawn mowers usher in a new summer season in Westchester, county and local officials are asking homeowners to radically change the way they mow their lawns in order to save both money and the environment.
A new recycling program, called "grasscycling," encourages people to leave grass clippings on their lawn after mowing.
By mowing more frequently, program advocates say, homeowners can keep their lawns looking good and at the same time provide fertilization through natural methods.
Most important, thousands of tons of grass clippings will be kept out of the county's overburdened waste stream.


The Black Crowes, Circa 1972
Rock's past has rarely sounded as perfect as it does on the Black Crowes' second album, "The Southern Harmony and Musical Companion"(Def American 26916; CD and cassette).
The music has the jauntiness of 70's pub-rock bands like Faces, and the swaggering guitars should bring a smile to Keith Richards's face.
The Crowes' lead singer, Chris Robinson, slurs lyrics like "music got to free your mind!" in a gravelly tone that recalls Joe Cocker.
Even though the Crowes are in their 20's, unwitting listeners may feel they've stumbled on a typical FM rock station circa 1972.
The re-creation isn't limited to the music, either.
Mr.
Robinson, who twirls his microphone stand and struts like a rooster in the best Rod Stewart fashion, wears bell bottoms.
In an equally anachronistic move, the band recently played at a music festival in its hometown of Atlanta in support of the legalization of marijuana.


A Dies Irae As Bells Toll For Galleries
Lois Nesbitt, a conceptual artist, has devised a New York walking tour that almost no one would want to go on.
The tour maps are covered with 50 black spots: each one represents a commercial or nonprofit gallery that has closed since 1989.
During this month, Ms.
Nesbitt has put up 3-by-6-inch stickers, below, at each closed gallery to match up with the map.


Mutual Funds; A Letdown for Pricing Reformers
At the mutual fund industry's annual get-together this month, the Securities and Exchange Commission presented its long-awaited package of proposals to change the way funds are regulated.
Intended to update a 50-year-old law, the report tinkers with the regulatory structure, focuses on big topics like the globalization of the securities markets and proposes new types of funds and negotiated sales charges.
But people who were looking for simpler fund investing will be disappointed.
John C. Bogle, chairman of the Vanguard Group, calls the S.E.C. proposal "too much marketing and not enough trusteeship." He wants more investor-friendly information, especially in the area of fees, advertising and annual reports to shareholders.


AIR TRAVEL AND OIL CURBED
Rejecting last-minute Serbian appeals for a delay, the Security Council voted overwhelmingly today to follow the Bush Administration's lead and impose tough economic sanctions on the Yugoslav Government in an effort to force Belgrade try to bring peace to Bosnia and Herzegovina.
In addition to calling for the establishment of a "security zone" around the Sarajevo airport to allow emergency supplies to be flown into the Bosnian capital, today's resolution committed the Council to "consider immediately, whenever necessary, further steps to achieve a peaceful solution in conformity with relevant resolutions of the Council."  [ Excerpts from the resolution, Page 8. ] U.S. to Seize Yugoslav Assets
Although the resolution, which passed with 13 votes in favor and two abstentions, made no specific reference to using force, some Council members are informally discussing the possibility of a naval blockade of the Adriatic ports and closing Bosnian air space to Serbian planes that are supporting forces fighting there.
In Sarajevo today, Bosnian Serbs and Muslim Slavs battled at an army barracks, but the Serbs were later reported to have ordered their troops to halt artillery fire..


Washington Talk; In Surprise, High Court Appears Less Solid
No sooner have the conservatives found themselves in the saddle at the Supreme Court than they are starting to ride off in different directions.
If the last few weeks are any indication, the term could turn out to be considerably more ragged, and perhaps even more unpredictable, than appeared likely when it began last fall.
In its most recent rulings, the Court appears almost as fragmented and out of sorts as it did in the years before retirement shrank the liberal wing to virtual insignificance.


Just Whose 'Malcolm' Is It, Anyway?
"Malcolm X" is a film that didn't have to be made to be controversial.
The project has been embroiled in controversy since it was launched in 1968.
At that time, a screenplay by James Baldwin and Arnold Perl was commissioned by Marvin Worth, a producer who had acquired rights to Alex Haley's as-told-to "Autobiography of Malcolm X." Over the years, the focus of the controversy has changed.
Initially it involved Hollywood's readiness to deal with Malcolm X. Later it concerned which phase of his ideological development to emphasize.
Then it focused on whether a white director could capture Malcolm's complexity.
When Spike Lee actually began filming "Malcolm X" for Warner Brothers last year, everybody, it seemed, had an opinion about what was in store.
Within the black community, ideologues and intellectuals of every stripe -- cultural nationalists and integrationists, buppies and revolutionaries, Five Percenters and Baptist ministers alike -- wondered aloud about Mr.
Lee's right to portray the complex life of Malcolm X for the big screen.


Tagliabue Waffles on Lisa Olson File
Two seasons have passed since Lisa Olson, then a reporter for the Boston Herald, said she was sexually harassed by three players in the New England Patriots locker room.
The allegation ignited a firestorm of outrage over the treatment of female sports reporters and renewed the debate about an athlete's right to privacy versus a reporter's right to report.
The National Football League hired Phillip Heymann, a Harvard University legal scholar, to conduct an investigation and ultimately fined the players.
Olson sued the players and the team.
She moved to Australia and in January settled her lawsuit, closing the book on the matter so she could get on with her life.


MAY 24-30: Party Politics; Communists Sue the State, Defense Welcomes the Trial
The Soviet Communist Party died last August during the failed coup d'etat and was later banned and buried by a special decree issued by the triumphant Russian President, Boris N. Yeltsin.
Last week, in one of history's more twisted moments, the party's defenders -- those few who remain of the former 19 million members -- appealed to Russia's Constitutional Court for a fair trial, seeking redress in laws that for seven decades the Communists had manipulated for their own purposes.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Congressional Races; G.O.P. Looks to California And Sees House Bonanza
California voters will pick the political warriors for the critical battle of the 1992 Congressional elections on Tuesday when they choose among a record 373 hopefuls for the state's 52 House seats.
If Republicans can avoid destroying their most electable candidates in these primaries, they could use this state in November to secure ideological dominance of the House.
They might even challenge 38 years of formal Democratic control.


TODAY'S SECTIONS
Special Today: Book Review/Section 7 The Book Review's summer issue.


Many Hands Honed the Show
To the Editor
Jo Swerling Jr. is mistaken about Abe Burrows's entrance into "Guys and Dolls." During the summer of 1950 -- long before rehearsals began -- Burrows stayed with us at our house in Bucks County, Pa., and worked on the script with my father, George S. Kaufman, who was to direct it.
They worked long hours together, shaping it and, I'm sure, going over it line by line, as my father always did.


From Budget Doomsday to Surplus and Smiles
Last year, it was Doomsday and deadlines. This year, it was surplus and surprise.
New York City officials wrapped up an agreement on a new city budget yesterday in record time, and they attributed their swift success to an essential fact: everyone involved understood that the government had a little extra money to spend, but not too much.


Trousseau Chic, $5
It takes a certain insouciance -- the confidence of a Ginger Rogers, at least -- to wear this particular millinery construction.
The gray velvet beauty was picked up for a mere $5 after the hordes at the estate sale had passed it by.
Made in the late 1930's by B. H. Wragge of New York, it was the topper to the "going away" outfit that was worn by the owner of the house when she left to go on her honeymoon.


BENEFITS
The Best for the Brightest
June 1 -- Prep for Prep, completing its 14th year of identifying gifted minority children for admission to top private schools, will hold a black-tie dinner and dance at the Waldorf-Astoria.
In the coming school year, 750 Prep for Prep students will be enrolled in the schools, which are providing $8 million annually for their education.
E.
John Rosenwald Jr., vice chairman of Bear, Stearns &amp; Company, will be honored for his support.
Cocktails at 6:30 P.M.
Tickets, $350, from (212) 580-5511.
Women's Theatrical Project
June 1 -- Jessica Lange, Annie Leibovitz, Nora Ephron and Bette Bao Lord will be honored at the awards dinner of Women's Project and Productions, which has been promoting women's participation in the theater for 14 years.
Cocktails at 7 P.M. open the event at Tavern on the Green.
Tickets, $300, from (212) 838-2660.
Movie and a Party
June 2 -- The East Coast premiere of "Patriot Games," with Harrison Ford and Anne Archer, will benefit the Irvington Institute for Medical Research.
The 7 P.M. showing at Loews Tower East, 71st Street and Third Avenue, will be followed by a buffet dinner and dancing at Tavern on the Green.
Bus transportation provided from theater to restaurant.
Tickets, $300, from (212) 758-8250.
TriBeCa Synagogue Concert
June 2 -- The Civic Center Synagogue, which moved in 1965 from the Civic Center to 49 White Street between Church Street and Broadway, is known as "the synagogue for the arts." Steve Reich and the Kronos Quartet will perform Mr.
Reich's Grammy Award-winning composition, "Different Trains", for string quartet and tape.
A light buffet and wine with the composer follow the 7 P.M. performance.
Tickets, $100, or for the concert alone, $45, from (212) 966-7141.
Counseling Youth
June 2 -- The Youth Counseling League, which serves troubled youth in New York City and Westchester County, will benefit from a black-tie party at the Pierre.
Cocktails at 7 P.M. will be followed by dinner, dancing and a cabaret show.
Tickets, $350, from (212) 473-4300.
Reception and Musicale
June 2 -- The Concert Artists Guild will hold its annual reception and musicale at Steinway Hall, 109 West 57th Street.
Reception at 6:30 P.M.
Suggested contribution, $60.
Reservations: (212) 333-5200.
Belafonte at Town Hall
June 3 -- Harry Belafonte will perform at a benefit at Town Hall for the National Actors Theater.
Tony Randall will be the host.
A reception at Sardi's follows the 8 P.M. performance.
Tickets, $100, or $50 for the concert alone, from (212) 719-5331.
Israel Benefit
June 3 -- Henry Kissinger and Fouad Ajami, a professor of Mideast studies at Johns Hopkins University, will be the main speakers at a benefit for the Jerusalem Foundation, which raises money to create jobs in Jerusalem for immigrants.
The benefit opens with a 6 P.M. buffet at the Equitable Center, Seventh Avenue at 52d Street.
Dan Rather will moderate the forum, which will be followed by dessert and music.
Tickets, $250, from (212) 697-4188.
Guggenheim in SoHo
June 3 -- Christo, Maya Angelou, Garth Fagan, Savion Glover and Annie Leibovitz will receive awards at a party at the fifth-floor Tony Shafrazi Gallery, 130 Prince Street near West Broadway.
The awards will be presented by Learning Through Art, the children's program of the Guggenheim Museum.
Workshops of Learning Through Art will benefit from the party, which will be from 6 to 9 P.M.
Tickets, $65, or $120 a couple, from (212) 861-7047.
Jewish Congress at the Plaza
June 3 -- The American Jewish Congress will present its 1992 Fund for Religious Liberty Award to Jay Topkis, a partner in the New York law firm of Paul, Weiss, Rifkind, Wharton &amp; Garrison, at a black-tie dinner and dance at the Plaza.
Cocktails at 6 P.M.
Tickets, $500, from (212) 879-4500.
Mental Health Fund-Raiser
June 3 -- The Mental Health Association of New York and Bronx Counties will hold a cocktail reception and preview of an exhibition of 20th-century decorative arts at Christie's from 6 to 8 P.M.
Tickets, $75, from (212) 254-0333.
To Save a Mural
June 3 -- The Public Art Fund is having a party to raise funds to preserve the Bathgate Mural, a 35-by-55-foot painting on a side wall of a school in the South Bronx.
From 8 P.M. to midnight, there will be dancing, food and an open bar at Kulu, 1770 Second Avenue, near 92d Street.
Tickets, $45, from (212) 980-4575, or $55 at the door.
Indian Films
June 3 -- "Wind and Glacier Voices: The Native American Film and Media Celebration" will hold its first venture at Lincoln Center with a benefit evening.
A 6 P.M. buffet supper in the Kaplan Penthouse of the Rose Tower opens the evening, followed at 7:30 with a program in Alice Tully Hall that will include film clips of 80 years of work by Indian film makers.
A reception will follow at 10:30 in the Kaplan Penthouse.
Tickets, $100, from (212) 689-8720, or $20 for the show alone at the door.
Downtown Culture
June 3 -- Stanley Brezenoff, executive director of the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey, and Mark Kaufmann, a senior vice president of Chase Manhattan Bank, will be honored at a black-tie dinner and dance sponsored by the Lower Manhattan Cultural Council.
The evening starts with cocktails at 7 P.M. in the private dining room at the bank's headquarters, at Chase Plaza on Nassau Street between Liberty and Pine streets.
Tickets, $400, from (212) 432-0900.
P.A.L.
Award
June 4 -- The Police Athletic League's annual Superstar Dinner will honor Richard L. Gelb, chairman and chief executive of Bristol-Myers Squibb, at a black-tie benefit at the Starlight Roof of the Waldorf-Astoria.
Cocktails at 6:30 P.M. will be followed by dinner, dancing and entertainment.
Tickets, $1,000, from (212) 477-9450, extension 310.
Evening at the Boathouse
June 4 -- The Friends of the American Cancer Society in New York will hold a dance party in the Loeb Boathouse in Central Park from 7 to 11 P.M.
Dinner included.
Tickets, $100, from (212) 586-8700, extension 390, or $125 at the door.
Hudson River Museum
June 6 -- The Hudson River Museum of Westchester will hold a black-tie benefit from 7 P.M. to midnight at the museum, which is at 511 Warburton Avenue in Yonkers, overlooking the river.
The evening starts with cocktails and an auction of works by Hudson River artists, followed by dinner and dancing.
Black tie.
Tickets, $200, from (914) 359-4220.
So the Sick May Eat
June 7 -- Robert Skilling, a pianist, will perform at a 3 P.M. recital at St.
Clements Church, 423 West 46th Street, to benefit God's Love We Deliver, a volunteer group that delivers meals to homebound people with AIDS.
Tickets, $15, at the door.
Information: (212) 865-6500.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Campaign Financing; Despite Many Distractions, Cash Flows Steadily Into Party Coffers
The economy is a little sluggish, Ross Perot is a large distraction and the voting here counts for little in this year's Presidential primary season, yet the flow of political money remains strong in New Jersey.
This is one of the nation's wealthiest states, and the interest in politics here is keen.
So in the Presidential primary campaigns New Jersey has become a net exporter of cash, and in the Congressional contests, the candidates have been able to find plenty of money.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: White House; Pressure Is Growing on President To Bring Baker In for Campaign
Warned by friends and advisers that his re-election is imperiled by Ross Perot's unexpected strength and a perception that he is not doing anything about the country's problems, President Bush is under growing pressure to call in Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d to rescue his campaign.
Mr.
Bush today denied published reports that a senior aide, Robert A. Mosbacher, the titular campaign chairman, had urged him to dismiss Samuel K. Skinner as chief of staff and replace him with Mr.
Baker.


Gainey Denies Rumors
Minnesota North Stars Coach BOB GAINEY is trying to squelch rumors that he may be a candidate to coach the Montreal Canadiens.
"I haven't heard from their hockey team," Gainey said Friday in Bloomington, Minn.
"And I'm still under contract to the North Stars. I'm not looking to instigate a different situation." (AP)


Elizabeth Mead, William Stowell
October wedding plans for Elizabeth Wales Mead and William Lackey Stowell, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Samuel C. Stowell of Riverside, Conn., have been announced by her parents, Mr. and Mrs.
William G. Mead of Brooklyn Heights.
Miss Mead, 29 years old, graduated from William Smith College.
She is a legal assistant at the Dreyfus Corporation in New York.
Her father is of counsel to the New York law firm of Keenan Powers &amp; Andrews.
Her mother, Mary-Chilton Winslow Mead, a director of corporate communications at Dreyfus, was a nationally syndicated newspaper columnist known as Mimi Mead.


GARDENING
THE spring planting frenzy is behind me. (In other words, I've got clean fingernails for the first time in weeks.) Finally there's a chance for more than a peek at a few new volumes destined for the gardening bookshelf.
Although some of these books are quite handsome, I like them best for their solid advice, which can be put immediately to work in the garden.
Topping the pile, at least for sheer thickness, is RODALE'S ALL-NEW ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ORGANIC GARDENING (690 pp., Rodale Press, $29.95), edited by Fern Marshall Bradley and Barbara W. Ellis.
Thirty-three years have passed since the first publication of this innovative work by J. I. Rodale, the visionary who made "organic" a household word.


SOUPED-UP SCHOLAR
Begley's article on Stanley Fish reveals a great deal both about the current political climate and the status of academic scholarship in the humanities.
For one thing, it is clear that terms like conservative, liberal and radical have become virtually meaningless in trying to understand the debates regarding contemporary social and political issues.


Who Paid the Most Taxes in the 80's? The Superrich
If your Federal income tax bill shrank in the last decade, you probably owe William H. Gates, Steven J. Ross or some other latter-day Rockefeller a thank-you note.
The richest of the rich -- the top 1 percent of American families -- reaped 70 percent of the growth in average family incomes in the late 1970's and the 1980's, Congressional Budget Office data show.
But according to a Federal Reserve Board governor, Lawrence B. Lindsey, the top 1 percent of families also shouldered a bigger share of the American tax burden, lightening the load for everyone else.


Gorbachev Assails Yeltsin's Rule In Sharpest Attack Since Quitting
Stung by Russian indifference to his American tour and by President Boris N. Yeltsin's disdain for his advice, Mikhail S. Gorbachev has issued a broad attack against the Russian Government, which he said was in danger of losing control.
In an interview with the newspaper Komsomolskaya Pravda, the former Soviet President went further than he has since his resignation in December in criticizing the political style of his old rival Mr.
Yeltsin.


Getting Out of the Kitchen
Did you know that trout find food with their eyes, which is why they can survive only in clear water?
Or that almond farmers rent bees to pollinate their crop?
And don't you wonder, when you learn that highly skilled sexers earn up to $70,000 a year, what they do, exactly?
These tidbits make PIERRE FRANEY'S COOKING IN AMERICA (illustrated by Lauren Jarrett, 392 pp., Knopf, $25) one of those cookbooks that wend their way onto the night table for leisurely bedtime reading.
Written by Mr.
Franey and Richard Flaste as the companion to Mr.
Franey's television cooking programs, it is organized as a series of visits to food producers, cafes and cooks from Puerto Rico to Alaska.
Each chapter explores a different area of the American larder, providing details on food history, production and preparation as well as recipes.
With this scenic approach, Mr.
Franey, the author of the 60-Minute Gourmet column in The New York Times, and Mr.
Flaste, his longtime collaborator, introduce Esther and Owen Vermeer, pig farmers in Iowa; Gip Redman and his Washington State cherry orchard; Dave Simon and his cheddar cheese-making plant in Wisconsin.
And it is in Virginia, at a turkey farm, that we meet the sexers, workers trained in the task of separating the toms from the hens.
For those who choose to leave the book in the kitchen, there are such rewards as cheddar tart with arugula, a light, butterless vegetable strudel and a fresh cherry clafoutis in a tart shell.


SOUPED-UP SCHOLAR
I am a doctoral candidate in cultural anthropology at Duke, and I have never taken one of Stanley Fish's classes.
But three years ago, when I was contemplating a change in my research area, I called Professor Fish, whom I had briefly met, to ask for advice.
Within a week we were lunching in the faculty commons, and for two hours he debated with me the pros and cons of my dilemma.
His advice was invaluable, and his willingness to take so much time thinking through the problems of a relative stranger all too rare.
JOANNE PASSARO
Durham, N.C.


MAY 24-30: Omnia Reichmannia; Only the American Third of the Empire Is Untouched
Like Gaul, the world's largest real estate empire was divided into three parts: Canada, the United States and London's Canary Wharf.
The Reichmann Brothers' desperate efforts to hold their pieces together suffered a possible fatal blow last week when their $3.5 billion London project was declared insolvent and surrendered to court-appointed administrators.
With their Canadian properties operating under court protection for the last two weeks, two-thirds of their privately owned Olympia &amp; York Developments Ltd. is now under water.
Although the British government insists it's not bailing anyone out, it may well decide in the next few weeks to shift several thousand civil servants to Canary Wharf's stunning complex of white office towers, joining such companies as Texaco and American Express.
Outside buyers could also ease the pressure.
London newspapers report that a Hong Kong billionaire, Li Ka-shing, a partner of the Reichmanns in a Manhattan tower at 60 Broad Street, is sniffing around Canary Wharf.


Nepal Zigzags Toward Hard-Won Democracy
First came the democracy movement, then the election.
The voting was a year ago, and that was the easy part.
Like people all over the world who have joined the trend toward democracy, the people of Nepal, a Himalayan kingdom only recently transformed into a constitutional monarchy, are in the crucial process of building the institutions needed to cement the power of the ballot.


RECORD BRIEFS
Walton: 'Belshazzar's Feast,' Two Pieces for Strings from 'Henry V,' Partita for Orchestra
Thomas Allen, baritone ("Belshazzar"); London Philharmonic Orchestra and Choir conducted by Leonard Slatkin.
RCA Victor 60813-2; CD.


In the Region: Westchester and Connecticut; Recent Sales
Briarcliff Manor, N.Y. 667,000
4 Stonington Heights  3-bedroom, 4 1/2-bath, 2-year-old contemporary; eat-in kitchen, family room, fireplace, dining room; taxes $10,000.
Larchmont, N.Y. 392,000
63 Cooper Lane  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 72-year-old colonial; fireplace, screened porch, dining room, eat-in kitchen, den, terrace; taxes $7,544.
Mount Kisco, N.Y. 565,000
12 Kitchel Road
4-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 37-year-old colonial; 2 fireplaces, formal dining room, library, family room, playroom, 1.2 acres; taxes $9,779.
Stamford, Conn. 190,000
70 Tremont Avenue  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 48-year-old cape cod; large eat-in kitchen with pantry, secluded and fenced-in yard, 0.25 acre; taxes $2,346.
Westport, Conn. 772,000
7 Marvin Place  4-bedroom, 4 1/2-bath, 4-year-old colonial; river view, 4 fireplaces, 0.5 acre; taxes $4,964.
Weston, Conn. 750,000
1 Langner Lane  3-bedroom, 3-bath, 46-year-old French provincial; in-ground pool, underground sprinkler, moldings, 2 acres; taxes $8,456.
OTHER AREAS East Meadow, L.I. 185,000
2747 Woods Avenue  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 9-year-old high ranch; dining room, eat-in kitchen, family room, 1-car garage; taxes $5,200.
Fort Salonga, L.I. 269,000
45 Wayne Court  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath 18-year-old colonial; family room with fireplace, finished basement, inground pool; taxes $7,300.
Lakewood, N.J. 110,000
1120 Robin Drive
4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 8-year-old bi-level; c/ a, fenced yard, 2-car garage; taxes $2,522.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Primaries; BUSH AND CLINTON STAGGERING TO END OF PRIMARY SEASON
California votes on Tuesday, though not for Ross Perot.
His name is on people's lips, but not yet on the ballot.
The likely victors in an election that brings a tumultuous primary season to an end are Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas and President Bush.
Mr.
Clinton may well gain enough of this state's 348 delegates to the Democratic national convention, the largest single block, and enough from Alabama, Montana, New Jersey, New Mexico and Ohio, which also hold primaries on Tuesday, to put a mathematical lock on his party's nomination.


Now It's Perot, Then It Was Henry Ford; Dream in a Briefcase
To the Editor:
There has been something vaguely familiar about Ross Perot and his gift for generalities.
Finally it came to me: it was Dr.
Francis E. Townsend (of the "Townsend Plan") and E. B. White's description in "One Man's Meat" of a talk by Townsend that he had heard in August 1939.


Threats Change, but Duty Is a Mainstay, Cadets Told
Graduating cadets at the United States Military Academy here were told today that while they will face a world of radically changed military threats, the principles of duty, honor and country will remain the heart of their soldier's calling.
"When you began your journey as soldiers on 29 June 1988, the world was much different," said Gen.
Gordon R. Sullivan, the Army Chief of Staff, addressing the 929 members of West Point's 194th graduating class.
"We were still involved in the Cold War, committed in strength in Europe."


Hidden Hollywood
The young Hollywood agent was at his regular table at Joss, a fashionable Chinese restaurant here, looking tanned and casually elegant in an Italian silk tie and a boxy suit from Barney's New York.
There was little to distinguish him from half a dozen other young Hollywood agents and writers picking at $13 plates of prawns, sipping sparkling water and talking deals.
Except one thing.
Deep in his heart, he said, he cheered when the convicted murderer Robert Alton Harris was executed in San Quentin last month.
During the Senate hearings on the nomination of Clarence Thomas to the Supreme Court, he felt certain that Anita Hill was lying.
He even thought Dan Quayle might have had a point about Murphy Brown.


Marnie Stetson, David Futterman
Marnie Stetson and David Futterman were married yesterday at Great Oak Manor in Chestertown, Md.
The Rev.
Glen Catley, a Methodist minister, performed the interfaith ceremony, assisted by Cantor Dan Rous.
Ms.
Stetson, who is keeping her name, and her husband are both 27 years old and graduates of Williams College.
She received a master's degree in English from Indiana University.
She is the special assistant on the environment to Representative Wayne Gilchrest, Republican of Maryland.
She is a daughter of Patricia and Mauritz Stetson of Chestertown, where her mother is a schoolteacher and her father is the president of the Argus Investigation and Security Agency.


Noted With Pleasure
Love Like a River
Love, whatever its object, must begin with understanding, according to Roderick L. Haig-Brown in his essay "To Know a River." It is included in "Home Waters: A Fly-Fishing Anthology," edited by Gary Soucie (Fireside/Simon &amp; Schuster, paper).
TXT&gt;  One may love a river as soon as one sets eyes upon it; it may have certain features that fit instantly with one's conception of beauty, or it may recall the qualities of some other river, well known and deeply loved.
One may feel in the same way an instant affinity for a man or a woman and know that here is pleasure and warmth and the foundation of deep friendship.
In either case the full riches of the discovery are not immediately released -- they cannot be; only knowledge and close experience can release them.
Rivers, I suppose, are not at all like human beings, but it is still possible to make apt comparisons, and this is one: understanding, whether instinctive and immediate or developing naturally through time or grown by conscious effort, is a necessary preliminary to love.
Understanding of another human being can never be complete, but as it grows toward completeness, it becomes love almost inevitably.
The Necessity of Rules
Does creativity require discipline to flourish?
The case for rules was elegantly stated by the painter Sir Joshua Reynolds in 1768.
His words are quoted by Stephen Bayley in "Taste: The Secret Meaning of Things" (Pantheon).
Every opportunity, therefore, should be taken to discountenance that false and vulgar opinion that rules are the fetters of genius.
They are fetter only to men of no genius; as that armor, which upon the strong becomes an ornament and a defense, upon the weak and misshapen turns into a load and cripples the body which it was meant to protect. . . .
How much liberty may be taken to break through those rules . . . may be an after consideration when the pupils becomes masters themselves.
It is then, when their Genius had received its utmost improvement, that rules may possibly be dispensed with.
But let us not destroy the scaffold until we have raised the building.
The Ecstatic Conductor
Harvey Sachs casts a critical eye on modern conductors who act out their emotional response to the music (and upstage the orchestra) in this passage from "Reflections on Toscanini" (Grove Weidenfeld).
James Levine has pointed out that many people who attend symphony concerts make two incorrect assumptions: that the conductor necessarily likes what the orchestra is doing, and that the conductor can necessarily control what the orchestra is doing.
During rehearsals, stopping and starting are possible, and any reasonably competent conductor working with a decent orchestra can at least make the pieces of the puzzle mesh.
But if something goes fundamentally wrong during a performance, not even the best of conductor-orchestra teams can always bring the progression of musical events back into line.
Conductors who appear to be acting out a Mannerist painting of St.
Teresa in ecstasy are either conducting an imaginary performance, parallel to but rarely identical with the orchestra's, or are trying -- consciously or unconsciously or both -- to impress the audience.
Landscape of Dreams
We preserve superstitions, Philip Garrison suggests, not so much because we believe such notions as because we require the thrill of strangeness they provide.
This is from his collection of essays, "Augury" (University of Georgia).
We honor folk notions.
But not because we believe in them.
No, folk notions represent our collective, half-conscious effort to vivify the drab dailiness of our existence: they have a way of intensifying, of making more thrilling whatever regularity we count on in order to plan our lives. . . .
The landscape of belief and that of fact are not opposed, or not diametrically, at least.
No, they lie at some oblique angle to each other.
Tired of the predictabilities that nourish, we long for that other world, the one we keep extrapolating, collectively, from scraps of belief.
The landscape of belief relates to that of fact in rather the way the planet Pluto related, once, to Neptune.
The orbit of the latter, or certain irregularities in it, let astronomers infer both the existence and location of a presence they'd never seen. . . .
The older I get, the more folk beliefs stick in my mind.
They arrange themselves all around the periphery of my thinking.
I admire how they hover between life and art, these quirky, archaic forms of behavior. . . .
We do dwell in the landscape of fact.
But we never escape the tug a certain counterpart to it exerts.
The Artist of Life
The poet Cid Corman finds in Rembrandt's long series of self-portraits a reminder both of life's brevity and art's persistence.
This is from "Where Were We Now: Essays and Postscriptum" (Broken Moon Press, paper).
From the start -- apparently -- he had found the center from which all other work was to find its only possible "measure." But "measure" -- not in a sense of ranking but in the sense of realizing almost year by year the feeling of being alive -- within the face and hands largely -- to register the penetrations of the life lived and living. . . .
What moves us -- and will always move the living -- is that weird exactitude by which he shows us -- makes us
see
-- that we are hopelessly, helplessly mortal . . . yet that somewhere -- at core -- heart's intelligence -- there is the light that being alive persists in extending.
His obduracy and courage, the candor and the verity of it, are witnessed in the most unswerving hand.
And
his
work,
his
life, brings home to us what we must still most learn: that there is no artist except the artist of life, that there is no life without the art to realize and share it.


WHAT THEY'RE WEARING... ...WHAT THEY'LL BE WEARING
WHATEVER YOUR PENCHANT MAY BE -- beatnik, beautiful or blatant; subtle, severe or sexy -- black has been your color.
All sorts of social events this past season have confirmed that notion, culminating in Vogue's 100th-anniversary celebration at the New York Public Library in April.
The guests, a panorama of bons vivants from the funkiest to the fairest, were attired, pillar to pillar, in black.
But that's the past.
The question now is, Will black continue to dominate this fall?
Or will the fiery reds that illuminated designers' collections in Paris, Milan and New York charge in and light up the night?
The infinite gradations of red -- from near-pinks to borderline purples -- have the potential to flatter everyone.
That's why red just could become the season's new black.


Diana Degnan, Blake Thorson
Diana Kris Degnan, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Donald E. Degnan of New York, was married in New York yesterday to Blake Roberts Thorson, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert L. Thorson of New York.
The Rev.
Bruce W. Forbes performed the ceremony in St.
Bartholomew's Episcopal Church.
Mrs.
Thorson, 27 years old, graduated from Skidmore College.
She is a vice president of the Degnan Company, a television advertising agency in New York.
Her father founded and heads the company.


If You're Thinking of Living in: Port Chester
LIFE was sweet in the village of Port Chester when the Life Savers plant was operating there.
In its heyday, it pumped out four million packs a day of the "candy with the hole in the middle."
Mayor Peter Iasillo said that while growing up he could always tell what flavor was being made.
"The smell would permeate the entire town," he said.


Miss Thompson, Cary Evert
Stephanie Thompson, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John B. Thompson of Old Bridge, N.J., was married yesterday in New York to Cary Robert Evert, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Herbert D. Evert of Kearny, N.J.
The Rev.
Richard L. Jeske performed the ceremony at Holy Trinity Lutheran Church.
Mrs.
Evert, 34 years old, is a vice president in corporate-finance origination at Fuji Bank in New York.
She and her husband graduated from Rutgers University, and she received an M.B.A. from New York University.
Her father, who is retired, was a director of sales for Pitney Bowes in Stamford, Conn.


Amanda Susan Sawyer, Curtiss Bruno
Conant Sawyer of Mount Kisco, N.Y., has announced the engagement of his daughter, Amanda Susan Sawyer, to Curtiss Gregory Bruno, the son of Gregory S. Bruno of Maplewood, N.J., and Joyce A. Bruno of Chatham, N.J.
An October wedding is planned.
Miss Sawyer, 33 years old, is an account executive in the USA Network's advertising sales division in New York.
She graduated from Lafayette College.
Her father, who is retired, was a vice president of D.D.B.
Needham Advertising in New York.
Miss Sawyer is also the daughter of the late Nancy E. Sawyer.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
All Nudes Off the Beach
NUDES and dogs will not be tolerated on the village beaches of East Hampton this summer.
"No dogs on the beach between 9 and 6 P.M.," Police Chief Glen Stonemetz said.
"That's the new law."
The ban on nudity is an old law.
But in the past the police have discreetly turned their heads when happening upon topless and bottomless sunbathers.


It's Harder Now to Figure Out Compelling National Interests
Behind the Bush Administration's groping for an appropriate response to the crises in Yugoslavia and Haiti is a much deeper problem bedeviling American foreign policy: figuring out what is an "American national security interest" now that the cold war is over.
Which conflicts, if any, really are worth American intervention to settle, and which ones can be safely ignored?
In some ways, the existence of the Soviet Union made life easy.
The Kremlin was the North Star of America's foreign policy.
All the policymakers had to do was take out their compasses, point them at any regional conflict in the world, see which side Moscow was on and immediately deduce which side America should take.
Virtually every conflict from Namibia to Afghanistan to Nicaragua engaged American interests, and prompted some level of American military involvement, because the Soviets were backing one side or the other.


Chill Out
THE CONVENTIONAL WISDOM IS REDS AT room temperature, whites and roses chilled.
Correct?
Not always.
And when we do follow the rules, we tend to take them to extremes, serving reds too warm and whites too cold.
There must be a course in maitre d'hotel school where students are taught never to serve a white wine until it is so cold that absolutely no taste is discernible.
But what of the reds?
Can they be chilled?
Not only can be, but in some cases should be.
Young, fruity red wines benefit most from chilling, and since 90 percent of the world's wines are drunk when they are young and fruity, chilling emerges as an interesting possibility for many of them.
Beaujolais is the prime example, and not just simple Beaujolais and Beaujolais Villages.
The bigger, sturdier Beaujolais, like Regnie, Brouilly, Chiroubles, Julienas and Saint-Amour, all taste better in warm weather if they've spent 20 minutes in the refrigerator or ice bucket.


Miss Shaw, David Simonoff
Cynthia Anne Shaw, a pianist in New York, and David Ted Simonoff, a mathematics teacher at Prospect Heights High School in Brooklyn, were married in New York Monday at the Episcopal Church of the Epiphany.
The Rev.
Janet Kraft officiated.
The bride, 37 years old, has a master's degree in piano performance from the Manhattan School of Music.
She is a daughter of Dwight Shaw and Dorothy Shaw, both of Pueblo, Colo.
Mr.
Simonoff, 45, has a master's degree in mathematics education from Brooklyn College.
He is the son of Florence Simonoff of Brooklyn and the late Isidore Simonoff.


Bill on Doctors' Discipline Gains in Trenton
A bill that would make it more difficult to revoke the licenses of impaired or incompetent doctors and other health-care professionals is making its way through the Legislature, to the chagrin of the Florio administration.
The bill would require licensing boards, before imposing sanctions, to find "clear and convincing evidence" that a doctor, dentist or podiatrist had violated state regulations or was guilty of misconduct.


Making a Difference; Rebirth in Bed-Stuy
Things haven't been easy for Roderick B. Mitchell in the three years since he took over the presidency of the Bedford-Stuyvesant Restoration Corporation, a source of jobs, housing and low-interest loans in the heart of Brooklyn.
Founded by Senators Robert F. Kennedy and Jacob K. Javits in 1967, the nonprofit organization served as a model for hundreds of revival efforts in cities around the country.


One of Mexico's Proud Symbols Slowly Bows to Change
Banishing foreign oil companies from Mexico in 1938, President Lazaro Cardenas set off a cry among workers, "The oil is ours!" As profits gushed in from Petroleos Mexicanos, the state monopoly that Mr.
Cardenas created, his successors made the phrase almost an official mantra.
The expropriation was celebrated each March as a national epiphany, and Pemex, as it became known, was hailed, too, regardless of its performance.
On this year's anniversary, however, President Carlos Salinas de Gortari seemed ambivalent.
He still called Pemex the pride of Mexico.
But times are changing, he said, and Pemex needs to change, too.
In private, other officials put the issue more bluntly: the modernization of the rest of the economy is leaving Pemex behind as a lonely monument to inefficiency.
The company badly needs new investment and could probably make much more money, they say, except Mexicans' sensitivity about the control of their oil runs so deep that the idea of selling off parts of Pemex or letting foreigners drill for a share of the profits remains unthinkable.


2 Dead as Israelis Fight Guerrillas Who Swam Across Gulf of Aqaba
Palestinian guerrillas swam from Jordan across the Gulf of Aqaba today and then shot to death a security guard near the Israeli resort of Eilat before one of them was killed in a gun battle with Israeli soldiers, officials said.
The army said that a second infiltrator had been wounded and captured in the shootout, and that two other Palestinians had drowned while trying to swim three and a half miles from the Jordanian port of Aqaba, on the gulf leading to the Red Sea.


Coupling Up in Cambridge
THE EASY WAY OUT
By Stephen McCauley. 298 pp. New York:  Simon &amp; Schuster. $20.


Now It's Perot, Then It Was Henry Ford
To the Editor:
The American voters' fascination with Ross Perot has echoes of the country's clamor for Henry Ford during the summer of 1923.
Ford had already won the 1916 Michigan Presidential preference primary, had more than 150 Ford-for-President clubs and 7,000 Ford dealerships along with seven million Ford cars reminding voters what he could do.
He was enjoying the same kind of boom then that Mr.
Perot is now experiencing while sending both Republican and Democratic party leaders into a state of befuddled anxiety.


Data Bank/May 31, 1992


Miss von Bothmer, Jerome Villalba
Dr. and Mrs.
Dietrich von Bothmer of New York have announced September wedding plans for their daughter Maria Elizabeth von Bothmer and Jerome Loomis Villalba, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Jeronimo Villalba of Paris.
Miss von Bothmer, 24 years old, graduated from Princeton University.
Her father, a former chairman of Greek and Roman art at the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York, is a Distinguished Research Curator at the Metropolitan and teaches as an adjunct at the Institute of Fine Arts at New York University.


Q and A
Air-Conditioner Charges Question: In August I signed a new two-year, rent-stabilized lease.
It included a separate charge for "new equipment" and a rider requiring me to pay a $5-a-month charge for each window-mounted air-conditioner if I put them in.
Is the air-conditioner charge legal? . . .
Kenneth Lee, Manhattan Answer: It probably is.
According the Joseph D'Agosta, acting deputy commissioner for the Office of Rent Administration in the State Division of Housing and Community Renewal, in certain circumstances landlords of rent-regulated units are allowed to add an extra charges to the rent for the use of tenant-owned air-conditioners.
If a rent-stabilized tenant pays for his own electricity and installs his own air-conditioner, the landlord is entitled to a $5-a-month fee for each air-conditioner that protrudes beyond the window line.
This fee would apply to the use of most portable air-conditioners.
Tenants whose rent includes electricity and who use their own air-conditioners may also incur extra charges.
The air-conditioner charge, which is set each Oct. 1, is based on the index of the operating costs for rent-stabilized housing in New York City.
The current allowable charge is $18.57 a month.
Damage From Renovation  Question: I am the owner of a co-op apartment.
With the permission of the co-op board, a neighbor has been doing a lot of construction and renovation recently.
The constant hammering and pounding has caused some walls in my apartment to crack.
There is even a hole in one wall now.
Who is responsible for repairing the damage caused by the work, the neighbor or the co-op? . . .
Isabel Kivy, Manhattan Answer: Responsibility could fall on both the neighbor doing renovations and the co-op.
According to Ronald Sher, an attorney who specializes in real estate matters, the shareholder doing the renovation should pay for the cost of repairing damage done inside your apartment, like cracked plaster.
But if the work has resulted in damage to any of the building's structural elements, like interior-wall supports, the co-op would be responsible for the repair work.
"Part of the specified area of responsibility for co-op boards," said Mr.
Sher.
"is to insure the structural soundness of their buildings, So if the renovation work caused structural damage, ultimate responsibility for repair work would be the board's.
"But I would also expect the board to seek compensation from the shareholder doing the work for any expense for these repairs."
Some boards require shareholders making renovations to sign indemnification agreements, before the work begins, to protect the co-op against the costs of repairing damages.
Late Fee in Co-op  Question: I live in a small, seven-unit, town-house co-op.
We have recently had two unexpected assessments in two months, which came to $5,000.
I paid my share 10 days to two weeks late.
I was charged a late-payment penalty, which usually is charged only for late maintenance bills.
My late payment did not cause the co-op to incur any extra charges.
Is it legal for the co-op to charge for late payments if they do not result in costs to the co-op? . . .
Eleanor Kairalia, Manhattan Answer: Yes.
The board has the legal right to impose fees on shareholders for the late payments of assessments as well as for late-payment on maintenance fees.
The financial impact of the tardy payment to the co-op would not be a factor in the board's ability to enforce late payment rules.
The right to impose late fees has withstood court challenges.
Mary Ann Rothman, executive director of the Council of New York Cooperatives, said that some co-ops are willing to be flexible on late charges in certain circumstances.
"Most boards recognize that unexpected assessments, particularly ones that are close together, can be hardships for shareholders," she said.
"If the board was notified in advance of the financial problem of the shareholder, it might have made an exception on the late payment charge, if the shareholder was able to pay part of the assessment on time."


Votes in Congress
Tally Last Week in Connecticut, New Jersey and New York
House
1.
Oil Reserve: Vote on an amendment to delete a provision of a major energy bill that would require oil importers and refiners to turn over 1 percent of their sales, or the cash equivalent, to the Strategic Petroleum Reserve.
Approved 263 to 135, May 27.
2.
Energy: Vote on passage of an energy bill that prohibits new offshore drilling, toughens building codes to encourage conservation and grants incentives to stimulate solar and other alternative power for homes and cars.
Approved 381 to 37, May 27.
3.
N.I.H.
Funding: Vote on passage of a bill that reauthorizes funds for the National Institutes of Health and lifts a ban on Federal spending for research that uses fetal tissue derived from induced abortions.
Approved 260 to 148, May 28.
1
2
3
Connecticut
1. Kennelly (D) . . .
N
Y
Y
2. Gejdenson (D) . . .
N
Y
Y
3. DeLauro (D) . . .
N
Y
Y
4. Shays (R) . . .
N
Y
Y
5. Franks (R) . . .
Y
Y
Y
6. Johnson (R) . . .
Y
Y
Y
New Jersey
1. Andrews (D) . . .
Y
Y
Y
2. Hughes (D) . . .
N
Y
Y
3. Pallone (D) . . .
N
Y
Y
4. Smith (R) . . .
Y
Y
N
5. Roukema (R) . . .
N
Y
Y
6. Dwyer (D) . . .
N
Y
Y
7. Rinaldo (R) . . .
Y
Y
N
8. Roe (D) . . .
N
Y
N
9. Torricelli (D) . . .
A
Y
Y
10. Payne (D) . . .
N
Y
Y
11. Gallo (R) . . .
Y
Y
Y
12. Zimmer (R) . . .
Y
Y
Y
13. Saxton (R) . . .
Y
Y
N
14. Guarini (D) . . .
A
Y
Y
New York
1. Hochbrueckner (D) . . .
N
Y
Y
2. Downey (D) . . .
N
Y
Y
3. Mrazek (D) . . .
N
Y
Y
4. Lent (R) . . .
Y
Y
A
5. McGrath (R) . . .
A
Y
N
6. Flake (D) . . .
N
Y
Y
7. Ackerman (D) . . .
N
Y
Y
8. Scheuer (D) . . .
A
Y
Y
9. Manton (D) . . .
A
Y
10. Schumer (D) . . .
N
Y
Y
11. Towns (D) . . .
A
Y
Y
12. Owens (D) . . .
N
Y
Y
13. Solarz (D) . . .
N
Y
Y
14. Molinari (R) . . .
Y
Y
Y
15. Green (R) . . .
N
Y
Y
16. Rangel (D) . . .
Y
Y
Y
17. Weiss (D) . . .
N
Y
Y
18. Serrano (D) . . .
N
Y
Y
19. Engel (D) . . .
N
Y
Y
20. Lowey (D) . . .
N
Y
Y
21. Fish (R) . . .
N
Y
N
22. Gilman (R) . . .
N
Y
Y
23. McNulty (D) . . .
Y
Y
Y
24. Solomon (R) . . .
Y
Y
N
25. Boehlert (R) . . .
N
Y
Y
26. Martin (R) . . .
A
Y
N
27. Walsh (R) . . .
Y
Y
N
28. McHugh (D) . . .
N
Y
Y
29. Horton (R) . . .
Y
Y
Y
30. Slaughter (D) . . .
N
Y
Y
31. Paxon (R) . . .
Y
Y
N
32. LaFalce (D) . . .
N
Y
N
33. Nowak (D) . . .
N
Y
Y
34. Houghton (R) . . .
Y
Y
Y
KEY: Y Yea; N Nay; (A) Absent or did not vote; (P) Present.


Ann C. Barcher, Henry Shipman
Ann Christine Barcher and Dr.
Henry Longfellow Shipman were married yesterday at the Episcopal Christ Church and Holy Family in Brooklyn, by the Rev.
Harris Riordan-Hendlin, a Unitarian minister.
The bride, 44 years old, is keeping her name.
She graduated cum laude from Harvard University and received a law degree and a master of laws degree in international legal studies from New York University.
She is the daughter of Hazel B. Barcher of Poughkeepsie, N.Y., and the late John J. Barcher.
Her mother retired as a high school English teacher in Poughkeepsie.
Her father was a life insurance agent there.


In Defense of His Father
To the Editor:
The charge of filial prejudice will certainly be leveled, but anyone who knew my father, John J. McCloy, will readily attest that Kai Bird's book, "The Chairman," to some extent, and Joseph Finder's review of it (April 12), entirely, missed the essence of the man and his career.
"The Chairman" is a thorough, scholarly, perhaps somewhat un creative biography of a man who devoted his life to the betterment of his country and the world.
From a life filled with powerful achievements, however, Mr.
Finder chose to select those parts of my father's career that might be thought controversial.


Top Powers Fail in Bid to Cut Mideast Arms Sales
The world's five largest arms suppliers to the Middle East failed to agree this week on how to put into effect a year-old American initiative limiting conventional-weapons sales to the region.
After talks on Thursday and Friday, the five countries -- the United States, Russia, Britain, France and China -- which supply the Middle East with between 85 and 90 percent of its conventional arms, reported no progress.
China opposed a proposal to disclose agreements about the sales of weapons before they are delivered.


Hermaphrodites in Love
RAPTOR
By Gary Jennings. Illustrated. 980 pp. New York: Doubleday. $25.


All About/Adhesives; Making Things Stick In the Age of Plastic
The 20th century may go down as the heyday of stickiness.
After thousands of years of getting by with animal proteins like blood, waxes and ingredients from plants to glue things together, the human race has applied its rapidly expanding knowledge of chemistry to create a widely diversified multibillion-dollar industry.
This business has good prospects for continued innovation and growth even though some of its traditional markets, like packaging, may shrink because of environmental concerns.


Dinkins and Council Reach Accord on $29 Billion Budget
Mayor David N. Dinkins and the City Council reached an accord on the basics of a $29.5 billion budget for New York City yesterday, nearly a month ahead of schedule and three hours before Mr.
Dinkins was to take off for Europe on an economic-development trip.
Mr.
Dinkins and Council Speaker Peter F. Vallone announced late yesterday afternoon that they had agreed to add $88 million for schools and other programs to the budget proposed by the Mayor last month, to be paid for by changes in revenue estimates and trims in administrative spending.
Police and Parks Gain
But the settlement, the earliest in recent memory, represented only minor changes in the Mayor's plan.
In some ways, its greatest significance lies in its being reached so early and so amicably, signs of an improvement in the city's fiscal picture and a consensus among Council leaders that the Mayor's budget proposal was sound.


Los Angeles Has Chance to Show Anger at Gates
Eye-catching among the cinders of burned-out buildings in South-Central Los Angeles are brightly printed signs that read: "Reform L.A.P.D. Vote Yes on F."
On Tuesday, the city's voters will have an opportunity to direct their anger at the ballot box, where a measure known as Proposition F has become in large part a referendum on the tenure of the departing Chief, Daryl F. Gates.


More Fiction Than Fact
To the Editor:
In his review of "Jelly's Last Jam"  [ May 3 ] , David Richards puts it up to the historians to say how closely the play matches the biography.
The musical, he says, weighs Jelly Roll Morton's "character." As one of Jelly's historians and a performer of his music, I think the scales are badly tilted.


Audrey Weg, Michael Schaus
Audrey Suzanne Weg, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Kenneth Weg of Princeton, N.J., was married there yesterday to Michael Nicholas Schaus, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Nicholas Schaus of Fort Lauderdale, Fla.
The Rev.
Bruce Webber performed the Episcopal ceremony at Trinity Church.
Mrs.
Schaus, 24 years old and a graduate of Duke University, is studying law at New York University.
Her father is the president of pharmaceutical operations at Bristol-Myers Squibb in Princeton.
Her late grandfather S. George Little founded and headed the General Features Corporation, a syndicate, and Fleet Publishing, both in New York.


New Rochelle Seeks Macy's Successor
WHEN R. H. Macy &amp; Company announced recently that it would close eight of its stores -- among them the one shoppers have frequented here for 25 years -- city leaders said the question was not so much, "Why us?" but rather, "Where do we go from here?"
"To tell you the truth, we had a feeling it was coming," said Mayor Timothy C. Idoni.
"But the news caught us off guard. I guess we didn't think it would happen so soon."


Ford Caps Its Line of Crown Victorias
EXCEPT for New Orleans, where the cabs are as flamboyant as the food, you are not likely to see a spiffy taxi in most cities, much less in New York.
So I was surprised when I got into one last week that had both a fresh wax job and a newly polished interior.
Another surprise was that the car was a Ford, a rarity on potholed streets that are the special province of the Chevy Caprice.
My comment on the oddities produced a conversation with the driver, who was genuinely pleased to hear that Ford has resumed its sale of rear-wheel-drive fleet vehicles after a 14-month hiatus.


Sports of The Times; Cal Ripken's Stainless Steel Streak
FOR 10 years, Cal Ripken Jr. has not only been on the job, he has also been doing the job so well, so smoothly, so invisibly that it takes a milestone for his consecutive-game streak to be noticed.
When the Baltimore Orioles' manager, Johnny Oates, wrote "Ripken" on his lineup card yesterday in Oakland, it marked the 10th anniversary of the start of the 31-year-old shortstop's streak that, day by day, threatens what was thought to be one of baseball's unbreakable monuments: Lou Gehrig's record 2,130 games.


Guys and Dolls Strut the Stripes
This spring the chalk-stripe suit is swaggering along Fifth Avenue, having moved east from Broadway and the mythical underworld of Damon Runyon.
The bravado of the chalk stripe is not new to fashion.
In the late 1950's and the 60's, the designer Rudi Gernreich captured its brash attitude in reviving the Nathan Detroit look: black shirt, white tie and rakish fedora.


Nancy Kernan, P. F. Chamberlain
Nancy Avery Kernan, a daughter of Mrs.
Walter A. Kernan of New York and the late Mr.
Kernan, was married in New York yesterday to Peter Fitzhugh Chamberlain, a son of Ellen O. Chamberlain of Chester, N.Y., and the late E. Fitzhugh Chamberlain.
The Rev.
Walter F. Modrys performed the ceremony at the Roman Catholic Church of St.
Ignatius Loyola.
The bride, 39 years old, is an attending pediatric hematologist-oncologist and the assistant chief of the bone marrow transplantation service at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in New York.
She graduated magna cum laude from Wheaton College in Norton, Mass., where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and received her M.D. from Cornell University.
Her father was a senior partner in the New York law firm of Carter, Ledyard &amp; Milburn.


Streetscapes: Miss Keller's School for Girls; Revlon's Right-Touch Restoration
IS a city block a collection of buildings or of the people in them?
That question will be tested next month when MacAndrews &amp; Forbes Holdings Inc., the Revlon Inc. parent, moves its corporate headquarters into the old Keller School at 35 East 62d Street after a $1.3-million restoration.
It is a beautiful job, but some preservationists opposed it -- the street is zoned for residential use.
But at the request of the Landmarks Preservation Commission it received a special permit in exchange for its big restoration budget.


A Show of 125 Works by Artists in the Northeast
THIS year's version of "Art of the Northeast," like its 42 predecessors, comesweighed down with prizes -- 18 of them from $100 to $1,000, to be exact.
The other statistics hold steady -- 125 pieces chosen from more than 1,000 submissions -- and if the show at Silvermine Guild here seems smaller than usual it is only because there are fewer large works.
The chief curator at the Phillips Collection in Washington, Eliza Rathbone, was juror, following in the footsteps of her father, Perry Rathbone, who did the job in 1956 shortly after becoming director of the Museum of Fine Arts in Boston.
The honor roll of judges shines with stars, among them Milton Avery, H. H. Arnason, John I. H. Baur (twice), William Baziotes, Clement Greenberg, Hilton Kramer, Roy Neuberger and Louise Nevelson.
No wonder the contest attracts so many regulars.


Newport Salutes Restored Avenue
Bellevue Avenue, the address of the famous mansions in Newport, R.I., has been restored -- the project was completed last December -- at a cost of $7 million.
Cracked pavement has been replaced with a smooth road that duplicates the 1890's original and new brick sidewalks run its 2.5-mile length.
The final fillip is graceful cast-iron lamps with glass globes faithful to the style of the old gaslights.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
BENEFIT FOR SCIENCEPORT
In the fall of 1995 Scienceport is to open in the North Bathhouse of Rye Playland as a participatory museum for science education, serving children and adults of the Westchester County area.


On Broadway, the Lights Get Brighter
On the night Los Angeles was burning down, I went to the theater in New York.
Earlier on that Friday, May 1, such a plan might have seemed quixotic.
Wild rumors and sheer panic seized New York once television images of the South-Central rioting traveled east, and Times Square emptied out at midday.
Outside the Marquis Theater, home of the supposedly indomitable "Man of La Mancha," a hastily assembled wall of plywood materialized, turning one of Broadway's most conspicuous houses into a bunker suitable for downtown Beirut.


A QUESTION OF LIFE
As a survivor of breast cancer who is now unable to conceive, I consider Nora Frenkiel's decision to have a child an act of courage ("A Question of Life," May 3).
When I asked if I could become a mother two years after I had breast cancer, my female gynecologist responded, "Did I want my child to be an orphan?" Another doctor more gently suggested adoption.
Unfortunately, more and more younger women -- women of child-bearing age -- are developing breast cancer and facing this agonizing issue, with too few studies and no concrete answers.


Dollar Down For the Week
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen
127.60
129.21
138.35
per Dollar
German Mark
1.6080
1.6165
1.7425
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar
1.2032
1.1960
1.1448
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound
1.8285
1.8177
1.6970
U.S. Dollar per British Pound
Gold
$336.25
$337.75
$361.30
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


Sequels Battle Monsters, Villains and Burnout
Trying to defuse a bomb set to go off in seconds, Mel Gibson tells his partner something as deep and profound as anything else in "Lethal Weapon 3." He looks down at the tangle of red and blue wires and says: "Oh, no. More plastic than Cher." For a while he and Danny Glover debate which wire to cut, two detectives doing a perfect Abbott and Costello routine, but soon the inevitable happens.
A building explodes in a gargantuan fire burst and, from that big-bang opening on, "Lethal Weapon 3" never slows down as it mixes droll comedy and relentless action.
There's no need to look for messages or high art or even a plot here, but the film follows an unbeatable formula for commercial success.
In its first weekend, it took in $33.2 million, making it the second-biggest opening in history, just behind "Batman." The major explosion at the start reveals the movie's simple, cautious strategy: pump up the volume and give the audience what it wants, only more.


A Noteworthy Collection
This selection of paperbacks is from the New &amp; Noteworthy column since the 1991 Christmas issue.
BEST NIGHTMARE ON EARTH: A Life in Haiti, by Herbert Gold. (Touchstone/Simon &amp; Schuster, $12.) Memoir of a writer captivated by the country.


Restaurants
Following are suggestions for restaurants worthy of a stop on or off selected routes to vacation spots around the country.
All have been visited by the writer this year, except where noted.
FROM NEW YORK CITY
Route I-95 north to Rhode Island
Abbott's Lobster in the Rough, 117 Pearl Street, Noank, Conn. (203) 536-7719.


New Gilding for a Sturdy Frame
Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum; May 28, 9 P.M.


The Drive to Be Topical, the Urge to Compete
HERE it comes again: "Art of the Northeast," at Silvermine Guild in New Canaan.
This year's version, like its 42 predecessors, comes weighed down with prizes -- 18 of them from $100 to $1,000, to be exact.
The other statistics hold steady -- 125 pieces chosen from more than 1,000 submissions -- and if the show seems smaller than usual it is only because there are fewer large works.
The chief curator at the Phillips Collection in Washington, D.C., Eliza Rathbone, was juror, following in the footsteps of her father, Perry Rathbone, who did the job in 1956 shortly after becoming director of the Museum of Fine Arts in Boston.
The honor roll of judges coruscates with stars, among them Milton Avery, H. H. Arnason, John I. H. Baur (twice), William Baziotes, Clement Greenberg, Hilton Kramer, Roy Neuberger and Louise Nevelson.
No wonder the contest attracts so many regulars.


Lemieux's Injury: Was It Real?
To the Sports Editor:
Remember the uproar created by the slash on Mario Lemieux's hand?
He was going to miss a minimum of four to six weeks, the Penguins said.


And the Winner Is . . .
To the Editor:
As the producers and conceivers of the original "Guys and Dolls," we must correct the letter to the editor from Jo Swerling Jr.  [ May 3 ]  about his father's role in the writing of the musical's book.


Replacing Judge Johnson: Try Harder
Frank Johnson of Alabama, a revered figure in the Federal judiciary, is moving at age 73 to semi-retired status and a reduced workload on the U.S.
Court of Appeals for the 11th Circuit.
One of the courageous, principled judges who desegregated the Deep South in the 1960's, Judge Johnson has been called "irreplaceable." Yet a replacement is needed; that need cannot be filled by a nominee who lacks breadth and opposes the core of what Judge Johnson stands for.


Waiting It Out At Airport Clubs
WHEN I visited the USAir Club at the airport in Hartford last year, an out-of-town company was either holding job interviews or accepting bids in a conference room there.
The sofas and seats in the lounge area were filled with aspirants who were summoned in one by one.
I drank some coffee with my arms close to my sides of necessity and eventually wandered out to the hotel that is part of the airport, seeking space and quiet.
On another trip, to California, things were blissfully peaceful at the spacious American Airlines Admirals Club at John Wayne Airport in Orange County, but the travelers were punching feverishly at phones.
Airline clubs have come a long way from their origins as retreats for a privileged few.
American Airlines, which created the first club, at La Guardia in 1939, operated it as a by-invitation-only organization.
Memberships were given as gifts by sales agents to celebrities or to people who flew a lot.
Other airlines created clubs on the same model, usually in odd corners of airports, where passengers could stare at the door but not by any application get past the "members only" sign.
The question of discriminatory patterns of membership was raised and in 1967, the airlines lost a civil rights case and membership could not be restricted.


Milestone for Ripken, Millstone for the A's
Orioles 7, Athletics 6
OAKLAND, Calif., May 30 (AP) -- Cal Ripken began his second decade of consecutive games today in much the same fashion he spent every day during the first decade -- giving the Baltimore Orioles nine solid innings at shortstop.


Bon Appetit, Scientists Say
A year from now, Americans may be able to buy a tomato with more flavor and a longer shelf life.
For that, they can thank -- or berate -- Calgene Inc. of Davis, Calif., and Federal officials who last week sped genetically engineered foods toward grocery shelves, ruling that no special testing, labels or regulations are needed in most cases.
Taking a desirable gene from one organism and putting it into another is no more dangerous than conventional food development, the Government said.
Calgene, for example, enhances its FlavrSavr tomato with a gene that zaps the enzyme causing overripening and spoilage.


Ah, Wilderness
IN THE 1920'S, WHEN TRIGANT BURROW, A psychoanalyst and writer, made his way from his home in Baltimore to Lifwynn, his rustic retreat in the Adirondacks, he did so by train, overnight ferry up Lake Champlain, train again, horse-drawn carriage and a second boat, across Lake Chateaugay.
For Dr.
Burrow's grandchildren -- brothers Stephan and John Syz and their cousin, Penny Burrow Marwede, who converge on Lifwynn regularly from homes in Montpelier, Vt., Greens Farms, Conn., and North Salem, N.Y., respectively -- interstate highways have made the trip somewhat more prosaic.
But the last leg of the journey preserves the sense of adventure: a jaunt by open launch across the sometimes choppy waters of the lake to the opposite shore, where a collection of wood-frame cabins sits amid the trees, virtually unchanged for 70 years.


Alexandra Payne, H. R. Sutherland
Alexandra Evans Payne, the daughter of Mrs.
Harold G. Brown Jr. of Kennett Square, Pa., and the late Thomas Payne, was married yesterday in Wilmington, Del., to Howard Ramsey Sutherland, the son of Adair R. Sutherland and Ashby M. Sutherland, both of San Antonio.
The Rev.
Roddey Reid Jr. performed the ceremony at Immanuel Episcopal Church.
Mrs.
Sutherland, 36 years old, was until recently the manager of special events at the Museum of the City of New York.
She graduated from the University of Delaware.
Her father was an editor in New York.
Her stepfather retired as a public relations official for E. I. Du Pont de Nemours &amp; Company in Wilmington.


Ilene Weisbard, Dan Berman
September wedding plans for Ilene Terry Weisbard and Dan Jonathan Berman, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Floyd Berman of Birmingham, Ala., have been announced by her parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Martin J. Weisbard of Jericho, L.I.
Ms.
Weisbard, 28 years old, graduated from Cornell University and received a law degree from Emory University.
She is an associate with the law firm of Proskauer Rose Goetz &amp; Mendelsohn in New York, where Mr.
Berman, 27, is an associate at the law firm of Young &amp; Young.
He graduated from Brandeis University and received J.D. and M.B.A. degrees from Emory.


A GOOD GRILLING
BARBECUE IS A MALE THING.
OH, WOMEN CAN appreciate a properly charred brisket or rib.
I've sat swatting mosquitoes with other women, allowing the aroma from a charcoal grill to carry us back to the days of Coppertone tans and AM radio.
Still, we remain spectators.
Many women do take pride in their prowess at the grill.
But we don't share that primal pull to an open flame any more than we share whatever it is that can make a man's eyes grow misty at the sight of a Little League park.


Lisa N. Dell'Angelo and David L. Olgaard
Dr.
Lisa Nicole Dell'Angelo, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Robert J. Dell'Angelo of Pound Ridge, N.Y., was married yesterday in Bedford, N.Y., to Dr.
David LeClair Olgaard, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Ralph Olgaard of Casper, Wyo.
The Rev.
Dr.
William Foley performed the ceremony at St.
Matthew's Episcopal Church.


Primaries; Here Comes The Finale; No Need To Applaud
One myth of American political culture envisions the Presidential campaign as a kind of Arthurian quest.
A group of men (it is usually men) sets out in pursuit of the great prize, endures many tests and trials (at the hands of the press, the voters and one another) and is gradually winnowed down to the worthiest of their number.
Democracy is served, the voters are served, and the candidate who finally emerges is better for what he has endured.


Missouri Player Faces Charges After Arrest
ANTHONY PEELER, a University of Missouri basketball standout, was arrested yesterday in Columbia, Mo., on suspicion of weapons and kidnapping charges after allegedly threatening a female acquaintance with a gun.
Peeler, the Big Eight player of the year last season, entered the woman's unlocked apartment about 2 A.M., said Columbia Police Sgt.
BECKY COVINGTON.
Peeler went into the woman's bedroom, bit her four times and placed a .45-caliber revolver to her head, Covington said.


Editorial Notebook; The War Against Street Gangs
The fifth-grade classes at the Gulf Avenue Elementary School are radiant with Latino faces, faces in so many hues of tan and brown that they make their own rainbow.
But these children show anguish when they speak about the gang violence that surrounds them.
"They beat my uncle with a tire iron and ran him over," one boy said.
Another child's uncle was killed for wearing clothes that made him look like a gang member.
Each child knows a story.
The Los Angeles County District Attorney puts the number of street gangs at 1,000, with 150,000 members countywide.
That's scary: 95 per cent of gang members never finish high school; 90 per cent have been arrested twice by the age of 18.
What's scarier still is that gangs are a dominant force in the socialization of the city's young.
Look again at the videotape of three black men savagely beating a white truck driver during the riot.
The three came of age in the same gang.


Corrections
A map legend last Sunday about proposals for rebuilding the West Side waterfront referred incompletely to the areas shown.
The shading marked areas proposed for recreation and park development as well as for real estate development.


Stalin's Nervous Collapse
To the Editor:


Ringo Starr, a 60's Relic? Not if He Can Help It
"I was just a terrified little bunny out there, you know?" is the surprising way Ringo Starr now describes his life as the drummer of the Beatles.
The bright spotlight in which the group stood took its toll on Mr.
Starr, who in recent years has expressed regrets about abusing alcohol and drugs when he could have been enjoying the Beatles' success.
"Everyone thought, 'Oh, look at him. He's got everything. He's famous. He's got the limo.' But I was just a tired, frightened little person in there. And now I'm not so frightened."
Mr.
Starr, who is 51 years old, began reclaiming his life in late 1988, when he checked into a rehabilitation program in Arizona for a month.
The next summer, he toured the United States and Japan, singing Beatles songs and his own 70's hits, and shunning the rock tradition of post-concert debauchery as a way of testing his resolve.


Glitzy, Yes, but How's the Food? Rating the Steamy Books
The contemporary novel about sex has become a historical novel about sex.
What was once only wicked is now truly dangerous, so many writers of steamy fiction -- like the authors of some of the following books -- have abandoned the age of AIDS for the swinging 1960's and 70's, when excess was all.
This guide to some of the season's titillations is rated by the requisite ingredients.
FACADE.
By Roxanne Pulitzer. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $20.) Four women in Palm Beach (all with hang-ups) are involved with some nasty, mostly rich men.
Detail: designer hair clips.
Sex *, Money *, Clothes/Decor **, Scenery *


Laura Drabkin, David Marks
Dr.
Laura Michelle Drabkin, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Ralph J. Drabkin of Woodmere, L.I., and Dr.
David Ryan Marks, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Stuart B. Marks of Woodland Hills, Calif., were married last evening in Brooklyn.
Rabbi Mark Golub officiated at the Brooklyn Botanic Garden.
The bride, 25 years old, is to become a pediatric intern next month at Massachusetts General Hospital in Boston.
She graduated cum laude from the University of Pennsylvania, and she and her husband received their M.D. degrees from Yale University.
Her father is a partner in the New York law firm of Simon, Drabkin &amp; Margulies and is the Village Justice of Woodsburgh, L.I.
Her mother, Lynne E. Drabkin, is the director of instruction and professional development for Community School District 19 in Brooklyn.
The bridegroom, 29, is the chief resident in internal medicine at Greenwich (Conn.) Hospital.
He is to begin a fellowship in allergies and immunologic diseases at Massachusetts General in July.
He graduated summa cum laude from the University of California at Santa Barbara.
His father owns California Action Now, a clothing manufacturers' representative in Los Angeles.
His mother, Mimi Marks, is the office manager for the Encino, Calif., law firm of Staitman, Snyder &amp; Tannenbaum.


Frustration And Jeers Swirl at Shea
It was a scene out of some lost, soured September of the recent past.
Boos rained down from the upper decks of Shea Stadium, trash swirled in the cold wind and through sections of abandoned seats.
The scoreboard, a 6-1 loss to the Braves about to become official, silently mocked the Mets, and the general manager was cornered to account for the latest spectacle of underachievement.
Afterward, the Mets, from center fielder to senior executive, offered their monotone mantras:


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Senate Race; Sonny Bono's Political Curse: Fame Without Respect
In the spotlight of a television series, Sonny Bono could handle the weekly insults from Cher as millions of Americans watched.
But in the glare of his campaign for the United States Senate, he finds the locutions of his opponents far more intimidating.
"It was scary," the songwriter turned businessman turned politician said of his rivals' quick-witted answers in a recent televised debate.
"You go, geez, these guys, there were times when I wanted to put music to their answers. I mean, they're eloquent. I can't articulate like they can. It overwhelms you."


Defending the Community Reinvestment Act
To the Editor:
Lawrence J. White's criticism of the Community Reinvestment Act of 1977 in "Don't Handcuff the Healthy Banks" (Forum, May 17) is a 180-degree reversal of his public position a few years ago when he was one of the three top savings and loan regulators.
More important, Mr.
White's opinion that the act obligates banks to supply unprofitable financial services locally, prevents banks from diversifying and contributes to bank failures does not square with the facts.


Provencal Picnic
THE SETTING IS CHESTER, CONN., BUT IT looks like Provence.
On Sunday afternoons during the summer, a number of close friends, French and American, meet to play petanque, a Gallic form of outdoor bowling.
Charlie van Over and Priscilla Martel, who used to run a local French country restaurant and are now food consultants, have turned these afternoons into a ritual that always ends with a spectacular feast.
"Our menus revolve around the sort of food you get around the Mediterranean," says Mr. van Over.
"We keep it simple. We do a lot of roast chicken, grilled meat or fish, pizzas, things that we can serve in one big dish. We often play petanque at the beach, so we make a Provencal seafood salad or a paella cooked on an outdoor grill with a cover. We use a lot of stuff from the garden -- especially fresh herbs."


This Week's Numbers
Consensus
Last Period
Estimates*
Monday
Construction spending
1.6
0.6
National purchasing managers
51.3
52.5
Personal income
0.6
0.2
Personal consumption
0.3
0.5
Tuesday
Leading economic indcators
0.2
0.1
New home sales, thousands
513
538
Wednesday
Factory orders
1.6
0.6
Thursday
Weekly initial jobless claims, thousands
403
400
Friday
Non farm payroll, thousands
126
85
Wednesday: Earth Summit begins in Rio De Janerio Thursday: Chain store sales *
Bundesbank council meeting
(Source: I.D.E.A. Inc.)


Historic Hotels Get New Life
The GOVERNOR HOTEL reopened last month in downtown Portland, Ore., after being closed since 1986.
The hotel is actually in two newly renovated and connected buildings: the original Governor Hotel Building, built in 1909, and the neighboring Princeton Building, dating to the early 1920's.
The Princeton Building, built in Italian Renaissance style for the Portland Elks Club, now contains suites, a business center and athletic club.
The hotel has 100 rooms, with rates starting at $145 for two.
Reservations: (800) 554-3456.


Corrections
A report in Styles of The Times last Sunday about the wedding of Deborah Jane Bloom and Paolo Antonio Ful ghieri was published prematurely.
The couple were married last Sunday, not on May 23.


There Must Be Meaning in Marrakesh
HIDEOUS KINKY
By Esther Freud. 186 pp. New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich.


Hotel Prices
To the Editor: I share Emily C. Essex's opinion ("Madrid Prices," Letters on Travel, April 12) that your "What's Doing in . . ." must appeal to "no more than 2 percent of your readers" because of the astronomical prices you list for hotels and restaurants.
The editor's reply, however, that claims they give a "realistic sense of costs," "various price levels" and an "accurate portrayal of the places listed" makes me howl with laughter.


Rash of Brain Defects in Newborns Disturbs Border City in Texas
For three years babies have been born with missing or incomplete brains and other devastating neurological defects at a startling rate in this border city, and although the cause remains a mystery, United States officials are now investigating whether industrial pollution from Mexico might be at fault.
Since January 1989 at least 42 babies have been born in Cameron County, at the southeastern tip of Texas, with various manifestations of a condition known as neural-tube defect .
That is about three times as many cases as would normally be expected, said Dr.
Dennis Perrotta, chief of the epidemiology division of the Texas Department of Health.


BEST SELLERS: May 31, 1992
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
3
JEWELS, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $23.) From New York schoolgirl to doyenne of a French chateau: the life of a woman who becomes rich by dealing in precious stones.
2
7
2
SAHARA, by Clive Cussler. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) On a mission to Africa, Dirk Pitt uncovers secrets from the past and a plot that may extinguish all life in the world's seas.
3
5
110
OH, THE PLACES YOU'LL GO! by Dr.
Seuss. (Random House, $12.95.) The problems of finding your way through life; in verse and pictures.
4
3
12
THE PELICAN BRIEF, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $22.50.) A woman law student seeks to discover the truth about the murder of two Supreme Court justices.
5
2
6
ALL AROUND THE TOWN, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $22.) The plight of a college student accused of killing her professor.
6
1
WAITING TO EXHALE, by Terry McMillan. (Viking, $22.) The friendships and romances of four black women in Phoenix.
7
6
7
JAZZ, by Toni Morrison. (Knopf, $21.) A couple in the Harlem of the 1920's learn again and again that life does not keep its promises.
8
4
6
"I" IS FOR INNOCENT, by Sue Grafton. (Holt, $18.95.) Kinsey Millhone investigates the case of a man once charged with murdering his rich wife.
9
9
5
FRENCH SILK, by Sandra Brown. (Warner, $18.95.) The ordeal of a New Orleans woman suspected of killing a television evangelist.
10
11
16
RISING SUN, by Michael Crichton. (Knopf, $22.) The death of a woman leads to an investigation involving the American-Japanese rivalry. (LP)
11
12
3
THE LIVING, by Annie Dillard. (HarperCollins, $22.50.) Four decades in the lives of the motley residents of the 19th-century Washington Territory.
12
10
6
FOR LOVE ALONE, by Ivana Trump. (Pocket, $22.) The experiences of a Czechoslovak-born skier married to a wealthy entrepreneur from an old Newport, R.I., family.
13
15
13
THE ROAD TO OMAHA, by Robert Ludlum. (Random House, $23.95.) A retired general and a lawyer scheme to take possession of Nebraska on behalf of an obscure Indian tribe. (LP)
14
13
23
DISNEY'S BEAUTY AND THE BEAST. (Gallery Books/Penguin USA, $6.98.) A retelling of the classic fairy tale in words and pictures.
15
8
34
SCARLETT, by Alexandra Ripley. (Warner, $24.95.) The sequel to "Gone With the Wind."
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
2
6
GIVE WAR A CHANCE, by P. J. O'Rourke. (Atlantic Monthly, $20.95.) Satirical essays on recent social and political developments.
2
1
18
REVOLUTION FROM WITHIN, by Gloria Steinem. (Little, Brown, $22.95.) The reflections of a feminist on the struggle to achieve self-esteem.
3
5
28
BACKLASH, by Susan Faludi. (Crown, $24.) A journalist contends that the media and political groups are staging a war against women's rights.
4
7
4
HEAD TO HEAD, by Lester Thurow. (Morrow, $25.) The upcoming economic battle among Japan, Europe and the United States.
5
4
5
TWO NATIONS, by Andrew Hacker. (Scribners, $24.95.) A political scientist discusses the way racism affects American life.
6
6
3
THE WAY I SEE IT, by Patti Davis. (Putnam, $22.95.) The autobiography of the daughter of Ronald and Nancy Reagan.
7
10
4
WHO WILL TELL THE PEOPLE, by William Greider. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $25.) A journalist's account of how powerful monied interests and elite groups dominate the Federal Government.
8
1
THE SILENT PASSAGE, by Gail Sheehy. (Random House, $16.) The psychological and social significance of menopause for today's women.
9 *
3
11
ROGUE WARRIOR, by Richard Marcinko with John Weisman. (Pocket, $22.) The memoirs of the retired commander of a counterterrorist unit.
10
1
DIANA IN PRIVATE, by Lady Colin Campbell. (St. Martin's, $19.95.) A biography of the Princess of Wales.
11
17
3
PLAYING IN THE DARK, by Toni Morrison. (Harvard University, $14.95.) The novelist-critic's call for literary scholarship that will bring the black experience to the attention of all Americans.
12
15
33
DEN OF THIEVES, by James B. Stewart. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $25.) How Ivan Boesky, Michael Milken, Martin Siegel and Dennis Levine plundered and created havoc on Wall Street.
13
14
9
THE DISUNITING OF AMERICA, by Arthur M. Schlesinger Jr. (Norton, $14.95.) A historian considers the effects that the current emphasis on ethnicity is having on our society.
14 *
13
27
MOLLY IVINS CAN'T SAY THAT, CAN SHE? by Molly Ivins. (Random House, $23.) Essays about the current political and cultural scene.
15
9
2
ELEANOR ROOSEVELT, by Blanche Wiesen Cook. (Viking, $27.50.) From childhood in New York to the White House: the first 49 years of a pre-eminent First Lady.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
2
15
A RETURN TO LOVE, by Marianne Williamson. (HarperCollins, $25.) Advice about ways to replace feelings of fear with feelings of love in daily life.
2
1
6
THE JUICEMAN'S POWER OF JUICING, by Jay Kordich. (Morrow, $15.) A program for staying healthy and trim by consuming fresh fruit and vegetable juices.
3
4
26
HOW TO SATISFY A WOMAN EVERY TIME, by Naura Hayden. (Bibli O'Phile/Dutton, $14.95.) Sexual counsel for married couples.
4
3
26
MORE WEALTH WITHOUT RISK, by Charles J. Givens. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) An updated and expanded volume of financial advice.
5
4
THE ART OF WORLDLY WISDOM, by Baltasar Gracian. (Currency/Doubleday, $15.) Advice on how to live and labor; the work of a 17th-century Spanish Jesuit scholar.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,050 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 28,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.
And Bear in Mind
(Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)
INTELLECTUAL MEMOIRS: New York 1936-1938, by Mary McCarthy. (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, $15.95.) Written during McCarthy's final illness (she died at 77 in 1989), this memoir looks back half a century at bohemian New York in the 1930's; she knew everybody who was anybody, many of them carnally.
CHINA: A New History, by John King Fairbank. (Belknap/Harvard University, $27.95.) A grand ambition, grandly achieved in Fairbank's final book: the analytic narrative is full of intelligent ideas, original contributions and up-to-date scholarship.
CAETANA'S SWEET SONG, by Nelida Pinon. (Knopf, $24.) The second of this Brazilian novelist's works to appear in English is a long, complex, philosophical-allegorical farce in which matter wars with spirit in an upcountry backwater.
Matter usually wins.
OH CANADA!
OH QUEBEC!
Requiem for a Divided Country, by Mordecai Richler. (Knopf, $23.) An angry, unsystematic, powerful polemic against Quebec's French-only legislation, in which Mr.
Richler sees paranoia on the surface, anti-Semitism in the depths.
UNDERWORLD, by Peter Conrad. (Poseidon, $21.) This versatile writer's first novel, which starts with a kidnapping and a ghastly murder, is really a carefully layered, and indeed redemptive, meditation on the world we are making for ourselves.
AFTER HENRY, by Joan Didion. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $22.) Reports and meditations, affording the pleasures of literature, on phenomena like Patricia Hearst, brush fires, Ronald Reagan.
ALL THE PRETTY HORSES, by Cormac McCarthy. (Knopf, $21.) The first volume of a planned trilogy, this dark, uncomfortable, magnetically attractive novel projects its 16-year-old hero's activity on a world too vast and alien to be much affected.


Suzanne Stevenson, Daniel Cross
Suzanne Joan Stevenson, a daughter of Jane K. Stevenson and William H. Stevenson, both of San Pedro, Calif., was married yesterday in Washington to Daniel Carroll Cross, the son of James E. Cross of Gulfstream, Fla., and Meredith M. Dale of Washington.
The Rev.
Dr.
Francis Wade performed the Episcopal ceremony at St.
Alban's Church.
Mrs.
Cross, 28 years old, is a public affairs specialist at the Department of the Interior in Washington.
She graduated from the University of Colorado at Boulder.
Her father is a financial consultant in San Pedro.


'Womanwords'
To the Editor:
In her review of "Womanwords," by Jane Mills (In Short: Reference Books, May 3), Florence King cites the adjective "anile," from the Latin
anus,
meaning old woman, and adds, "How 'anus' got its medical meaning is ignored" by the author.
Rightly so, since we are dealing with two unrelated Latin words: the feminine
anus
with a short "a" ("anile" is preferably pronounced with a short "a") and the masculine
anus
with a long "a," meaning ring. The anal sphincter is a ring muscle, or orbicularis.


Suddenly, Debating Is Back
ONCE on the verge of extinction, high school debating in New Jersey is back in fashion.
Throughout the state, hundreds of New Jersey debaters from dozens of schools are now testing their mettle in what educators have called the crown jewel of a liberal arts education.
A decade ago the National Forensic League, which sponsors debate competitions for high school students, was considering dissolving its New Jersey district because it was so inactive and merging it with New York City's.
Now, because there are so many forensic clubs, the league is considering splitting the state into a northern and a southern district.
The New Jersey Forensic League, another high school debating organization, has seen its membership climb more than 25 percent in the last four years.


Faith Prince, How Does Your Garden Grow?
The first thing that Faith Prince does is scrub the makeup off her face.
Then she rustles up an all-natural black-cherry soda, settles in the Adirondack chair in the tidy garden off her one-bedroom Manhattan apartment and tries to catch her breath.


High-Tech Pistol Faces Off With Old Reliable
If the .38-caliber service revolver that New York City police officers carry is a trusty and reliable Ford, then the Glock, the semiautomatic weapon that most of the officers on the beat want to carry is a Ferrari.
The .38 looks like the kind of gun used in the movies by Jimmy Cagney, with a hammer on top of the handle and a bulging cylinder that holds the bullets in the middle.
In contrast, the Glock seems to say "Schwarzenegger." It is a glossy metallic gray and has smooth sides because all the firing mechanisms are located within, giving it a sleek, high-tech look.


Native Scenes
The name sounds forbidding: "Wind and Glacier Voices." But organizers of this festival say some offerings are quite warmhearted.
From Thursday through Sunday at the Walter Reade Theater at Lincoln Center, "Wind and Glacier Voices" will showcase films and videos made by North American Indians.
Among the 23 entries are a reenactment of Eskimo life in the early 1900's ("Qaggiq, the Gathering Place" by Zacharias Kunuk) and a documentary on Hopi tribal history ("Ikam Hakim, Hopiit" by Victor Masayesva Jr.).
"Return of the Country" by Bob Hicks, a Creek-Seminole, satirizes race relations by imagining a world in which whites find themselves dominated by Indians.
Loretta Todd's "Learning Path" profiles three Indian women educators and their experiences in the Canadian educational system.
". . .And Woman Wove It in a Basket . . ." by Bushra Azzouz, Marlene Farnum and Nettie Kuneki explores Klickitat tradition through basketry.


Sensations Or Just Inroads In Body Art?
PLACE: The Harley-Davidson boutique at Macy's Herald Square.
CONCESSIONAIRE: Roy Zuckerman, owner of Temptu Tattoos.
Q.
Is this the first department store in which you've operated?


Deborah Rhodes, Frederick Groves
Dr.
Deborah Jane Rhodes, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Frank H. T. Rhodes of Ithaca, N.Y., was married there yesterday to Frederick Savage Groves, a son of Sally H. Groves of Lancaster, Pa., and the late Joseph M. Groves.
The Rev.
Robert Johnson performed the Episcopal ceremony at the Sage Chapel at Cornell University.
Dr.
Rhodes, who is 28 years old and is keeping her name, will become an intern in internal medicine at Johns Hopkins Hospital in Baltimore next month.
She graduated cum laude from Harvard University and received her M.D. from Cornell, of which her father is the president.


POSTINGS: New College Branch; Reusing a Utility
The 25-year-old Elizabethtown Gas Company building in downtown Elizabeth, N.J., has been recycled into a one-building branch campus of Union County College in Cranford, N.J.
The 100,000-square-foot, seven-story Sidney F. Lessner Building houses classrooms, administration and faculty offices, triple-tiered lecture halls, computer labs, a bookstore, food service areas and a cafeteria.
The basement has been converted into a 3,100-square-foot auditorium with a stage and theatrical lighting system, a lounge, a library, exhibition rooms and galleries.


Haiti's Junta Leader Talks of 'Right Path' Despite Signs of Upheaval in Army
Surrounded by seven of the highest-ranking officers of his staff, Brig.
Gen.
Raoul Cedras, leader of the coup that overthrew the Haitian Government in September, declares himself satisfied.
"We are on the right path," General Cedras, the commander of the Haitian Army, said in an interview Thursday, smiling faintly.
"We are on the verge of applying an agreement between all the parties here. As soon as this accord is formalized, we will have a consensus government that will be acceptable for everyone concerned, including the international community."


Luxury Hotel Planned For Great Neck Plaza
THE first luxury hotel in downtown Great Neck, an $8 million undertaking, is expected to win preliminary endorsement from the Great Neck Plaza Board of Trustees on Wednesday.
The approval would set the stage for the replacement of a longstanding eyesore this year or early next year.
The developer, Sussex Inc. of Bayside, is seeking final approval for its 85-room five-story building from the trustees.
The preliminary endorsement is expected this week, and the final approval is likely next month, Mayor Allan J. Gussack said.


Broker-Landlord Bias Case: What's Next?
THE Open Housing Center, a private fair-housing advocacy group that won a Federal jury determination on May 15 that a landlord is responsible for a broker's racial steering in the rental of apartments, is seeking $500,000 in legal fees for the five years of litigation and for monitoring the results of the verdict.
Last week, Lynn Judell of the law firm of Schulte, Roth &amp; Zabel, which represented the center on a pro bono basis, also asked Judge Arthur D. Spatt, who presided at the trial in Uniondale, L.I., to order the losers in the suit to take a number of steps that it hopes will lead to a major breakthrough in housing for black and Hispanic tenants.


Croatia Wants Nothing to Do With Serbian Designs in Bosnia
To the Editor:
"Lean on Croatia, Too" (editorial, May 13) explicitly accuses Croatia of making a deal with the Serbian regime of Slobodan Milosevic to partition Bosnia and Herzegovina at the expense of the Muslim community.
This is unfounded and untrue.


Sallie Proctor, Kenneth Dowd Jr.
Sallie Earle Proctor and Kenneth Lowell Dowd Jr. were married yesterday at the Davis Chapel on the campus of Wake Forest University in Winston-Salem, N.C.
The Rev.
Dr.
George Robinson performed the Methodist ceremony.
Mrs.
Dowd is a first vice president at Mitchell Hutchins Institutional Investors in New York.
She graduated from Vanderbilt University and received an M.B.A. from Emory University.
She is the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Richard C. Proctor of Winston-Salem.
Her father retired as the chairman of the department of psychiatry at Bowman Gray Medical School of Wake Forest University.


Dismissed From Army as Lesbian, Colonel Will Fight Homosexual Ban
Having served 14 months in a war zone in Vietnam, given birth to four sons and worked daily with some of the most fragile American war veterans, Col.
Margarethe Cammermeyer has seen her share of pain and torment.
But there was a moment Thursday afternoon, at the Washington National Guard headquarters just south of here, that broke her heart.
After nearly 27 years in the military, Colonel Cammermeyer, the chief nurse of this state's guard, was discharged because she is a lesbian.


Technology; A Step Closer to Flight as Free as a Bird's
For centuries humanity has yearned to fly like the birds -- taking to the air and hovering or soaring or darting above the earth as one's whims dictate.
This drive is still alive despite the development of supersonic airliners and space travel.
And now researchers are making progress toward a machine in which a solitary person could experience flight much as birds do.
The prototype of this quest was the mythological Icarus, with his arm-powered flapping wings.
Of course, he had technical problems.
According to the legend, he flew too close to the sun, which melted the wax that held the feathers to his arms.


Data Update
BUILDING PERMITS ISSUED (Housing units)
Apr. 92
Mar. 92
Apr. 91
New York
2,593
2,109
2,827
New Jersey
1,466
1,495
1,447
Connecticut
799
697
702
*4*Source: Census Bureau, U.S. Department of Commerce
*4*MORTGAGE INTEREST RATES (Averages)
Last Week
Previous Week
Year Ago
New York
Conventional (30-yr)
8.77
8.80
9.73
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.98
6.00
7.32
New Jersey
Conventional (30-yr)
8.64
8.69
9.56
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.77
5.82
7.28
Connecticut
Conventional (30-yr)
8.66
8.72
9.57
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.77
5.91
7.08
Co-ops (N.Y.)
Conventional (30-yr)
8.89
8.92
9.95
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
6.34
6.38
7.73
*4*Indexes for Adjustable-Rate Mortgages*
1-yr. Treasury security
4.12
4.12
6.15
National Mortgage Contract Rate
8.14
8.14
9.24
*Rates on most adjustable mortgages are set 1 to 3 percentage points above these indexes.  (Source: HSH Associates)


The Joys of Summer, Anticipated
A gaggle of youngsters perched on kindergarten chairs at a family services center in Brooklyn two weeks ago, waggling their knees nervously, or intently inspecting the ceiling, as they searched for words to say what weeks away from the city might mean to them.
Their responses were clipped -- mental snapshots, really -- some mere imaginings of what might be, others based on memories of summers past in places where "there's all grass."


Picture Perfect
"CAN I buy your energy?" Andy Warhol once asked his friend Christopher Makos.
It would not have been out of character for Mr.
Makos, who published a book of photographs of Warhol after his death, to have said, "Yes."
Right before Memorial Day weekend, the California-bred photographer, who has the goatee and posture of an aging surfer and the enthusiasm of a younger one, was standing in the middle of a crush of friends for the opening of his exhibit at Magidson Fine Art, Madison Avenue at East 81st Street.
He had managed to create in the small gallery the atmosphere of an everything-must-go sale in a country about to turn communist.


Kathryn Becker, Alan Klingenstein
Kathryn Marie Becker, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Eugene D. Becker of Orange, Calif., was married last evening to Alan Lee Klingenstein, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Lee P. Klingenstein of Scarsdale, N.Y.
Rabbi Miriam Ancis performed the ceremony at Wheatleigh, an inn in Lenox, Mass.
Mrs.
Klingenstein, 28 years old, is studying for a law degree at Columbia University.
She graduated from the University of California at Berkeley, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and received a master's degree in Russian studies from Harvard University.
Her father is the president of Global Sulphur Systems Inc., a hazardous-waste recycling company in Orange.


Noted With Pleasure
Love Like a River
Love, whatever its object, must begin with understanding, according to Roderick L. Haig-Brown in his essay "To Know a River." It is included in "Home Waters: A Fly-Fishing Anthology," edited by Gary Soucie (Fireside/Simon &amp; Schuster, paper).
TXT&gt;  One may love a river as soon as one sets eyes upon it; it may have certain features that fit instantly with one's conception of beauty, or it may recall the qualities of some other river, well known and deeply loved.
One may feel in the same way an instant affinity for a man or a woman and know that here is pleasure and warmth and the foundation of deep friendship.
In either case the full riches of the discovery are not immediately released -- they cannot be; only knowledge and close experience can release them.
Rivers, I suppose, are not at all like human beings, but it is still possible to make apt comparisons, and this is one: understanding, whether instinctive and immediate or developing naturally through time or grown by conscious effort, is a necessary preliminary to love.
Understanding of another human being can never be complete, but as it grows toward completeness, it becomes love almost inevitably.
The Necessity of Rules
Does creativity require discipline to flourish?
The case for rules was elegantly stated by the painter Sir Joshua Reynolds in 1768.
His words are quoted by Stephen Bayley in "Taste: The Secret Meaning of Things" (Pantheon).
Every opportunity, therefore, should be taken to discountenance that false and vulgar opinion that rules are the fetters of genius.
They are fetter only to men of no genius; as that armor, which upon the strong becomes an ornament and a defense, upon the weak and misshapen turns into a load and cripples the body which it was meant to protect. . . .
How much liberty may be taken to break through those rules . . . may be an after consideration when the pupils becomes masters themselves.
It is then, when their Genius had received its utmost improvement, that rules may possibly be dispensed with.
But let us not destroy the scaffold until we have raised the building.
The Ecstatic Conductor
Harvey Sachs casts a critical eye on modern conductors who act out their emotional response to the music (and upstage the orchestra) in this passage from "Reflections on Toscanini" (Grove Weidenfeld).
James Levine has pointed out that many people who attend symphony concerts make two incorrect assumptions: that the conductor necessarily likes what the orchestra is doing, and that the conductor can necessarily control what the orchestra is doing.
During rehearsals, stopping and starting are possible, and any reasonably competent conductor working with a decent orchestra can at least make the pieces of the puzzle mesh.
But if something goes fundamentally wrong during a performance, not even the best of conductor-orchestra teams can always bring the progression of musical events back into line.
Conductors who appear to be acting out a Mannerist painting of St.
Teresa in ecstasy are either conducting an imaginary performance, parallel to but rarely identical with the orchestra's, or are trying -- consciously or unconsciously or both -- to impress the audience.
Landscape of Dreams
We preserve superstitions, Philip Garrison suggests, not so much because we believe such notions as because we require the thrill of strangeness they provide.
This is from his collection of essays, "Augury" (University of Georgia).
We honor folk notions.
But not because we believe in them.
No, folk notions represent our collective, half-conscious effort to vivify the drab dailiness of our existence: they have a way of intensifying, of making more thrilling whatever regularity we count on in order to plan our lives. . . .
The landscape of belief and that of fact are not opposed, or not diametrically, at least.
No, they lie at some oblique angle to each other.
Tired of the predictabilities that nourish, we long for that other world, the one we keep extrapolating, collectively, from scraps of belief.
The landscape of belief relates to that of fact in rather the way the planet Pluto related, once, to Neptune.
The orbit of the latter, or certain irregularities in it, let astronomers infer both the existence and location of a presence they'd never seen. . . .
The older I get, the more folk beliefs stick in my mind.
They arrange themselves all around the periphery of my thinking.
I admire how they hover between life and art, these quirky, archaic forms of behavior. . . .
We do dwell in the landscape of fact.
But we never escape the tug a certain counterpart to it exerts.
The Artist of Life
The poet Cid Corman finds in Rembrandt's long series of self-portraits a reminder both of life's brevity and art's persistence.
This is from "Where Were We Now: Essays and Postscriptum" (Broken Moon Press, paper).
From the start -- apparently -- he had found the center from which all other work was to find its only possible "measure." But "measure" -- not in a sense of ranking but in the sense of realizing almost year by year the feeling of being alive -- within the face and hands largely -- to register the penetrations of the life lived and living. . . .
What moves us -- and will always move the living -- is that weird exactitude by which he shows us -- makes us
see
-- that we are hopelessly, helplessly mortal . . . yet that somewhere -- at core -- heart's intelligence -- there is the light that being alive persists in extending.
His obduracy and courage, the candor and the verity of it, are witnessed in the most unswerving hand.
And
his
work,
his
life, brings home to us what we must still most learn: that there is no artist except the artist of life, that there is no life without the art to realize and share it.


A LA CARTE
Relishing a City Snack
JUST as basketball is a city game, dim sum is a city snack, whether it is Hong Kong or New York.
Dim sum, which is Cantonese for "heart's delight," consists of a variety of tasty appetizer-type tidbits like fried or steamed dumplings, shrimp balls, steamed buns, spring rolls and Chinese pastries, all served from rolling carts.


Beth-Ann Fine, J. L. Buchman
Beth-Ann Fine, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Michael A. Fine of West Hartford, Conn., was married there last evening to Jonathan Lee Buchman, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Joel Buchman of New York.
Rabbi Harold S. Silver performed the ceremony at Congregation Beth Israel.
Mrs.
Buchman, 27 years old, is an advertising sales representative for Artnews magazine.
She graduated from Rollins College.
Her father is president of Motive Parts Warehouse Inc., a West Hartford auto parts distributor.


Conversations/Cajuste Carelus; A Haitian Refugee Wonders When He'll Return
Cajuste Carelus, who is in the 12th year of exile from his native Haiti, can speak freely.
He has no plans to return home anytime soon.
President of the Haitian Community Association in Huntington, N.Y., and chairman of its Multi-Cultural Center, Mr.
Carelus has pledged not to return to Port-au-Prince until democracy does.
"I work for change from here," he said.
His association tracks Haiti's faltering attempts at democracy, helping scores of the casualties: refugees who land here without money, housing or friends.
Mr.
Carelus and a friend feed and shelter the newcomers, and provide a lawyer.


A New Championship: The Pan-American
FOR more than 60 years there have been national championships.
For more than 40 years there have been world championships.
But now, for the first time, there is something in between.
Next Saturday nine days of play will begin in Corpus Christi, Tex., in the first Pan-American Championships.
Participation from 24 countries is expected.
In the open series, the Brazilian team, with a bunch of world champions, will be hard to beat, though the United States will be strongly represented in both the open and women's divisions.
Two of the four American women's squads met recently in Memphis to select the American team for the 1992 world championships, and the diagramed deal was dynamic.


COOKBOOKS


MAY 24-30: The Philippines; The Election Isn't Over Till the Ballots are Counted
In most democracies, the presidency is won or lost at the ballot box but in the Philippines, even the new, post-Marcos Phlippines, it is won or lost in the counting.
Three weeks after the first free elections in more than two decades, the official counting has just begun.
By an unofficial count, the winner will be Fidel V. Ramos, the 64-year old former general who enforced martial law under Ferdinand E. Marcos, then turned on him in the 1986 "People Power" revolution.
With seven candidates crowding the field, Mr.
Ramos is expected to win with only about 25 percent of the vote, hardly a mandate against crushing economic problems, a still-active Communist insurgency, and a right-wing military faction that is perpetually plotting a new coup.
Allegations of vote fraud are widespread, and many wonder if numbers are being changed as they pass from precincts to towns to provinces, then to the Congress.
Rivals are vowing to make sure Congress, where votes have been known to go to the highest bidder, does not proclaim the former general the winner. .
None of the other candidates has yet conceded defeat; in the Philippines it is always better to declare that the election was stolen from you.
Miriam Defensor Santiago, a populist who ran a strong second to Mr.
Ramos, started a hunger strike "to the death" the other day to protest fraud; she ended it two days later and was quoted as saying she is thinking of taking a fellowship at Harvard.


The Bold, The Browless
Kristen McMenamy's lack of eyebrows has raised a few in the fashion world.
At the designer Anna Sui's fall fashion show this spring, Francois Nars, a makeup artist, was using concealer stick to cover up the eyebrows of most of the models.
He convinced Ms.
McMenamy, a model who is based in Paris, to go all the way.
The no-eyebrow look of the 60's, with only the thinnest line penciled on, is making a comeback.


Chronicling the Spread of AIDS Throughout Brooklyn
The man flipped on his tape recorder and turned to the woman sitting cross-legged on a couch.
"O.K.," he began, scanning a long list of questions, "why don't you tell me a little bit about how you found out you're H.I.V.-positive."
For the next two hours, the woman spoke of her life before and after she learned she had the virus that causes AIDS.
She told of a 17-year relationship with a man she thinks was infected by another lover before passing the virus to her.
She talked of days punctuated by visits to a doctor, an AIDS counselor and an herbalist who sells "healing" teas.
Then there were the hours spent trying to start an AIDS newsletter for Crown Heights, her Brooklyn neighborhood.


RECORD BRIEFS
Tavener: 'The Protecting Veil,' 'Thrinos'; Britten: Cello Suite No. 3 (Op. 87)
Steven Isserlis, cello; London Symphony conducted by Gennadi Rozhdestvensky ("Protecting Veil").
Virgin Classics VC7 91474-2; CD.


Miss Mersereau, John Dickinson
Pamela Beth Mersereau, a daughter of Paul E. Mersereau of Avon, Conn., and Carol J. Harman Mersereau of New Britain, Conn., was married yesterday in Farmington, Conn., to John Taylor Dickinson, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Roy M. Dickinson of Westport, Conn.
The Rev.
Lidabell L. Pollard performed the ceremony at the First Church of Christ.
Mrs.
Dickinson, 27, is an assistant vice president of BancBoston Capital, a Boston investment company.
She graduated from Williams College.
Her father is a lawyer in Avon.
Her mother is a real-estate saleswoman in West Hartford, Conn.


CBS Discloses Plan To Begin Charging Fees to Its Affiliates
CBS announced a plan yesterday that would radically alter the way the television network deals with its affiliate stations, by charging the stations fees to carry certain programs.
To explain the need for the change, the network cited low profits and increased competition from cable networks, the Fox network and program syndicators.


Sports of The Times; Allowing U.S. Players Time for Introductions
CRINGING in front of the television set, Chuck Daly watches his American lads flailing away at each other.
Ooops, there was Michael Jordan and Patrick Ewing, nose to nose a few weeks back.
Ooops, there was Clyde Drexler sticking a finger in John Stockton's eye last week.
Ooops, there is Scottie Pippen hobbling around on a tender ankle.
Part of Daly wants to scream, "Boys, boys, boys, take it easy on each other." But these are the playoffs.
This is real life.
The Summer Games in Barcelona are later.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Undeclared Candidate; Perot Carries His Message To Arkansas
Ross Perot, settling into the swing of his anti-politician campaign, delivered a speech here today that hit political hot buttons with the dexterity of a court stenographer, concluding with a startlingly harsh attack on President Bush.
Mr.
Perot, who has repeatedly decried the tendency of Mr.
Bush and other Presidential campaigners to indulge in personal attacks, suggested that the President went to war in the Persian Gulf in part because he wanted to prove his masculinity.


NATURAL SETTINGS
"WHEN IS ART DECOR AND DECOR ART?" asks Gerd Verschoor, surveying his SoHo loft, which is full of both.
"How far can you go in design? You cannot design a 'new' chair. So I only recycle, and give things new forms."
Verschoor, a Dutch-born conceptual artist, furniture designer and former florist, lives in an ecosystem of natural and found objects, as mutable as the natural world.
His controversial collage-sculptures for Le Madri, a Manhattan restaurant, turn materials like potatoes, tumbleweed and beach debris into legitimate -- even elegant -- elements of design.


Riko Miyagawa, Andrew Saidel
Riko Miyagawa, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Koji Miyagawa of Osaka, Japan, and Andrew M. Saidel, a son of Peter M. and Judith R. Saidel of Feura Bush, N.Y., were married yesterday.
Judge Roger Fritts, a retired judge of the Bethlehem (N.Y.) Town Court, performed the ceremony at the home of the bridegroom's parents.
Mrs.
Saidel, 24 years old, graduated from the Kansai University of Foreign Studies in Osaka.
She is a counselor at the International Center for Education in Tokyo.
Her father is a photographer in Osaka.


Reinventing the Sandwich
THE SANDWICH HAS COME OUT of the picnic basket.
Today, as chefs and home cooks take a more informal approach to dining, all sorts of inventive combinations, as well as some time-honored classics, are being seen on both restaurant and guest menus.
Sandwiches can be served not only for lunch but for a buffet supper, and also for hors d'oeuvres with drinks.
And consider the sandwich -- filled with ice cream -- for dessert.
It takes more imagination than cooking skill to produce appealing sandwiches, since they usually require simply layering freshly prepared fillings onto or between slices of bread.
Of course, many require no cooking at all.
And if there isn't time to make them from scratch, most catering shops, like restaurants, now offer a large selection.


Boy Editor in the Naked City
BRIGHTNESS FALLS
By Jay McInerney. 416 pp. New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $23.


SOUPED-UP SCHOLAR
Although I am familiar with Stanley Fish as a Miltonist and literary theorist, Adam Begley gave me insight into Fish, the scholar, the reveler, the man.


The Surprises Of a Stay In a Stately Flat
IT is not easy to recline with aplomb in one's bath while receiving strangers, but James carried it off very well.
An hour earlier, we had arrived for a week's stay at Standen, a Victorian country house owned by the National Trust near East Grinstead.
As we drove toward the house, we noticed a large tent pitched on the lawn.
Dozens of cars were parked along the drive, and women in silk dresses, accompanied by men in dark suits and discreet ties, were strolling toward the tent.
As she showed us around our second-floor flat, Gladys, one of Standen's resident staff, told us that tonight was the annual Lord Mayor's reception.
It was obviously quite a do.
While we carried suitcases and groceries from the car, we caught glimpses of several men in satin waistcoats, gilt braid and scarlet sashes, the kind of gaudy ceremonial regalia that Americans tend to associate either with light opera or the British Empire.


A Salad Fit for Grilling. Yes, a Salad.
AS the weather warms and the outdoor season moves into high gear, the grill is in for a workout.
And when it comes to grilling these days, anything goes.
Take grilled salad, for example.
While grilling may sound like an odd way to prepare salad, using one or more grilled items in a salad mixture adds a delicious edge of crispness and smoky flavor.


Moo!
To the Editor:
Regarding Jeff Silverman's article "To Make a Hit, You Need a Pitch"  [ May 3 ] .
O.K., here's my pitch.
Western psycho-thriller: "The Silence of the Cows."  ED TURNER Atlanta
The writer is executive vice president of CNN.


After 104 Years, Richmond Newspaper Closes
The Richmond News Leader, which thundered conservative Southern views for 104 years, printed its final issue today with the headline "Never More," an allusion to the writer Edgar Allen Poe who once made Richmond his home.
The newspaper's parent company, Media General Inc. of Richmond, announced in September that it would merge The News Leader with its sister paper, the morning Times-Dispatch, which has a separate news staff.


Dr. Hearn, Dr. Norris
Mr. and Mrs.
James J. Hearn of Drexel Hill, Pa., have announced September wedding plans for their daughter Dr.
Anne P. Hearn and Dr.
Robert B. Norris, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard A. Norris of Bridgewater, N.J.
Dr.
Hearn, 28 years old, graduated summa cum laude from St.
Joseph's University and received an M.D. from Temple University.
She is a resident in internal medicine at Pennsylvania Hospital in Philadelphia, where Dr.
Norris, 33, is a staff cardiologist.
He graduated from the University of Pennsylvania, where he was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and the New York University Medical School.


Miss Aldridge, Anthony Mancini
Alexandra Amindra Aldridge, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Fred C. Aldridge Jr. of Haverford, Pa., was married yesterday in Wayne, Pa., to Anthony Richard Mancini, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Albert R. Mancini of Wynnewood, Pa.
The Rev.
Rudolph A. Moore performed the ceremony at the Chapel of St.
David's Episcopal Church.
Mrs.
Mancini graduated from Duke University and received an M.B.A. from Columbia University.
She is the program manager at the Vanguard Group, a mutual-funds company in Valley Forge, Pa.
Her father is a senior partner at the Philadelphia law firm of Stradley, Ronon, Stevens &amp; Young.
Her mother, Alexandra Q. Aldridge, is the vice president for development at the Philadelphia Museum of Art.


Foiling Counterfeiters Before They Start
BRITAIN is unique among members of the Universal Postal Union, which regulates international mails, in being excused from showing the name of the country on its stamps.
Stamp lore has it that the exemption is to honor Britain as the first country to issue postal stamps, in May 1840.
Instead, the monarch's portrait or silhouette identifies British stamps.


To Lay Bricks, Preparation Includes Detailed Planning
LAYING bricks and other masonry in a single layer, and using sand instead of mortar, is an easy way to make patios, walks and driveways.
The technique is called flexible paving.
Start by choosing the masonry, usually bricks, concrete paving blocks or flagstones.
With bricks, consider pavers, which are harder than bricks used for walls and will withstand freezing and contact with damp ground.


POSTINGS: Housing the Elderly; The Model Solution
When developers of a new residential complex in East Meadow, L.I. were seeking a site for a model apartment they could show to prospective buyers, they found space in an improbable location; the vacant ground floor of their own office building.
Earlier this month, a full scale replica of the one-bedroom units to be part of the Knolls of East Meadow, opened in an office building at 377 Oak Street in Garden City.


Christopher Masalsky And Amy K. Franz
Amy Katherine Franz, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Henry A. Franz of Upper Montclair, N.J., was married yesterday to Christopher John Masalsky, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Stanley J. Masalsky Jr. of Stoughton, Mass.
The Rev.
Ruhle Kane performed the ceremony at St.
John's Episcopal Church in Montclair, N.J.
Ms.
Franz, 23 years old, will keep her name.
She graduated from Wellesley College and is an assistant manager for the Ann Taylor store in Chestnut Hill, Mass.
Mr.
Masalsky, also 23, graduated from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and is a program specialist for the May Institute in Braintree, Mass., which aids children and adults with disabilities.


At 82, Miguel Najdorf Stays Involved
MIGUEL NAJDORF celebrated his 82d birthday by arranging the Najdorf International Tournament in his home city, Buenos Aires, April 11 to 25, as is his custom.
Argentina's greatest player no longer enters such events, yet he gets heavily involved.
Joel Benjamin wrote in the May edition of Chess Chow: "Every day he would hover about the stage, absorbing the nuances of all seven games. He would occasionally sit in the chair of a player who had gotten up for a stroll. Everyone took it in stride."


POSTINGS: Economy and Environment; Critical Issues At a Seminar
How can the New York metropolitan region compete successfully in national and global economies?
How can it create open space, conserve water and cope with solid waste?
How can it use existing transportation to stimulate economic growth?
And how can Manhattan be maintained as the economic and cultural hub?
At an assembly to be held Tuesday at the Sheraton New York Hotel, the Regional Plan Association will take up these and other questions.


Turning the Beat Around
The "Tonight Show" band is no longer an all-male club.
One of the many changes in the show, now starring Jay Leno, was the addition of its first female musician.
"There's no real reason why it should have been me and been this late," said Vicki Randle, a percussionist and new member of Branford Marsalis's seven-person jazz band.
"I'm very proud."


Translating Player-Speak
To 'pitch' equals to grovel shamelessly.
To 'network' equals to spread disinformation.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Voters; Perot Petition Embraced As Manifesto of Change
Ross Perot has struck political gold here in the San Fernando Valley, and the rush is on.
By the thousands, people are signing petitions to put him on the November Presidential ballot, not merely affixing their names but appending a "Yes!" A rap on the table.
An "All right!" A grin that says they are up to mischief and are proud of it.
"This makes me feel good; this makes me feel very good," Clayton Zonshine, a 40-year-old Democrat who voted for Michael S. Dukakis four years ago, said as he signed a Perot petition.
"Bush, Clinton are politicians. They talk out of both sides of their mouths. Mr. Perot gets things done."


The Executive Computer; A Plug-In Upgrade Chip That's Packed With Power
The Intel Corporation, which until now has sold its personal computer microprocessors almost exclusively to computer makers, is for the first time selling central processing unit chips to computer users through retail stores.
Owners of computers built around the i486SX microprocessor can buy Intel's new Overdrive processor for about $500, plug it into a special socket in their computers and significantly increase the performance of the machines.
The Overdrive chip is a do-it-yourself upgrade that can be installed in just a few minutes.
The chip plugs into the special socket reserved for a math co-processor.
It automatically disables the original i486SX processor and usurps power in the computer equivalent of a coup d'etat.


The Temptations of a Man of Integrity
Susan Rudolph remembers that it happened around 1973, shortly after she and Mendy were married.
Mendy Rudolph, the dark-haired and fastidious National Basketball Association referee, the most respected and one of the best, if not the best, to have blown a whistle on a court, seemed deeply troubled.
"It scared me," she said.
"Mendy was never like that. He was usually so upbeat, and when he wasn't, he was still able to disguise his feelings. But not now."


Corrections
Because of an editing error, a chart on May 10 with the Mutual Funds column, about portfolio managers' personal investments in their own funds, misidentifed the balanced fund with the third-best ranking in 1991.
It is the Kemper Investment Portfolios Total Return Fund, not the Kemper Total Return Fund.


A Home and Haven in the West Bank
Hussein Bushkar peered nervously out the window of his house, scanning the landscape for signs of danger.
"This is worse than a jail," he said, "I'm afraid all the time."


Weekend Studies
In Vermont Inns Weekends at a Vermont inn can be combined with workshops on the environment, fly fishing, home building and even farming, in a program called Vermont Off Beat, offered until early November.
Among the subjects are agriculture, with visitors staying on a farm and visiting others; environmentally safe livelihoods and alternative energy sources; an introduction to building a country home, and how to run a specialty food business.
One weekend revolves around the Plain and Fancy Quilt Festival.
Participants in Vermont Off Beat's learning weekends will stay in one of several inns, which accommodate up to 20 guests.
Most workshops are Friday evening to Sunday afternoon.
The cost varies from $225 to $525 a person based on two in a room and includes accommodations, breakfast and dinner.


The Writing On the Wall At the Opera
During a recent performance of Lully's "Atys" at the Brooklyn Academy of Music, William Christie, conducting in exquisitely refined fashion, suddenly turned toward the audience and shot a look of furious disdain at the listeners.
We had, it seemed, sullied the unearthly phrases of the music with laughter.
The reason?
The supertitles projected over Mr.
Christie's head translated a 17th-century observation about men and women into a humorous maxim better suited to contemporary sexual banter about frustrated love.
The flashing of words on a strip of screen during an opera performance will always create problems.
As the Houston Grand Opera's production of "Parsifal" was taking shape, the director Robert Wilson argued that light from the projected letters would distort his carefully shaded ritualistic images. (The lighting was eventually muted, and the slides were faded in and out.) At the New York City Opera, during "Die Soldaten," the supertitles did not identify which of the extravagantly perverse characters was speaking.
There are more than enough examples of mistranslations, mistaken allusions and abridgments to give any opera lover nightmares.


Where the Clientele Is a Good Omen
THE Hong Kong Seafood Restaurant is Chinatown in Amityville.
It has the look, style and food of the real thing.
The modest storefront has a veneer of suburbia, with its dusty rose mirrored and marbled walls.
But the soft-drink cooler in the dining room is strictly Chinatown, and the tanks of sea creatures waiting to be cooked are rare on Long Island.


Corrections
A picture caption on May 17 about the original production of "Girl Crazy" misstated the year.
The musical opened on Broadway in 1930.


A Show of 125 Works by Artists in the Northeast
THIS year's version of "Art of the Northeast," like its 42 predecessors, comesweighed down with prizes -- 18 of them from $100 to $1,000, to be exact.
The other statistics hold steady -- 125 pieces chosen from more than 1,000 submissions -- and if the show at Silvermine Guild here seems smaller than usual it is only because there are fewer large works.
The chief curator at the Phillips Collection in Washington, Eliza Rathbone, was juror, following in the footsteps of her father, Perry Rathbone, who did the job in 1956 shortly after becoming director of the Museum of Fine Arts in Boston.
The honor roll of judges shines with stars, among them Milton Avery, H. H. Arnason, John I. H. Baur (twice), William Baziotes, Clement Greenberg, Hilton Kramer, Roy Neuberger and Louise Nevelson.
No wonder the contest attracts so many regulars.


Empty Gesture in Haiti
To the Editor:
"Haitians Expected to Snub U.S. Rules" (news article, May 26) quotes an American official in Port-au-Prince, Haiti, on the possibility for Haitians to apply for asylum at the United States Embassy there: "They don't have to actually come here. They can write."


Jennifer Goodale, Robert Epstein
Nancy E. Hall and Thomas T. Goodale, both of New Canaan, Conn., have announced August wedding plans for their daughter Jennifer Paine Goodale and Robert Joseph Epstein, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
H.
David Epstein of Sunnyside, S.I.
Ms.
Goodale, who is 30 years old and a graduate of Barnard College, is a specialist in cultural affairs at Philip Morris in New York.
Her father is a director in New York of Philip Morris U.S.A.


Wall Street; Bond Markets Aren't Waiting for New Ratings
Officially, California has a higher credit rating than Massachusetts.
In fact, the Bay State's ratings -- Baa from Moody's Investors Service and BBB from Standard &amp; Poor's -- are the lowest of any state, while California sports a decent AA from S.&amp;P. and Aa-1 from Moody's.
But those ratings are being ignored by the municipal bond market, said Robert A. Dennis, senior vice president and portfolio manager of the MFS Managed Municipal Bond Trust in Boston.
The prices of the lowly Massachusetts bonds drew closer to California's last week than at any point in the past year.


Lillian Bennett, T. D. O'Malley Jr.
Lillian Maria Bennett, a daughter of Ondina Bennett of Glen Ridge, N.J., and the late W. Craig Bennett, was married yesterday to Thomas Daniel O'Malley Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
O'Malley of Greenwich, Conn.
The Rev.
Abbot Brian Clark, a Roman Catholic priest, performed the interdenominational ceremony at Glen Ridge Congregational Church, assisted by the Rev.
Martha Eidman-Hicks, a Congregational minister.
Mrs.
O'Malley, 25 years old, and her husband, 25, are 1989 graduates of Boston College.
She is an assistant manager of sales planning for American Express Travel Related Services in New York.
Her father was the division executive of investment management at Citibank in New York.


Drinks
WHEN I WAS YOUNG, I THOUGHT YOU could enjoy the same drinks in hot weather as in cool.
That delusion ended one scorching day in the 1960's in the Dominican Republic, where I was covering some uprising or other.
I had a couple of dry martinis at lunch, stepped blithely into the blast-furnace heat and almost fell on my face.
Since then I have been a great one for what are variously called long drinks or summer coolers.
Here are favorites that have eased the angst of revolution, war, famine and especially campaign speeches over the last three decades.
UNITED STATES: The arrival of warm weather more or less coincides with the running of the Kentucky Derby at Churchill Downs in Louisville, where the mint julep is the libation of choice.
Made of crushed mint leaves, ice, a teaspoon of sugar and enough bourbon whisky to fill a tall glass about a third of the way -- enough, in other words, to stun a medium-size mule -- it soothes the spirit and cools the brow.
At the innumerable wingdings in and around Louisville during Derby week, they serve juleps in silver cups.
But no matter what you drink them from, they don't do much for the brain.
I have never picked a Derby winner after downing a julep, but then I haven't picked many before drinking one, either.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on page 1 of the Arts and Leisure section today about television's portrayal of abortion misstates the source of decisions on broadcasting a special-interest group's commercial on an issue.
Individual television stations and networks set their requirements for documentation and disclaimers and judge whether to accept the ads; the Federal Communications Commission does not.


MAY 24-30: Thailand; Another General To Be Prime Minister; Opposition Parties Object
Unhappily for Thailand, it is the rare week that does not include rumors of a coup.
The last coup was 15 months ago, but unless civilian politicians reach a compromise quickly, the next one could be fast approaching.
Thailand's military leaders and its former prime minister, General Suchinda Kraprayoon, who resigned last week, have been in hiding since soldiers shot scores, perhaps hundreds of pro-democracy demonstrators in the streets..


Rio: A Start on Managing What's Left of This Place
Most of the delegates converging on Rio de Janeiro for the start of the Earth Summit on Wednesday, it seems safe to say, believe that humanity must do something about the harm that human expansion is doing to the rest of the biosphere.
But it also seems that many of the world's governments tend to pin primary responsibility on someone else and to duck strong measures that could hurt them economically or politically.
That is why the Rio meeting -- as has already been made abundantly clear in pre-summit talks on the key issues of climate and extinction of species -- is likely to disappoint any who are expecting a dramatic environmental leap forward.


Quotation of the Day
"What I hope to represent is a part of the normality of being homosexual, of not being in leather or shaving my hair, but rather showing how much we are all alike." -- COL.
MARGARETHE CAMMERMEYER, after she was dismissed by the Washington National Guard.  [ 18:5. ]


From 'Chorus Line' to 'Guys and Dolls'
"MY real name is Kenneth Alan Brown. My Hebrew name is Yakov Avraham. My professional name is Christopher Chadman." So began one life story at the historic taping sessions in 1974 when a group of 18 Broadway dancers gathered in a circle on the floor of an exercise studio in Manhattan from midnight to dawn three or four times and poured out their feelings and secrets.
One does not have to be an aficionado of musical theater to know that is how "A Chorus Line" was born.
After the inevitable editing, the combining of anecdotes and confessionals and the creating of composite characters, it was Mr.
Chadman's contribution and his opening lines that stuck.
Only the names were changed.
The real Christopher Chadman became the fictitious Gregory Gardner, and Mr.
Chadman, after being offered the role,
his
role, turned it down.


Images of the Young Leaving Youth Behind
JOHN KAPLAN didn't think he would win the 1992 Pulitzer Prize in feature photography when he submitted his 7 essays and 20 pictures about 21-year-olds coming of age in America.
He thought his series wasn't newsy enough.
The Pulitzer committee decided he was wrong.


1992 Candidates Don't Fill the Muddied Shoes of Their Forebears
THE 1992 Presidential campaign may have veered more toward the gutter than the high road, but it is by no means the worst of the quadrennial exercises in promises and invective.
American Presidential campaigns, said the curator of the Museum of American Political Life at University of Hartford, Edmund B. Sullivan, have a wonderful tradition of raucousness and personal abuse.
Many campaigns, particularly in the politically boisterous 19th century, make the current contest seem almost polite.


STOLEN PROMISE
Where was the daughter's voice in all of this -- does she share her mother's dreams of sugar-coated romance or is her mother annoying the heck out of her by calling up to find out if she has a date on Saturday night?
Maybe, like a lot of college-age women I know, she has seen through romance since a long time and would prefer a life fulfilled in more substantial ways
Secondly, Raybon seems to equate her own minor sadness with a great tragedy, the waste of young black men's lives.
Surely, the least of that tragedy is that these men will not serve as husbands.


Making a Difference; A Victory for the Mail-Order Houses
Jack Miller and his brothers lived the great American success story when they built the Quill Corporation from scratch into a catalogue seller of office equipment with sales of $340 million a year.
They also lived the great American litigation experience after North Dakota tried to collect taxes on goods the company shipped into the state.
Quill, of Lincolnshire, Ill., won a victory last week when the Supreme Court reaffirmed its ban on state taxation of mail-order sales by out-of-state companies.
The Court, however, invited Congress to remove the ban by legislation, so the victory could be short-lived.


Hip-Hop Makes A Sharp Turn Back to Melody
The word "Tennessee" bounces in stereo above cowbells and maracas.
A hip-hop drumbeat and turntable scratching kick in, and a voice starts to chant-sing verses about home and roots; a second voice arrives with a smooth refrain.
A woman casually interrupts to challenge one of the male singers to a game of horseshoes.
The chant returns, then a stretched-out chorus, with women harmonizing and one commandeering the lead, belting "Take me home" in long, gospelly phrases.
More conversation, some rhythm and scratching, and it's over.
The song is "Tennessee," a hit single by Arrested Development that easily confounds even the latest pop categories.
Even without any rapping, it's unmistakably hip-hop.


Bootleg Tape of Aide's Jab Is Hit in China
The hottest cassettes in China these days are underground copies of a speech on agriculture by a Politburo member addressing the Central Communist Party School for senior officials.
Bootleg videos and cassettes of the speech are in demand because of a tongue-in-cheek proposal by Tian Jiyun, a reform-minded Deputy Prime Minister, that the Government set up special zones in which hard-line officials could live according to their orthodox Marxist principles.


Food as Lure or Accessory to Gambling
RECENTLY we decided to have a firsthand look at the Foxwoods Casino that opened in February on the Mashantucket Pequot Reservation, near Ledyard Center.
We discovered four restaurants on the premises, one of which, the Pequot Grill, seemed a notch above the mass feeding expected in such establishments, so we decided to give it a try.
The casino, a long building in the tan and beige tones of the Southwest rather than the Northeast, is tucked into piney woods.
It is completely unobtrusive in the peaceful countryside: no neon, no billboards, no Las Vegas glitz.
To find Foxwoods, a driver follows small signs with a discreet turquoise and coral logo.


Sanctions Will Bring Hardships; Serbia Must Get Oil to Hold Out
Economists and Western diplomats agree that the sanctions imposed by the United Nations Security Council today will bring shortages and other hardships on the people of Serbia.
But they say contingency plans made by the Serbian leadership and loopholes in the embargo are likely to enable the economy to function for a long time.


M. S. Ravenholt, 71; Asian Affairs Expert
Marjorie Severyns Ravenholt, an expert on Asia for government, news and non-profit organizations, died on Monday at the Swedish Hospital in Seattle.
She was 71 years old.
She died of complications after surgery for lung cancer, said her husband, Albert.
The couple lived in Seattle and in Manila.


STOLEN PROMISE
Raybon's emotional needs are irrelevant to her daughter's life choices.
She needs to focus on her own issues and stop subjecting her daughter to the "old maid syndrome." Life is complicated enough as a black woman.
Let her live her life on her own terms, whatever they may be.
ANTOINETTE E. CLYDE
Amityville, L.I.


'Chess,' a Musical That Won't Give Up
WITH a stirring production of "Chess," the musical that won't give up, the Paper Mill Playhouse is making a bold, constructive and winning move.
This is no routine revival, but a genuine attempt at resurrecting a beleaguered show.
Like "Jesus Christ Superstar" and "Evita," which Tim Rice wrote to Andrew Lloyd Webber's music, "Chess" (score by Benny Andersson and Bjorn Ulvaeus; lyrics by Mr. Rice) originated as a so-called concept album.


Beth Meister, George Grolio
Beth Meister, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Henry Meister of Rye Brook, N.Y., and George Groglio, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
George Groglio of Rye, N.Y., were married yesterday at the Hudson River Inn in Ossining, N.Y., by Daniel McCarthy, the Acting Village Justice of Buchanan, N.Y.
Mrs.
Groglio, 26 years old, is a social worker in Irvington, N.Y.
She graduated from the University of Maryland and has a master's degree in counseling from Long Island University.
Her father is a stockbroker at Ernst &amp; Company in New York.


Michigan Parole Board Assailed After Killings
The confession of a 38-year-old paroled rapist in the abductions and slayings of four teen-age girls in southeastern Michigan has touched off a flood of criticism of the state's criminal justice system, particularly the parole board.
The parolee, Leslie Allen Williams of Detroit, was arrested Sunday, the police said, after abducting a 35-year-old woman whom he had threatened to rape and kill.


Travel
EVERYONE who has ever traveled has at some time discovered that a change of scene can work like a change in an eyeglass prescription.
Our plane lands, and the bright new world we enter is so much more detailed and crisply defined than the myopic blur we still dimly recall as home.
As the scales of familiarity drop from our eyes, we look on life as it really is -- or at least as it first appears.
For the paradox of travel is that while we feel that we're seeing more, we secretly worry that we're understanding less.
How can we hope to penetrate the facade of a foreign culture?
And how much truth do we want to see if it threatens our holiday?
Observant travel (and travel writing) requires so much effort that one can hardly blame those writers whose books are essentially extended boasts (or complaints) about the courage shown and the hardships faced, crossing Baluchistan on a skateboard.
Nor can one fault the author who travels as an excuse to sneak off and admire, as if in private, his or her own descriptive gifts and rapturous sensibility.
Happily, no such chest-thumping or mirror-gazing mars the books that follow, books that can transport us far away as we laze through a country weekend or ride the subway to work.


Maureen Hughes, James McAloon
Dr.
Maureen Ellen Hughes, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas J. Hughes Jr. of Riverdale, the Bronx, was married yesterday to James Earl McAloon, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
James H. McAloon of Hingham, Mass.
Msgr.
John Barry performed the ceremony at St.
Patrick's Cathedral in New York.
Dr.
McAloon, 28 years old, and her husband, 29, are graduates of Trinity College in Hartford.
She received a master's degree and a Ph.D. in chemistry from Tufts University.
She was until recently a postdoctoral research fellow at the California Institute of Technology in Pasadena.
Her father is a partner in the New York law firm of DeMaio &amp; Hughes.


Canada's Unity Talks Show Signs of Progress
In what many Canadians hope will be the final round of their country's long-running constitutional wrangle, negotiators this week signaled major progress in designing reforms to hold the country together.
But there were still some disagreements that were unlikely to be resolved until provincial leaders sit down with Prime Minister Brian Mulroney, probably early next week.


Kristin Rae, Charles Allen
Kristin Ann Rae, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James M. Rae of New Canaan, Conn., was married there yesterday to Charles Edward Gray Allen, a son of Mrs.
Duncan Allen of London and the late Mr.
Allen.
The Rev.
Roland Jones performed the ceremony at St.
Mark's Episcopal Church.
Mrs.
Allen, 25 years old, is a program-development assistant at the Children's Television Workshop in New York.
She graduated from Northwestern University.
Her father is a lawyer in New York.
Her mother, Ann Rae, is an artists' representative in New Canaan.


Strauss Is Banned
ASTRID STRAUSS, a silver medalist in the 800-meter freestyle for East Germany at the 1988 Olympics, was banned from competition for six months yesterday on evidence from a drug test taken in March.
The action was announced by the German Swimming Federation during the national championships in Munich, where the 23-year-old Strauss was competing.
The ban is in force until Nov. 29.


U.S. Remains Moscowcentric on Once-Soviet Asia
When Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d was trying to persuade former Soviet republics in recent weeks to give up their nuclear weapons, the only holdout was Kazakhstan.
Though it ultimately went along, the largest nation of Central Asia was toying with the idea of using nuclear weapons as political bargaining chips to get international attention.
The affairs of Kazakhstan, along with those of the other four former Soviet republics of Central Asia, have been largely overshadowed by developments in republics like Russia or Ukraine, which are better known outside the former Soviet Union.
With their Islamic, often anti-Russian populations, moreover, the Central Asia countries -- nicknamed the "stans" after their common suffix -- are emerging from the collapse of the Soviet empire as a world apart from Moscow, policy analysts and area specialists say.


TV Shouts 'Baby' (and Barely Whispers 'Abortion')
Scottsdale, Ariz., in the early Summer of 1962: children shout and race bicycles, Dad washes the car, Mom cooks supper and the cul-de-sac hums contentedly.
It is the prime of Miss Sherri Finkbine, the popular local host of the "Romper Room" television show.
Then, overnight, Miss Sherri becomes an international scandal.


A Curator's Eye for Imagery Informs a Print Show in Hastings
THE Gallery at Hastings-on-Hudson is looking very good.
Its show, "The Printed Image," offers variety without slipping into no-fault pluralism, because the curator, Lester Kane, has as much of an eye for imagery as for the means by which it is produced.
Nevertheless, Mr.
Kane, who had Kris Philipps, professor of printmaking at Sarah Lawrence College, as a consultant, provides a glossary of technical terms where, in effect, he takes issue with those who confuse monoprints with monotypes (and who may be related to the crowd that says parameters when it means perimeter).


Pamela Nolan, John Little Jr.
Pamela Ellen Nolan, the daughter of Gerard J. and June Nolan of Forest Hills, Queens, was married yesterday in New York to John Bertram Little Jr., a son of Drs.
John and Francoise C. Little of Brookline, Mass.
Msgr.
George Bardes performed the ceremony at the Convent of the Sacred Heart.
Mrs.
Little, 29 years old, graduated from Boston University.
She is the publicity coordinator at Bergdorf Goodman in New York.
Her parents own Parkington Associates Ltd., an insurance brokerage in New York.


Salzburg Tickets
To the Editor: Since some of Cross-Culture's special-interest travel programs include tickets to Salzburg International Music Festival concerts, we were particularly interested to read John Rockwell's comment on the new festival director, Gerard Mortier ("A Season to Salute Rossini's 200th," March 8).
We, in turn, salute Mr.
Rockwell's sounding of the alarm with his aside that Mortier may "threaten" the festival with his penchant for avant-garde artistic works.
Although most music lovers who flock to Salzburg each summer don't expect to hear only Mozart, they do expect most concert programs to include pre-20th century compositions.
In contrast, this year's festival includes works by Wyspianski, Janacek (many), Messiaen, Boulez, Varese, Webern, Stravinsky, Schoenberg, Berg and Bartok.
Mr.
Mortier may be bored by Mozart and his contemporaries, but those who travel to envelop themselves in the Baroque atmosphere of Mozart's city and his music will be quite surprised, as they open their concert programs.


Jennifer McLane, Brian Hinchliffe
Jennifer Hopkins McLane, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas L. McLane of New Canaan, Conn., was married yesterday in Newport, R.I., to Brian William Hinchliffe, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard W. Hinchliffe of Charleston, R.I.
The Rev.
David Stoddard performed the Episcopal ceremony at the St.
George's School Chapel.
Mrs.
Hinchliffe, 27 years old, is a professional folk singer.
She graduated from Ohio Weslyan University.
Her father is a managing director of Russell Reynolds Associates, an executive search firm in New York.


THE ROAD TO RIO: Setting an Agenda for the Earth; In Rwanda, Births Increase and the Problems Do, Too
For seven years Vestine Mukamunana has been battling, largely unsuccessfully, to encourage family planning among the impoverished peasants around her health center in Rwanda, Africa's most densely populated nation.
Of the many obstacles she faces, she says, the greatest is the opposition of men.
Even more than in most African cultures, men are supreme in Rwanda, where women toil at most of the agricultural jobs.
More than half of the women remain illiterate, and the fertility rate is the highest in the world.


Fear of Stumbling
People go to museums for all sorts of reasons.
Several lesser ones are suggested in this excerpt from Jay McInerney's new novel "Brightness Falls.
"The Whitney Biennial is a periodic attempt to irritate everyone in the art world and confuse those outside of it," Victor Propp announced to Juan Baptiste -- hoping to be quoted, the two of them swaying like buoys as the crowd surged around them in the museum lobby.


Correction
An article on March 15 about the lifetime risk of developing breast cancer misstated the upper age limit used in current calculations by the American Cancer Society.
The society says a woman has a 1 in 9 chance of developing breast cancer by age 85.
It earlier used the age of 110 as the upper limit, with a cumulative risk factor of 1 in 10.
The society wrote to point out the error immediately after the article appeared, but its letter did not reach the editors; it has recently sent another copy.


Additional Services For Alzheimer's Cases
"Families Share Burden in Alzheimer's Disease Care"  [ May 17 ]  focused much-needed attention on a devastating illness that takes an enormous toll on both victim and caregiver.
However, the article offered no information on resources to help family members cope with their overwhelming responsibilities.
The Parker Institute has a Respite Center open seven days a week, 12 hours a day, that provides flexible "drop-in" service, so that families can arrange care when needed.
We are an invaluable resource.
For remember, families of Alzheimer's patients are seldom in a position to make choices.
They just can't accept a wedding invitation or make a date to go to the movies.
They must first arrange care for their relative who, as a typical Alzheimer's victim, can no longer function independently.


Abroad at Home; . . . But in Ourselves
The Federal budget deficit is now up to $400 billion a year, and effectively out of control.
Practically everyone in Washington says that is a terrible thing, damaging to the economy, unfair to our children.
But no one does anything about it.
Why?
Well think about the following small story.
In the 1990 budget agreement between Congress and the President, one small item called for Coast Guard "user fees" on recreational boats.
The bill that was passed exempted boats up to 18 feet long.
The owners of larger boats paid fees on a sliding scale up to $100 a year for the largest.


Roger Gilman, 77, Who Planned Major Projects for Port Authority
Roger H. Gilman, a retired top official of the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey who was in charge of planning many of that agency's major projects, died on Thursday at the Muhlenberg Regional Medical Center in Plainfield, N.J.
He was 77 years old and lived in Edison.
He died of kidney failure, his family said.


In the Region: New Jersey; Recent Sales
Basking Ridge 727,500
265 Douglas Road
4-bedroom, 4 1/2-bath, 9-year-old colonial; 3-car garage, pool, cathedral ceilings, skylights; taxes $10,652.
Bernardsville 545,000
80 Roebing Road
6-bedroom, 4 1/2-bath, 35-year-old ranch; maid's quarters, barn, eat-in-kitchen; taxes $12,109.
Edison 120,000
110Jefferson Avenue
3-bedroom, 1-bath, 40-year-old Cape Cod; full basement, 2-car garage, maintenance-free exterior; taxes $2,199.
Freehold Township 260,900
27 Majestic Drive
4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, new colonial; fireplace, eat-in- kitchen, full basement; taxes $6,078.
Lakewood 110,000
1120 Robin Drive
4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 8-year-old bi-level; fenced yard, c/a, 2-car garage; taxes $2,522.
Toms River 110,000
349 Hilltop Road
4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 24-year-old bi-level; fireplace, fenced yard, c/a; taxes $2,469.
OTHER AREAS Mount Kisco, N.Y. 565,000
12 Kitchel Road
4-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 37-year-old colonial; 2 fireplaces, formal dining room, library, family room, playroom, 1.2 acres; taxes $9,779.
Stamford, Conn. 190,000
70 Tremont Avenue  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 48-year-old Cape Cod; large eat-in kitchen with pantry, secluded and fenced-in yard, 0.25 acre; taxes $2,346.
East Meadow, L.I. 185,000
2747 Woods Avenue  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 9-year-old high ranch; dining room, eat-in kitchen, family room, 1-car garage; taxes $5,200.


Heather Short, Mark McDonnell
Heather Lynn Short, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Jack E. Short of Xenia, Ohio, was married yesterday in New York to Mark Dewar McDonnell, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
James F. McDonnell of Grosse Pointe, Mich.
The Rev.
Stan Moseley performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Thomas More Church.
Mrs.
McDonnell, 29 years old, graduated from Vanderbilt University.
She is the corporate secretary of Osborn Communications, a media company in New York.
Her father is a principal of Kelly-Creswell Company, a manufacturer of road-striping equipment in Xenia.


Track &amp; Field; Reynolds Turned Back at the Start
If world-record holder Butch Reynolds had competed here today, Dan vs.
Dave may not have been settled in Barcelona, Spain.
The International Amateur Athletic Federation, which maintains that Reynolds tested positive for steroids in 1990, made what some considered an incorrigible threat today.


Joanna Romano and Joe Restuccia
JOE RESTUCCIA proposed to Joanna Romano in the parking lot of Kennedy International Airport.
That was his idea of a romantic, quiet, out-of-the-way spot.
Both Ms.
Romano, 37 years old, and Mr.
Restuccia, 35, are leading activists for the preservation and rehabilitation of tenement buildings in Clinton (a k a Hell's Kitchen).
He's the director of the Clinton Housing Development Company; she's a social worker at Fountain House, a rehabilitation center for the mentally ill.
They met 10 years ago in what Mr.
Restuccia remembered as a "noisy, raucous" community meeting.


Sanderson Puts 26th Feather in His Cap
After 14 seasons pitching for five teams, Scott Sanderson had a simple task before him tonight to reach an impressive plateau.
Hold an 8-0 lead over the Brewers and become only the ninth pitcher in major league history to defeat all 26 teams.
Though huge leads have recently been meaningless when the Yankees and Brewers tangle, Sanderson was almost flawless as he yielded five hits and one run in seven innings.
His second victory in nine starts paced the Yankees to an 8-1 victory at County Stadium and allowed him to join a group whose assets were longevity, mobility and winning.


Dr. Janice M. Downey, Dr. Glen D. Seidman
Dr.
Janice Marie Downey, a daughter of Richard R. Downey and a stepdaughter of Mary Ann Serra of Cambridge, Mass., was married Monday to Dr.
Glen David Seidman, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Norman Seidman of Lancaster, Pa.
Rabbi Bernard Mehlman officiated at the Ritz Carlton in Boston.
The bride, 32 years old, graduated magna cum laude from Northeastern University and received her M.D. degree from Boston University.
Her husband, 29, graduated magna cum laude from Boston University, where he also received his M.D. degree.
She is to begin an internship at the Graduate Hospital, and he is to begin a fellowship in hand surgery at the Hospital of the University of Pennsylvania, both in Philadelphia, this summer.


Romp and Circumstance
Toasts to leaders, endings and beginnings.
The not-so-lonely celebrate 'For Love Alone.'


Teen-Agers on Center Court, Fathers on Center Stage
Each is the apple of her father's eye, a reflection of his dedication and devotion, a monument to his belief that he has made all the right moves, pulled all the right strings and created a one-woman tennis dynasty.
Stefano Capriati, father of 16-year-old Jennifer, and Jim Pierce, father of 17-year-old Mary, are their daughters' perennial coaches and unofficial shadows.
They carry the racquets, broker the million-dollar deals, worry about the rankings and don't always remember that the youngsters they have groomed for greatness might have teen-age agendas of their own.


Jennifer Carlson, B. H. Jaruzelski
Jennifer Anne Carlson, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Dean L. Carlson of Westfield, N.J., was married there yesterday to Barratt Heywood Jaruzelski, the son of Dr.
John J. Jaruzelski of Westfield and the late Katharine H. Jaruzelski.
The Rev.
Dr.
John Wightman performed the ceremony at the First Congregational Church.
Mrs.
Jaruzelski, 31 years old, graduated from the University of Michigan.
She is the director of public relations at the New-York Historical Society.
Her father is a surgeon in Westfield.


Head of the Class
THE phone rang.
The bicoastal King of the Blonds was calling from California, Land of the Blonds.
"Hi," he said, "I'm out in the new store." Only Louis Licari would refer to his chic little hair coloring outpost in the heart of Beverly Hills as a store.
The word is
salon,
Louis.
Only Louis Licari, so far as anyone knows, has ever gotten a movie credit for hair color.
The first time he watches one of the movies he has worked on nothing registers for him on the big screen but magnified heads of hair.
Those heads loom as large as haystacks.


MAY 24-30: Tax Appeal; States Must Wait to Get In On Catalogue Boom
To tens of millions of American consumers who order by mail every year, the few dollars of state sales tax saved on a purchase simply add to the appeal of catalogue shopping.
To fiscally starved states, the customers' modest benefit translates into a maddening $3-billion-a-year loss of revenue, kept out of reach by a 1967 Supreme Court decision that prohibited states from imposing taxes on sales by out-of-state companies. with no physical presence within a state's borders.
Last week, the Justices revisited that ruling and readjusted it a bit.
But to the states' intense disappointment and the catalogue marketers' relief, the decision in Quill Corporation v.
North Dakota kept the pot of gold just beyond reach.


Making a Difference; The Airline Industry's Latest Catalyst for Chaos
On one of the walls in John H. Dasburg's headquarters office at Northwest Airlines in St.
Paul hangs a multicolored, abstract painting of a jet aircraft.
When asked by a local journalist if the painting in any way symbolized the airline industry, Mr.
Dasburg replied, "Yeah, chaos."
That was 16 months ago, two months after Mr.
Dasburg was appointed president and chief executive of Northwest, the nation's fourth-largest carrier, behind American, United and Delta.
The industry remains chaotic, having lost $6.5 billion in the last 18 months, according to the Air Transport Association.
But a semblance of order followed the carriers' adoption last month of the simplified fare structure devised by American Airlines, a structure that basically eliminated all but four fares.


Pact Extension Keeps Grunfeld With Knicks
Ernie Grunfeld wanted to stay with the Knicks, and the Knicks wanted to keep him.
Both sides got their wish.
The Knicks announced yesterday that Grunfeld, their vice president of player personnel, had agreed to a three-year contract extension that placed him under contract with New York for the next five years.
The extension will reportedly raise Grunfeld's average salary to $500,000 a season.


MAY 24-30: Omnia Reichmannia; Only the American Third of the Empire Is Untouched
Like Gaul, the world's largest real estate empire was divided into three parts: Canada, the United States and London's Canary Wharf.
The Reichmann Brothers' desperate efforts to hold their pieces together suffered a possible fatal blow last week when their $3.5 billion London project was declared insolvent and surrendered to court-appointed administrators.
With their Canadian properties operating under court protection for the last two weeks, two-thirds of their privately owned Olympia &amp; York Developments Ltd. is now under water.
Although the British government insists it's not bailing anyone out, it may well decide in the next few weeks to shift several thousand civil servants to Canary Wharf's stunning complex of white office towers, joining such companies as Texaco and American Express.
Outside buyers could also ease the pressure.
London newspapers report that a Hong Kong billionaire, Li Ka-shing, a partner of the Reichmanns in a Manhattan tower at 60 Broad Street, is sniffing around Canary Wharf.


Did Insurers Abandon the Inner City?
As the rioting ebbed here, Kibok Yoo stared into the cave-like ruin that once had been her liquor store.
Melted electrical cables hung like tendrils from a blackened ceiling.
A lifetime's savings lay in heaps of ash and shattered glass.
The rioters had destroyed the business that provided Ms.
Yoo with $6,000 a month in income and the promise of delivering her 3-year-old son into a comfortable life in middle-class America.
But the greatest trauma to Ms.
Yoo came in the news from her insurance agent: Her $280,000 insurance policy, it turned out, was written by a tiny, unlicensed company in the Caribbean.
Like hundreds of other inner-city merchants, she had unknowingly bought from a gray market of policies sold widely in poor areas.
She was shocked to hear that she might have to wait months or years to get money on her claim, if she gets it at all.


Young People Face Toughest Summer To Find Jobs
INGRID TOMITZ, 18 years old, and her brother Rich, 20, students at the State University at Binghamton, returned home to Roslyn and began looking for full-time summer jobs.
Their efforts have been futile, Miss Tomitz said.
Last summer, she worked at the Gap in Manhasset, but when the store cut her weekly hours to 12, she realized that she had to look elsewhere.


Slavery's Traces
To the Editor: My daughter and I recently visited Shirley and Berkeley Plantations on the James River, described in your article ("Their Old Virginia Homes," March 22).
To our great surprise, neither the guided tours nor the brochures mentioned an extremely significant element in the life and history of the plantations -- the slaves.


Andre Watts to Perform with Chamber Music Plus
ANDRE WATTS'S first Hartford appearance in nearly 10 years will be tonight's benefit recital for Chamber Music Plus at 7:30 in Christ Church Cathedral.
The pianist will join Sanda Schuldmann in four-hand works of Schubert and Brahms, and Harry Clark for Samuel Barber's Sonata and Schumann's "Fantasy Pieces," then conclude the gala with solo performances of two Preludes by Ravel, three pieces by Schubert and four Etudes by Chopin (232-0085).
Another opportunity to enjoy chamber music in a variety of tonal configurations arrives at 7 tonight.
After Victoria Drake demonstrates the harp at a "pre-concert conversation" for the Chamber Music Society of Westport at Artur Holde Hall in the Westport Arts Center, she will join other artists and guests of the society in Debussy's Sonata for Flute, Viola and Harp and a movement from Saint-Saens' Harp and Bassoon Sonata.
The program also includes songs of Poulenc and Faure, a Devienne Quartet for Bassoon and Strings, and Franck's Violin and Piano Sonata; among other participating artists are Maria Lambros Kannen, Richard Lalli, Michael Kannen and the ensemble's director, Jeffrey Jamner (661-4667).


In Your Face
Basketball, the game that brought the general language
one-on-one, tossup
and
full-court press
, has done it again.
In a single recent issue of The New Yorker, one film critic described a movie as "the worst kind of
in-your-face
farce"; another hailed actor Al Pacino for his "persuasive portrait of a pesky,
in-your-face
romantic" in the movie "Frankie and Johnny," and John Updike, in a review of two novels, praised the "slangy,
in-your-face
prose styles" in which the narrators -- both white women in Africa -- discussed their bowel movements "with a frankness new to romantic heroines."


Where the Ground Thundered
TRAVELERS in dinosaur country are forever being reminded of the impermanence of the land and of life.
Nothing there now is as it was.
Nearly everywhere dinosaur hunters have had their best luck, especially in the Gobi Desert of China and Mongolia and the canyonlands of the North American West, the landscape is a scene of epic devastation.
The lush terrain where the great reptiles thrived millions of years ago came to be buried by successive layers of soil and rock, preserving the remains of vanished life.
Then the relentless forces of erosion carved through the overlying sediments, down to the time of the dinosaurs whose fossils scientists are increasingly able to read as an archive of prehistory.


Corrections
An article on May 10 about artist-owned record companies referred incorrectly to Pangea, a partnership between Sting and his manager.
It is still in business.


SOUPED-UP SCHOLAR
It was felicitous of you to symbolize the position of the politically correct Professor Fish by highlighting his preference for Jaguars and his disdain for Volvos.


Talking: Relocation; Companies Cutting Benefits
IN the heady days of the 70's and 80's, corporate employees could rely on their companies to pick up virtually all the expenses of a transfer to a different community.
Today, transferees will find a somewhat frayed welcome mat at their relocation department door as recession and business cost-cutting pare traditional expectations.
Increasingly, employees are being asked to bear some relocation costs themselves -- a change that will force many to take a more active role in the move.


Splashy School Venture Creates Lots of Ripples
Christopher Whittle stunned the academic and business worlds last week when he lured Benno C. Schmidt Jr. away from the presidency of Yale University to help create a nationwide network of for-profit private schools.
Now Mr.
Whittle and his team face a task that has daunted some of the best educators of our times: how to pull together the innovative ideas he has culled from others and make them work in one school system.
The publicity blitz may have cloaked the fact that Mr.
Whittle and Mr.
Schmidt do not yet have a blueprint for their schools.
But even the sketchy ideas they have outlined so far raise intriguing questions.


Phillip Turino And Eliza Foss
Eliza Foss, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Lukas Foss of New York, was married yesterday to Phillip Gerard Turino, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Gerard M. Turino of New York.
The Very Rev.
James P. Morton, Dean of the Cathedral of St.
John the Divine, performed the Episcopal ceremony at the Retreat House of the Redeemer in New York.
Mrs.
Turino is an actress in New York.
She graduated from Vassar College and received a master's degree in theater from New York University.
Her father is the composer, conductor and pianist.
Her mother, Cornelia Brendel Foss, is an artist.


Clashes in Nigeria Show the Shakiness of Its Balancing Act
A year ago this was a country stirring with hope.
After seven years of military rule, Nigeria, black Africa's wealthiest, most populous state, seemed on the verge of a peaceful return to civilian, democratic government.
At a pace that astonished people here, Gen.
Ibrahim Babangida, Nigeria's military leader, appeared to have brought a semblance of stability to a country long riven by a mix of ethnic grievances and ancient vendettas.
He had done so, moreover, without sacrificing the military's tight grip on the levers of political and economic power.
An outbreak of killing last week showed the shakiness of this balance.
The initial spark was a dispute over land among neighbors in northern Kaduna state, not long-simmering religious or ethnic rivalries.
But soon those larger issues erupted, culminating in two days of carnage in which hundreds were killed.


Digging Into the Cretaceous Period
McCONE COUNTY, Montana, a treeless, gently rolling prairieland, is sometimes called the dinosaur capital of the world.
This is not because more dinosaurs lived in this part of southeastern Montana than anywhere else, but, rather, because geological circumstances favoring fossilization, then erosion, enable paleontologists to find dinosaurs there.
In 1910 the first skeleton of a Tyrannosaurus rex was uncovered in the dramatically eroded badlands that punctuate the landscape, and since then most of the T. Rex reconstructions in museums around the world have been pieced together with material from this area.
In 1965, in another set of badlands, two scientists discovered a site yielding the world's richest deposit of fossils from the Cretaceous period; 25 years later, that site -- the Bug Creek Ant Hills -- continues to provide material with which scientists shed light on life and death in those times.


Paying the Cost of Pollution Cleanup
To the Editor:
As chief legal officer of a company that generates waste in the manufacture of its products, I take strong issue with several letters on May 17 from lawyers in response to "Why Insurance Companies Say No."


Digging Deeper in the Search for Talent
A scaled-down, high school version of the famed college "meat market," in which National Football League hopefuls are prodded and tested, came to New York for the first time yesterday.
It was in a modest setting -- August Martin High School on Baisley Boulevard in Jamaica, Queens -- with half a dozen spectators on hand.
About 150 young men ran backward, lifted weights, dashed 40 yards and jumped as high as they could.
For some, their dreams were in sight.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Challenger; Losing, Buchanan Says He's Winning
The other day in Ridgewood, N.J., Patrick J. Buchanan, Presidential candidate and sometime jogger, put on his sneakers and took part in a one-mile "fun run." He started last, and he finished last.
In a sense, the foot race might be considered symbolic of Mr.
Buchanan's quest to snatch the Republican Presidential nomination from George Bush.


Penguins Can Get Their Brooms Ready
Bearing down on a second consecutive Stanley Cup championship, the Pittsburgh Penguins defeated the Chicago Blackhawks, 1-0, tonight to take a 3-0 lead in the four-of-seven-game final round of the National Hockey League playoffs.
The victory extended the Penguins' winning streak in the playoffs to 10 games, one short of the league record that was set earlier in the tournament by the Blackhawks.


Material Girl Goes Shopping
Madonna, who recently signed a $60 million recording and production deal with Time Warner, has gone shopping.
The singer has recently purchased a house near Coconut Grove in Miami and a second apartment in Manhattan.
She already has a house in Los Angeles but had been looking for a new one with tighter security.


How Pleasant It Is To Have Money
Back in the high-flying 1980's, GQ magazine handed Peter Mayle a dream assignment: "Go forth and mingle with the wealthy. Do as they do, providing you obtain clearance from the Accounts Department first, and report back." Mr.
Mayle, the author of "A Year in Provence" and "Toujours Provence," needed no further prodding, as ACQUIRED TASTES (229 pp., Bantam, $20) makes clear.
His credit card smoking with constant use, he filed monthly columns on the pleasures of buying a pair of $1,300 "hand-cut, hand-stitched, hand-built shoes" in London; a $350 custom-made shirt at Charvet in Paris; and hand-tailored suits at Douglas Hayward of Mayfair.
On the gustatory side, he explained to his readers the fine points of caviar, cigars, truffles, foie gras, Champagne and malt whisky, and reminisced about his favorite Paris bistro.
Mr.
Mayle is a writer who never fails to entertain.
If he were told to go forth and write about doorknobs, he would return with a witty, perceptive essay in hand.
Nevertheless, a few of the chapters in "Acquired Tastes" show evidence that the author had to strain a bit to fill out the required space.
"The Most Costly Passion of All," an essay on keeping a mistress, does not quite manage to rise above the piggishness of the concept, and the chapter on houseguests will sound very familiar to readers of "A Year in Provence." But Mr.
Mayle achieves a high batting average, passing on his unfeigned pleasure in the good life, whether it's "bespoke potato chips" at the Connaught Hotel in London or "the ultimate refinement," taking your stretch limo "for a walk." In the book's penultimate chapter, Mr.
Mayle offers a tribute to New York, a city that taps directly into the "lust for more and better" that inspired "Acquired Tastes." As the skyline of Manhattan beckons, he writes, "my credit cards tremble with anticipation."


New Yorkers As 'Greeters'
New Yorkers are invited to participate in a grass-roots effort to boost a major New York industry, tourism, by becoming part of a network of volunteers to help visitors feel more welcome.
The "Big Apple Greeter" program started this month by Ruth W. Messinger, the Manhattan Borough President, pairs volunteers with out-of-towners.


Where Have Hitters Gone?
To the Sports Editor:
If you want to know more about the quality of major league baseball in 1992, reflect on the fact that on May 21 there were 13 games played.
In those 13 games, 51 players appeared who had batting averages under .200.
These numbers do not include pitchers or a few whose batting averages were .000 who I charitably assume had not been to bat so far this season.


Gay Film Festival: Life and Life Style, Wit and Humor
REFRESHING alternatives to stereotypical images of homosexual men and women can be seen in the Gay and Lesbian Film Festival that begins this Friday in Hartford.
This year's festival -- at Cinestudio on the Trinity College campus and sponsored by Alternatives, a gay and lesbian cultural organization -- does not feature movies with big-name actors or glossy production values.
But it does offer films that illustrate that "sexuality is only one part of us," said the chairwoman of Alternatives, Terri Reid.
The festival, which has drawn an average attendance of 1,000 people each year since its opening in 1988, has shown some exceptional avant-garde movies.
And in 1988 Alternatives was the first organization to screen all nine short films (total running time: 153 minutes) in Kenneth Anger's Magick Lantern Cycle, including "Fireworks" and "Scorpio Rising."


Christianna Kotsonis, Christopher Long
Christianna Georgienne Kotsonis, a daughter of George and Penelope Kotsonis of New York, was married Friday to Christopher John Long, the son of Jay N. and Maria Long of New York.
The Rev.
Robert Stephanopoulos officiated at the Greek Orthodox Archdiocesan Cathedral of the Holy Trinity.
Mrs.
Long, a teacher at the Park Avenue Christian Church Day School, graduated from Wellesley College and received an M.A. in education from Columbia.
Mr.
Long, a portfolio manager at the investment firm of Fischer, Francis, Trees &amp; Watts in New York, graduated and received an M.B.A. from N.Y.U.


Making Connections Via Squares and Curves
What do designs by Frank Lloyd Wright and Andre Courreges have in common?
"Grids," said J. Stewart Johnson, the consultant for 20th-century design and architecture to the Metropolitan Museum of Art.
Indeed, Wright used a grid of squares for the pierced back of a 1904 office chair, and Courreges chose a larger-scaled grid for a 1965 jacket-dress.
Although the similarity between these networks of squares have gone largely unnoticed, it's impossible to miss when one sees the chair and dress placed side by side in the exhibition "Modern Design, 1890-1990," on display at the museum through Oct. 25.


Corrections
A Summer Arts listing for a concert series in July at the Dominican College in San Rafael, Calif., misstated the telephone number.
It is (415) 456-2328.


Why Levi's Don't Fit Scouts
WHEN Levi Strauss &amp; Company decided this month to end its financial support of the Boy Scouts of America, which refuses to admit gay Scoutmasters and gay Scouts to the ranks of the thrifty, brave and clean, the jeans maker sent a strong message.
The amount of money involved -- $40,000 to $80,000 a year -- was not really significant.
But the basis for the decision was.


The Velvet Revolution Gets Rough
Dr.
Milan Kuta draws nervously on a cigarette, describing with some bewilderment how, for him, Czechoslovakia's Velvet Revolution suddenly turned vindictive, costing him his job and his professional reputation.
It began seven years ago, in what struck him as a stroke of great fortune.
Dr.
Kuta was picked to head a newly formed oncology center in Chomutov, an industrial town that suffers Czechoslovakia's highest rate of lung cancer.
Physicians hardly flock to this grim region, but Dr.
Kuta, a soft-spoken man with a neatly trimmed mustache, jumped at the chance to escape the bureaucracy and do things more or less his own way.


Brenda Pressley, Douglas Purviance
Brenda Denise Pressley, an actress, and Douglas Purviance, a musician, both in New York, were married in New York yesterday at Metropolitan Duane United Methodist Church.
The Rev.
Takayuki Ishii officiated.
Mrs.
Purviance's recent credits include ABC-TV's "Brewster Place" and the Off Broadway revue "And the World Goes 'Round." She graduated from the University of South Carolina.
She is the daughter of Arzelle C. Pressley of Columbia, S.C., and the late Bowen W. Pressley.
Her father was the assistant superintendent of the John G. Richards School for Boys in Columbia.
Her mother owns Arzelle's Fashions, a women's clothing boutique in Columbia.


Photomontage: A Metaphor for Modern Life
In the 1920's, artists decided that photomontage, which had been keeping inferior company, should be inducted into the ranks of art.
Back in the 19th century, ladies had idly cut figures out of photographs and made them straggle across album pages.
Turn-of-the-century photographers had cobbled together postcard pictures of things like railroad cars straining to carry apples as big as Moby Dick.
But after World War I, artists realized that montage could picture the increasingly fragmented, discontinuous, rapidly shifting nature of modern life; what's more, it could teach photographs to communicate complex ideas.
Dadaists were then seeking a way to imitate the world's chaos and scald the bourgeoisie with images from its own media; Russian artists needed an agitprop that could be understood by a largely illiterate populace.
The polymorphous and promiscuous form of photomontage quickly proved adaptable to every social situation.
It was as apt for the creation of a new art as for advertisements, as well suited to praising Stalin as to attacking Hitler.


For One New York Senator, Redistricting Plan Is a Mix of Good and Bad
For Ralph J. Marino, leader of the Republican majority in the New York State Senate, the Congressional redistricting plan submitted last week to a Federal court is a classic mix of bad news and good news.
The bad news is that two incumbent Republican Congressmen from his home county of Nassau -- Norman F. Lent and Raymond J. McGrath -- were thrown into the same district.
"I don't like seeing two of my friends who are great Congressmen put together," Mr.
Marino said.


Haiti's Junta Leader Talks of 'Right Path' Despite Signs of Upheaval in Army
Surrounded by seven of the highest-ranking officers of his staff, Brig.
Gen.
Raoul Cedras, leader of the coup that overthrew the Haitian Government in September, declares himself satisfied.
"We are on the right path," General Cedras, the commander of the Haitian Army, said in an interview Thursday, smiling faintly.
"We are on the verge of applying an agreement between all the parties here. As soon as this accord is formalized, we will have a consensus government that will be acceptable for everyone concerned, including the international community."


Jane Smith, Bart Capeci
Jane Sarah Smith, a tax accountant at Arthur Andersen in London, and Nicholas Bartholomew Capeci, an associate in the New York law firm of Simpson Thacher &amp; Bartlett, were married in England yesterday.
The Rev.
Gordon Benfield performed the Anglican ceremony in St.
Peter's Church in Barford, Warwickshire.
Ms.
Smith, who is 28 years old and is keeping her name, graduated from Oxford University, where she received a master's degree in geography.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Graham W. Smith of Shipston-on-Stour, Warwickshire, where her father is an optometrist.
Her mother, E. Ann Smith, is a physiotherapist in Leamington Spa, Warwickshire.


Majors Is Hospitalized
JOHNNY MAJORS, Tennessee's football coach, was listed in good condition yesterday after undergoing angioplasty at Baptist Hospital-East in Memphis to relieve chest pains, a hospital spokesman said.
Majors, 57 years old, did not have a heart attack, the hospital said. (AP)


April (and May) Showers Prolong Flowers
THIS has been an unusually damp and cold spring.
Some blooms have lingered, while others have taken their time appearing.
In the middle of May there were still a few forsythia blossoms to join the usual tulips.
Pieris flowers hung on, too, but the showier early rhododendrons took their time opening.
For gardeners this coolness means a rather spectacular spring.
Blossoms that usually do not go together have joined forces, while others are yet to come.
And the spring rains have helped to keep things growing along at a steady pace as any gardener will attest.
The grass has been spectacular and fast growing.


New Mongols, Same Horses
IN SEARCH OF GENGHIS KHAN
By Tim Severin. Photographs by Paul Harris. 241 pp. New York: Atheneum. $25.


Two Likely Opponents Add Double Intrigue
It is the championship showdown that many people expected.
The Chicago Bulls and the Portland Trail Blazers were the top teams in their conferences during the National Basketball Association regular season.
And now, they will meet in the N.B.A. finals, a four-of-seven-game showcase that should be exciting and intriguing.
Think of the individual matchups: Michael Jordan vs.
Clyde Drexler, Scottie Pippen vs.
Jerome Kersey, Horace Grant vs.
Buck Williams.
Think of the contrast in styles: Portland's fastbreaking, up-tempo offense vs.
Chicago's switching, trapping, suffocating defense.


Does 'Murphy Brown' Reflect Our Norms, or Set Them?; This Father's Day
To the Editor:
Vice President Quayle would no doubt characterize me, along with Murphy Brown, as an "intelligent, highly paid, professional woman" (news article, May 20).
I am a lawyer and also the single mother by choice of two sons, ages 11 and 7.


A Century of Camps
Few words can have as broad a meaning as "camp," when it refers to a structure in the Adirondacks.
In this context, it can be a lavish estate or a one-room hunting shelter, 100 years old or brand-new.
But, more than anything, a camp is a state of mind: the always-too-brief enjoyment of the wilderness with family and friends.
The ancestor of all Adirondack camps is the legendary "Philosopher's Camp" of 1858.
In that summer, Ralph Waldo Emerson and other Boston intellectuals set up tents at Follensby Pond in the central Adirondacks.
They spent their time not only reading, writing and painting, but also fishing and hunting (Longfellow declined to join them when he heard Emerson was bringing a gun).
Thus, the novel idea of sophisticated city people choosing a simple vacation in the woods was born.


The Captain Was the Last to Know
THE TRUELOVE
By Patrick O'Brian. 256 pp. New York:  W.W. Norton &amp; Company. $19.95.


As Marxism Fails, Ho Chi Minh City Becomes More Like a Saigon Redux
A big red sign on a bustling central square exhorts citizens to work to make the former Saigon worthy of the name it was given when the Communists conquered it in 1975.
Underneath, as if in mockery of Ho Chi Minh, the founder of Vietnamese Communism, an even bigger sign plugs a Japanese brand of cameras.
All around the square, and throughout the center of this city of 4.5 million people, signs trumpet the names of consumer products of the non-Communist East and West.


Alicia Batty, William Batts Jr.
Dr.
Constance J. Batty of Upper Brookville, N.Y., has announced the engagement of her daughter Alicia Joyce Batty to William Batts Jr., a son of Mr.
Batts of Chicago and Lee A. Batts of San Antonio.
A September wedding is planned.
Miss Batty, 26 years old, is also a daughter of the late Beauford R. Batty.
An associate at the New York law firm of Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher &amp; Flom, she graduated from Harvard University and received her J.D. degree from Columbia University.
Her father was a visiting professor of education at the State University of New York College at Old Westbury and was a member of the New York Governor's Advisory Committee on the Education and Consolidation Improvement Act, Chapter 2.
Her mother, an author and lecturer, is the acting vice president of student affairs at the SUNY College at Old Westbury.


Diner's Dilemma
"To travel hopefully is a better thing than to arrive," observed Robert Louis Stevenson in "El Dorado." Of course, that was before interstate highways, station wagons full of monkeyshining kids and Formica purgatories known as rest areas.
It may be faster to reach your vacation destination today, but at least in Stevenson's day the scenic route was unhurried and you ate off real plates.
With the travel season coming on, vacationers are pondering where to escape to this year and, just as important, by what route.
A carful of ravenous children -- or adults for that matter -- is only slightly less distracting than a back seat full of Con Edison jackhammers.


Bush Says He Seeks Balance on the Environment
President Bush today defended his rejection of a treaty to protect biological species that will have broad support at the Earth Summit opening next week in Rio de Janeiro, saying he is "fighting for balance" between environmental needs and the health of the American economy.
"We cannot accept standards that are not based on the soundest of science," Mr.
Bush said.
"And we cannot shut down the lives of thousands of Americans by going to extremes" on environmental policy.


At Work; Should Fringe Benefits Be Taxed?
If Government reports were zeppelins, the skies over Washington would perpetually look like a turn-of-the century airshow.
Last month, the General Accounting Office quietly floated its own lighter-than-air craft, a baggage-crammed survey of the pros and cons of taxing employee benefits as income, and let it drift quietly onto the desks of various interested parties, most of whom cast a nervous glance toward the electorate and madly disavowed any knowledge of the report's provenance.
Little of "Tax Policy: Effects of Changing the Tax Treatment of Fringe Benefits," the G.A.O.'s report to the Congressional Joint Committee on Taxation, is original.
But it brings together data that had previously been reported by several agencies in different publications, and in doing that it provides a centralized document for Washington's tax policy experts to pore over.
"It put some of the details behind what we knew intuitively," said David Certner, a pension specialist at the American Association of Retired Persons.
"We knew benefits are expensive."


Amateur Draft Presents A Different Challenge
Tomorrow's draft of high school and college players could be the most confusing since baseball adopted the draft system in 1965.
Clubs will choose players under two different rules, one old, one new, and they will not necessarily draft the best players available when their turn arrives.
Clubs that choose players who have been selected in previous drafts will retain rights to those players until next year's draft.
Clubs that select players who never have been drafted will retain rights to them until one year after they leave college, creating a rights period of from two to five years for high school seniors.
The players association is challenging the latter rule, new this year, and an arbitration hearing is scheduled for next week.


Memory of a Fallen Officer
For police officers on the street, the strongest argument for letting them have semiautomatic weapons is the memory of a fellow officer who died while trying to reload his gun.
Officer Scott Gadell, armed with the standard six-shot revolver, was killed during a 1986 shootout in Queens by a man carrying a 9-millimeter gun that held more than a dozen bullets.


Students Plunge Into Crowded Labor Pool
As coordinator of the jobs programs for the City University of New York, Daniel E. Powers keeps students at the 17 campuses appraised of summer job openings.
These days, he does not have too much to do.
"In the late 80's, we would be under paper, with so many jobs coming in," he said recently.
"Last year I thought was the all-time low, but this is even lower. I've been here 15 years, and this is the worst I've seen it."


Excerpts From U.N. Resolution: 'Deny Permission'
Following are excerpts from Resolution 757, which was adopted today by the Security Council to impose sanctions on the Yugoslav Government: THE SECURITY COUNCIL,
NOTING that in the very complex context of events in the former Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia all parties bear some responsibility for the situation,


POSTINGS: Brightening the Lodge; A Masonic Emblem For the Ladies' Mile
The Masons are often thought to be a secret society.
But Robert C. Singer, grand secretary of the New York lodge, denies that, asserting that the 600-year-old fraternity really is "an international brotherhood with a few private ceremonies."
Now the lodge is preparing to call attention to itself in a big way.
It is seeking permission of the Landmarks Preservation Commission to put a 25-foot illuminated replica of the Masonic emblem high on the north facade of its annex on the northeast corner of 23d Street and the Avenue of the Americas.
The emblem will show a square and compass (depicting masonry) around a G (standing for God and geometry).


Congress Awaits Fallout on Bunker at a Resort Hotel
When it was reported this week that the Federal Government had a bunker at a luxury resort in West Virginia to which members of Congress would be evacuated in a nuclear war, the lawmakers had more to fear than the disclosure of a closely guarded national security secret.
There were fears of political fallout as well.
The existence of the bunker is reported in this Sunday's issue of The Washington Post Magazine, which was printed in advance; it was first disclosed in an article about that article in The Washington Times on Friday.
Leaders of both parties in Congress promptly issued a statement saying they had tried to persuade The Post not to publish the article and adding that "the effectiveness and security of the program would be jeopardized, if not terminated," by such a disclosure. 'Just Kind of Spastic'
But members of Congress, already acutely sensitive to criticism over check writing at the House bank and various other allegations of abuse of privilege, are now bracing for campaign-trail complaints that they intended to ride out an attack amid the five-star splendor of the Greenbrier, a 6,500-acre resort nestled in a valley in White Sulphur Springs, 250 miles southwest of Washington.


Holly Klingel, Stanley Barnes
Holly Elizabeth Klingel, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John D. Klingel of San Anselmo, Calif., was married yesterday to Stanley Adam Barnes, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Jarald A. Barnes of Hickman, Calif.
The Rev.
Richard Bain performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Anselm Church in Ross, Calif.
The bride, 26 years old, and the bridegroom, 27, graduated from California Polytechnic State University.
She is the circulation manger at GamePro Magazine in Redwood City, Calif.
Her father is the vice president of development for Time Publishing Ventures, a division of Time Warner in San Francisco.


For Sale: Contents Of a Life
AT 9 A.M. last Sunday, as punctually as a bank opening, a sign went up at the curb outside a white colonial-style house on Fox Meadow Road in Scarsdale: "Estate Sale Today."
"This isn't an estate," one woman said. "It's just a regular house."


Parcells Denies Racism
BILL PARCELLS said race did not enter into LANCE HAMILTON's not being hired as a New York Giants assistant coach.
The team's former head coach testified on Friday that Hamilton was not qualified for a coaching position.
Hamilton, a free-agent defensive back who was cut by Parcells in 1986, has accused the Giants of breach of contract and racial discrimination in a suit being heard in Hackensack, N.J., before state Superior Court Judge BENEDICT LUCCHI.


Corrections
A dance listing on May 17 in Summer Arts, section 2A, about the Jacob's Pillow festival in Massachusetts misstated the ticket price for the Studio/Theater.
It is $10.


Guns and Drugs: Neighborhoods Caught In the Crossfire
LAST month, while standing in his kitchen putting away his groceries, Joseph Lowery of New Haven said he heard a loud thump on his front porch.
Thinking that it might be his son, Keith, he opened the door.
Instead he found 19-year-old Antoine Wright, prone on the porch landing and breathing heavily.
"The boy looked up at me and said: "I've been shot and I'm dying," said Mr. Lowery, who lives in the Newhallville section of the city.
Moments earlier, Cliff Drye, a neighbor, was working on his car when he heard gunshots coming from a vacant lot nearby known as the Mudhole, a spot notorious for drug trafficking.
Then he saw the young man run toward Mr.
Lowery's house.


Jennifer Ware, Stephen Ellis
Jennifer Peyton Ware and Stephen Ellis were married yesterday at the Hitchcock Presbyterian Church in Scarsdale, N.Y., The Rev.
Dr.
Robert S. MacLennan officiated.
Mrs.
Ellis is the promotion director in New York for Variety.
She graduated from Ohio Wesleyan University and received a master's degree in journalism from Boston University.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John Peyton Ware of Scarsdale.
Her father retired as the industrial sales manager for the New York publishing house of John Wiley &amp; Sons.
He is a co-author of "A Cruising Guide to the New England Coast." Her maternal grandfather, the late Fessenden Seaver Blanchard, invented platform tennis.


Arson at Manhattan Bridge Shanties Leaves One Dead
The day after an arson fire tore through a lower Manhattan shantytown, killing an elderly man, residents seemed resigned to their vulnerable existence as they took up a collection to bury their neighbor and picked through his few papers for some clue to his family or friends.
The center of the shantytown, a tight cluster of about 15 plywood, cardboard and plastic homes and one tepee at the foot of the Manhattan Bridge, was a jumble of charred mattresses, paperbacks and clothing, smelling bitterly of ashes.
Residents said that, in all, six homes were consumed by the fire.
On the spot where the man died stood a white cross that residents planted Friday night.


Gun of Choice for Police Officers Runs Into Fierce Opposition
The sleek, semiautomatic gun that has emerged as the weapon of choice for the police in hundreds of cities across the country has run into fierce opposition from officials of New York and Chicago and raises broad questions about how heavily armed police officers should be.
The Glock 9-millimeter pistol, the gun favored by most departments that allow semiautomatic weapons, has a powerful emotional draw for street officers, who face the growing firepower of drug dealers and other criminals.
While the high-tech weapons may provide psychological comfort, some police and city officials in both Chicago and New York have resisted their use, saying the guns are more advanced than the average officer's ability to handle them and pose serious safety problems in crowded cities.


As American as Apple Pie, Dim Sum or Burritos
Henry Luce called it the American Century, but social observers in a future time may smile as they recall the grandiose sobriquet.
They will know how the word American was redefined by two surges of immigration, one ushering in the 20th century and another that is ushering it out.
Even national nicknames have lost their resonance.
What is a Yank?
Can one be found in San Antonio's barrios?
Was Kilroy here?
Or was it Nguyen?
These future observers will have the advantage of us.
Three or four censuses from now, they are likely to know what researchers are just beginning to explore: How the Mexicans, Koreans, Cubans, Filipinos, Hmong, Haitians, Jamaicans, Cambodians and Russian Jews fared after crossing to America.


Women Discover the Political Power Of Raising Money for Their Own
Only a year ago, Kathryn G. Thompson, a longtime Republican contributor from Orange County, Calif., was hobnobbing at an exclusive gathering for $100,000 donors to the Republican Party when she was approached by the then national chairman.
"Clayton Yeutter walked up to me and said, 'Who do you belong to, little lady?' " recalled Ms.
Thompson, who promptly decided not to renew her membership.


Dinner as Collaborative Art
Too many cooks spoil the broth, goes the saying.
And that might go double when the cooks in question are mother and daughter.
But Julia Robinson Hotton and her 25-year-old daughter, Tanya Hotton, have disproved this adage more than once, and on this late-summer Sunday, the sit-down dinner in preparation is only their latest successful collaboration.


How to Avoid Just Another Suburb With Palm Trees
A new type of town has sprung up along the Eastern seaboard, from southern Florida to Virginia: the planned community.
Planned communities are not real towns, of course, since they consist chiefly of second homes built by a single developer and are restricted to the seasonally mobile, but, like the spa towns of Bath or Marienbad, they nevertheless exhibit urban form.
Despite their evocative names -- they are inevitably Islands, Harbors, Clubs and Plantations -- planned communities are usually indiscriminate collections of rambling houses, set far apart on large lots, joined by miles of curving streets: suburbs with palm trees.
Windsor, in Vero Beach, is a closely watched project that is trying to break the suburban mold of the planned community.
Designed in 1989 and now under construction, Windsor lies between the Atlantic Ocean and the Indian River and provides the usual leisure facilities associated with planned communities: golf course, club house, tennis courts, riding trails, access to the beach.
What makes Windsor unusual is that, while the houses are large, the lots are small.
The typical Windsor lot is about one third the customary half acre, and most of the 300 lots on the 416-acre site are grouped close together, not scattered among the fairways.


BALANCE OF POWER
Jeff Giles's About Men column is the definitive essay on "Balance of Power" (April 26).
In it, he illustrates why no man should allow himself to support his wife -- no matter how much she favors the idea, no matter how many centuries this domestic pattern has existed, no matter how logical the economics of the arrangement may appear, no matter how good it makes him feel.


Watching the Fossil Finders at Work
LIKE sleuths armed with picks and brushes, paleontologists search for clues to the mysteries of the dinosaurs, hoping to find traces of long-distant epochs amid layers of sedimentary rock.
But these scientists' painstaking detective work is often little apparent once the animals' bones are neatly displayed in an urban museum far from where they were discovered.
At a number of excavations in the United States, fossil aficionados can watch paleontologists pull from the earth dinosaur bones untouched for tens of millions of years.
A few hours at an excavation may bring to life the swamps and the teeming forests of the Mesozoic era (from 225 million to 65 million years ago) as few exhibits can.


Stretches and Leaps Within Ballet Theater
The American Ballet Theater season, now at its midpoint at the Metropolitan Opera House, has had its controversies and its glamour.
But most significantly, in artistic terms, the level of dancing has been high, with new growth and standout performing from an impressive number of dancers.
Two such performers are Susan Jaffe and Cynthia Harvey, experienced ballerinas who have consolidated and transformed their considerable gifts.
Another is Parrish Maynard, a young virtuoso dancer who was named a soloist this year and seems to have nowhere to go but up.
Then there are Paloma Herrera and John Selya, who can take the smallest roles and turn them into jewels of classical dancing and dramatic characterization.


A Steam Train For Quebec
Starting June 27, visitors to Ottawa, the Canadian capital, will be able to board a steam train for a scenic ride along the west side of the Gatineau River between Hull, across the river from Ottawa, and Wakefield, 25 miles away.
The eight-car train, pulled by a 1914 engine built in Sweden, will travel at about 25 miles an hour through the forests and hills around this Quebec river, which served as a water route for lumber destined for paper mills in Hull from the early 19th century until last year.
The Choo-Choo Steam Train Company excursion is about 75 minutes each way, with an hourlong stopover in the village of Wakefield, where the 85-ton engine is turned around on a hand-powered turntable.
Each railroad car is equipped with bathrooms and seats 70 people.
Wakefield has a 1909 gristmill, craft shops and the Gatineau Historical Museum.


Who Wrote It? Your Getting Warmer
The impact of air-conditioning on literature is a subject that has too long been ignored.
In the pre-a.c. era, authors generally seem to have written more feelingly about high temperatures and hot summer days than they have in air-conditioned times.
Following are passages by 15 pre-a.c. writers.
You can find their names among the 25 listed below (10 of the authors on the list are included to confuse you).
Your job is to link each steamy passage with the name of its creator.
The answers are on page 30.
Select the 15 authors of the quotations from these 25 names: 1.
Jane Austen 2.
James Baldwin 3.
Albert Camus 4.
Willa Cather 5.
Samuel Taylor Coleridge 6.
Joseph Conrad 7.
Colette 8.
William Faulkner 9.
F.
Scott Fitzgerald 10.
Langston Hughes 11.
Zora Neale Hurston 12.
James Joyce 13.
John Keats 14.
D.
H.
Lawrence 15.
Thomas Mann 16.
John Milton 17.
Vladimir Nabokov 18.
Ogden Nash 19.
Cole Porter 20.
Williamc Shakespeare 21.
John Steinbeck 22.
Mark Twain 23.
Nathanael West 24.
Edith Wharton 25.
Virginia Woolf
A.
Sometime too hot the eye of heaven shines.
B.
The next day was broiling, almost the last, certainly the warmest, of the summer.
As my train emerged from the tunnel into sunlight, only the hot whistles of the National Biscuit Company broke the simmering hush at noon.
The straw seats of the car hovered on the edge of combustion; the woman next to me perspired delicately for a while into her white shirtwaist. . . .


Mary Bull, Peter Seterdahl
Mr. and Mrs.
David F. Bull of Greenwich, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter Mary Heffelfinger Bull to Peter Martin Seterdahl, the son of Leslie E. Seterdahl of Minneapolis and the late Elsie Syverson Seterdahl.
An August wedding is planned.
Ms.
Bull, 28 years old, graduated from Barnard College and received a master's degree in applied psychology from New York University.
Her father, who is retired, was a senior vice president of Nabisco Inc., in East Hanover, N.J.
Her mother, Anna Bull, also retired, was a social worker in Greenwich.


A Salary Plan For the Majors
To the Sports Editor:
After reading Joe Sexton's "Two Words Put Bonilla In Solitude: Strike 3!" (The Times, May 8) I began to wonder why some baseball players earn millions of dollars while others who also perform well earn significantly less.
As a result, I arrived at a solution which I am sure would provoke controversy.
It would also, however, afford each and every player an equal opportunity to increase his salary.


An Intermission at Yale: Women's Chorus Disbands
WHEN Yale University's senior a cappella singing groups concluded their commencement concert last Sunday, the curtain fell on a relatively young Yale tradition.
Whim 'n Rhythm, Yale's 11-year-old all-female group, will bow out for a one-year intermission, leaving the all-male Whiffenpoofs, who have helped to build college a cappella singing into a popular genre since their its founding 80 years ago, temporarily alone on the stage.
The current members of Whim 'n Rhythm announced this month that because of a dearth of auditions, they will not choose a successor group from the junior class as usual.
Instead, they will suspend the group for one year and audition current sophomores next spring for Whim 'n Rhythm of 1994.


Good, Bad, Ugly Of Youth Sports
To the Sports Editor:
What have youth sports come to mean when 5-year-olds are training five hours a day and a 10-year-old is whipped because he lost a tennis match ("Youth Sports: The Sins of the Tennis Parents," The Times, May 21).
The latter type of "discipline" is total garbage, and there is no place for it no matter how much ice cream a father buys for his children.
It was disturbingly ironic that an article about a Little League coach's throat being cut appeared on the same page.
Youth sports can teach and help bring about so many positive values for children, it is a shame that so many are so off base in the proper way to attain these goals.
All must be aware that children can learn everything through sports, both the good and the bad.
MICHAEL SMOLENS Kings Point, L.I.


Tyler L. Haaren and Daniel J. Moss
Tyler Louise Haaren, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Peter Haaren of Mount Holly, Vt., was married yesterday in Cummington, Mass., to Daniel Jay Moss, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Paul Moss of Hewlett, L.I.
The Rev.
Ed Rodman, an Episcopal priest, performed the ecumenical ceremony at the Cummington Community of the Arts.
Mrs.
Moss, 34 years old, is a clinical social worker at the Brighton-Allston Mental Health Clinic in Brighton, Mass.
She graduated from the University of New Hampshire and received a master's degree in social work from Boston University.
Her father is a financial consultant at Taylor Investments in New London, N.H.
Her mother, Sarah Haaren, is a nurse at the Rutland (Vt.) Hospital.


Goddess Sites and Nude Beaches: A Baedeker to the Guidebooks
Not that long ago, a guidebook was a pleasantly stodgy tome with enough basic information so you could pretend you'd actually been to the Louvre instead of lazing over a long lunch.
But pity the traveler who tries such shenanigans with the new breed of guidebook, which seems to take aimless leisure as a direct challenge.
Whatever your hobbies, your fantasies, your guilty resolutions, there's a travel guide (or two or three) to match them.
There's no excuse for missing a once-in-a-lifetime museum show if you've consulted Susan S. Rappaport's 1992 TRAVELER'S GUIDE TO ART MUSEUM EXHIBITIONS (illustrated, 238 pp., Museum Publications/Abrams, paper, $12.95), which lists exhibitions in the United States, Canada and Europe.
And Caroline O'Connell might say there's no excuse for ordering from room service if you peruse EVERY WOMAN'S GUIDE TO ROMANCE IN PARIS (illustrated, 178 pp., Avery Publishing, paper, $9.95), in which you'll find such
"tres roman tique"
French phrases as
"Je me jette a vos pieds"
("I throw myself at your feet").
Then again, you might prefer the romance of antiquity, specifically that to be found in Anneli S. Rufus and Kristan Lawson's GODDESS SITES: Europe (illustrated, 319 pp., HarperSanFrancisco, paper, $12.95), which celebrates the feminine side of a rather older Old World.


Boos Bounce Off Bonilla's Back
The booing was bad Wednesday night.
The booing was worse Friday night.
Bobby Bonilla heard it, understood it and promised it wouldn't be long before he would be able to forget it.
"We'll hear cheers here," Bonilla said before yesterday's game against the Braves at Shea Stadium.
"We all will."


Profits Are Growing, But Is That Enough?
Will profits catch up with the stock market?
That was the hope raised last week when the Government reported that after-tax corporate profits leaped 8 percent in the first quarter.
The number was better than the seers expected and may reflect the benefits of all the corporate restructurings of the last couple ofyears.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: May 31, 1992
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
18
THE FIRM, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $5.99.) A young lawyer learns that his firm is engaged in secret, possibly illegal activities.
2
2
THE KITCHEN GOD'S WIFE, by Amy Tan. (Ivy, $5.99.) A Chinese-American matriarch tells the harrowing story of her life.
3
1
THE HOUSE OF THUNDER, by Dean R. Koontz. (Berkley, $5.99.) A 1982 novel about a woman who, upon regaining consciousness in a hospital, recalls the horrors that brought her there.
4
1
MAN OF MY DREAMS, by Johanna Lindsey. (Avon, $5.99.) A Victorian beauty inadvertently wins the nobleman she had aspired to marry.
5
1
PARADISE, by Judith McNaught. (Pocket, $5.99.) The heirs of two family dynasties find true love when one of their businesses is threatened.
6
18
FRIED GREEN TOMATOES AT THE WHISTLE STOP CAFE, by Fannie Flagg. (McGraw-Hill, $6.95.) Life in rural Alabama.
7
6
AS THE CROW FLIES, by Jeffrey Archer. (Harper Paperbacks, $6.50.) A man strives to create the biggest store in the world.
8
7
"H" IS FOR HOMICIDE, by Sue Grafton. (Fawcett, $5.99.) The private eye Kinsey Millhone on the trail of perpetrators of an insurance scam.
9
1
IMBALANCE, by V. E. Mitchell. (Pocket, $4.99.) A new "Star Trek" adventure.
10
7
A TIME TO KILL, by John Grisham. (Wynwood, $9.95.) Racial tensions surface during a trial.
11
1
WOMAN WITHOUT A PAST, by Phyllis A. Whitney. (Fawcett, $5.99.) A Long Island woman journeys to South Carolina to solve the mystery of her birth and heritage.
12
5
ASPEN GOLD, by Janet Dailey. (Little, Brown, $5.99.) A woman from Colorado faces a choice: fame in Hollywood or love with an old flame.
13 *
1
VORTEX, by Larry Bond. (Warner, $5.99.) A war in Africa sometime in the future involves Cuba and the United States.
14 *
56
THE PRINCE OF TIDES, by Pat Conroy. (Bantam, $5.99.) Complex family relationships in South Carolina's low country and New York City.
15
1
ALIEN 3, by Alan Dean Foster. (Warner, $4.99.) The novelization of the new film about a woman stranded on a penal colony in space that is attacked by strange aliens.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
2
6
AMERICA: WHAT WENT WRONG? by Donald L. Barlett and James B. Steele. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $6.95.) How the practices of Washington lawmakers and Wall Street deal makers have benefited a few Americans at the expense of most.
3
54
YOU JUST DON'T UNDERSTAND, by Deborah Tannen. (Ballantine, $10.) The different languages men and women speak.
4
447
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Inspiration. (LP)
5 *
46
A YEAR IN PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A sojourn in the south of France.
6
7
JFK: CONSPIRACY OF SILENCE, by Charles A. Crenshaw with Jens Hansen and J. Gary Shaw. (Signet, $4.99.) A surgeon tells what he observed while treating the dying John F. Kennedy.
7 *
2
PARLIAMENT OF WHORES, by P. J. O'Rourke. (Vintage, $12.) A humorist's attempt to explain the Federal Government.
8
2
GROWING UP BRADY, by Barry Williams with Chris Kreski. (Harper Perennial, $10.) The making of the "Brady Bunch" television series.
9
12
YOU'LL NEVER EAT LUNCH IN THIS TOWN AGAIN, by Julia Phillips. (Signet, $6.99.) Life in Hollywood as experienced by a producer.
10
128
ALL I REALLY NEED TO KNOW I LEARNED IN KINDERGARTEN, by Robert Fulghum. (Ivy, $5.95.) Inspirational essays.
11 *
14
IRON JOHN, by Robert Bly. (Vintage, $11.) The passage of the male from boyhood into manhood.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
42
LIFE'S LITTLE INSTRUCTION BOOK, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $5.95.) Some 500 tips for achieving a self-fulfilling life.
2
6
LIVE AND LEARN AND PASS IT ON, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $5.95.) Morsels of what they've learned about life, from people aged 5 to 95.
3
90
THE T-FACTOR FAT GRAM COUNTER, by Jamie Pope-Cordle and Martin Katahn. (Norton, $2.50.) How to reduce fat in one's diet.
4
11
ATTACK OF THE DERANGED MUTANT KILLER MONSTER SNOW GOONS, by Bill Watterson. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $8.95.) "Calvin and Hobbes" cartoons.
5
71
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $9.95.) Principles for success.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,000 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 38,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.


Petrovic Keeps Scoring
New Jersey Nets guard DRAZEN PETROVIC had 31 points as Croatia defeated Spain, 109-96, on Friday night and finished undefeated in a pre-Olympic tournament in Trieste, Italy.
The Croatian team had earlier beaten Italy and Greece in the four-nation event.


Jennifer Heath, D. G. Robinson Jr.
Jennifer Wild Heath, a daughter of Benjamin W. Heath of Newport Beach, Calif., and the late Aloise Buckley Heath, was married yesterday in Sharon, Conn., to Donald G. Robinson Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robinson of Waterbury, Conn.
The Rev.
William Sokolowski performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Bernard's Church.
Mrs.
Robinson graduated from the University of Bridgeport.
She is the director of the Fitness Institute at Teikyo Post University in Waterbury.
She is a granddaughter of the late William F. Buckley Sr., the oil company executive, and a niece of Mr.
Buckley Jr., the author and publisher.
She is the stepdaughter of Maria E. Heath of Newport Beach.
Her father is the president of the Magellan Petroleum Corporation in Newport Beach.


MAY 24-30: Omnia Reichmannia; Only the American Third of the Empire Is Untouched
Like Gaul, the world's largest real estate empire was divided into three parts: Canada, the United States and London's Canary Wharf.
The Reichmann Brothers' desperate efforts to hold their pieces together suffered a possible fatal blow last week when their $3.5 billion London project was declared insolvent and surrendered to court-appointed administrators.
With their Canadian properties operating under court protection for the last two weeks, two-thirds of their privately owned Olympia &amp; York Developments Ltd. is now under water.
Although the British government insists it's not bailing anyone out, it may well decide in the next few weeks to shift several thousand civil servants to Canary Wharf's stunning complex of white office towers, joining such companies as Texaco and American Express.
Outside buyers could also ease the pressure.
London newspapers report that a Hong Kong billionaire, Li Ka-shing, a partner of the Reichmanns in a Manhattan tower at 60 Broad Street, is sniffing around Canary Wharf.


City of Pain and Rapture: Reflections in an Urban Eye
"I was explaining to you about the rapture," the tall, Bible-toting black man suddenly announced, standing solemn as Socrates within the Lexington Avenue local as he moved through another day of subway proselytizing.
"What is the rapture?" the handsome, thin-faced man asked rhetorically of riders clinging fervidly to their various inattentions.
The doors slid shut and he rode on out of the station with his answer lost in the steely noise of the city.
The passing reminder that there might be rapture for someone in the toughness of New York, and that a man felt compelled to move through the city's innards to tell about this, was weird welcome enough for a reporter returning home to the city after 13 years.
On renewed sight, the city seems as good and sad and true as ever, when viewed in all its shards, and the search for rapture is understandable.
Ruthless Regeneration
The city remains regenerative in a certain ruthless way, as out in the marshes beyond the runways of Kennedy International Airport, where the Norway rat breeds better than the snowy owl in the Jamaica Bay Wildlife Refuge.
There, Don Riepe, city born and bred in the Ozone Park shadows of Aqueduct Race Track, has chosen a strange life in the city, reigning as chief ranger for the wildlife refuge.


Look, in Center, It's a Rising Star
Roberto Kelly glides through the clubhouse to reach his locker in the same manner he glides to make a catch in the outfield and glides around the bases to score a run: gracefully.
He is a vision of style in center field, and away from it.


Rosie O'Donnell Mining Her Roots
ROSIE O'DONNELL galloped on to the stage at East Side Comedy Club in Farmingdale.
Gazing at the audience, she shouted, "It's great to be home!"
Home, as in the East Side Comedy Club, where she started her career as a stand-up comedian 12 years ago.
Home, as on Long Island, where she grew up as the middle of five children in Commack.


Corrections
A review on May 3 about "Unsilent Revolution: Television News and American Public Life, 1948-1991," by Robert J. Donovan and Ray Scherer, referred incorrectly to Look magazine and The Saturday Evening Post.
Look was published every two weeks for most of its life.
The Post was a weekly.


Networking; Now Software Giants Are Targeting E-Mail
Hook two computers together and sooner or later the two users will want to send one another messages.
That's electronic mail, or E-mail, as it is universally known in the world of networks.
This desire to communicate explains why selling E-mail software has become a $130 million business, and why the heavy-hitting software companies have hurried to develop E-mail products, often by acquiring promising programs from other companies.


Getting Transplants Off to a Good Start
Continue to plant corn and beans and second crops of lettuce, carrots and beets.
Plant all eggplant, tomato and pepper plants, giving each transplant plenty of compost and a drink of fish emulsion to get it off to a good start.
I add a tablespoon of Epsom salts to each hole and mix them in well; these plants thrive on the magnesium.
Prune shrubs like lilac and mock orange after they finish blooming.
Check around the yard for faded and dead blossoms of tulips and daffodils.
Cut the flower stems right down to the base, but leave the leaves alone.
They are busy making food for the bulbs, and big flowers next year.


Groundwater
To the Editor:
Stephen Hess, president of the developers' Association for a Better Long Island, is correct in saying in his letter on May 3 that groundwater can be protected by cluster development with covenants guaranteeing perpetual open space in the remainder of the properties.
However, the location, type and overall development density of the properties are much more important.


Compromise on Urban Aid Plan Is Reported Near
A month after the Los Angeles riots, the Bush Administration is cautiously moving toward granting more emergency aid to the cities than it had planned, Republicans in Congress say.
Although disputes over philosophy and money continue to doom any but the most modest initiatives in urban policy, Congressional and White House negotiators have managed to bridge their differences on the outlines of a package worth up to $2 billion.


Lisa Aitken, David Desmond
Mr. and Mrs.
Frank E. Aitken of Naples, Fla., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Lisa Renee Aitken, to Dr.
David William Desmond, the son of Judge Maryanne Trump Barry of New York and the stepson of John J. Barry.
A July wedding is planned.
Miss Aitken, a graduate of Southern Methodist University, is a candidate for an M.B.A. at New York University.
She is the executive assistant to the president of Wasserstein Perella &amp; Company, an investment banking firm in New York.
Her father, who is retired, was a senior executive overseas for the Exxon Corporation.


For the 90's, a New Breed of Housesitter
LIKE many people these days, Michele Pharao has been having trouble selling her home, a small one-bedroom condominium she outgrew in Bridgeport, Conn.
But instead of selling at a loss or continuing to live in the too-small condo, she chose a lesser-known option: She rented out the condominium and, taking her furniture with her, moved into a house in Fairfield as a housesitter.
"Where I'm living now is more spacious, and I'm saving money," she said.


Arson Figures Are Difficult To Compile
Arson is regarded as one of the most underreported crimes.
Historically it has been difficult to track.
Two Federal agencies and one private group collect national statistics on arson, and they have reservations about the completeness of the information, especially on arson for profit.


India Successfully Tests a Medium-Range Missile
India on Friday successfully tested an Indian-built medium-range missile capable of hitting targets at a distance of more than 1,500 miles.
The firing of the two-stage missile was a clear indication that the Indian Government would continue to pursue its missile development program despite pressure from the United States and other Western countries to halt it, officials at the Ministry of External Affairs said.


Does 'Murphy Brown' Reflect Our Norms, or Set Them?; A Destructive Influence
To the Editor:  I am not at all sure that our ballooning Federal deficit and the Los Angeles inner-city riots don't have a strong connection to "a truly vexing question: Is Murphy Brown really a tramp?" ("Views on Single Motherhood Are Multiple at White House," front page, May 21).


Mutual Funds; Comparing Short-Term Funds
With money-market rates at rock bottom, many investors are turning to other types of short-term investments.
Most popular are short-term corporate bond funds, short-term Government bond funds and short-term multimarket funds, which invest in foreign debt.
Unlike money markets, the share prices of these short-term funds fluctuate, as the chart shows.
The better benchmark for most investors is total return, which includes income as well as changes in share prices.
But investors who use short-term income funds as substitutes for money markets, especially when the cash might be needed soon, are well advised to look at how share prices in these funds have fluctuated over time.


A Show of 125 Works by Artists in the Northeast
THIS year's version of "Art of the Northeast," like its 42 predecessors, comesweighed down with prizes -- 18 of them from $100 to $1,000, to be exact.
The other statistics hold steady -- 125 pieces chosen from more than 1,000 submissions -- and if the show at Silvermine Guild here seems smaller than usual it is only because there are fewer large works.
The chief curator at the Phillips Collection in Washington, Eliza Rathbone, was juror, following in the footsteps of her father, Perry Rathbone, who did the job in 1956 shortly after becoming director of the Museum of Fine Arts in Boston.
The honor roll of judges shines with stars, among them Milton Avery, H. H. Arnason, John I. H. Baur (twice), William Baziotes, Clement Greenberg, Hilton Kramer, Roy Neuberger and Louise Nevelson.
No wonder the contest attracts so many regulars.


Ms. Wong, J.D. Koltisko
Dona Magdalene Wong, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Kum Wong of Hong Kong, was married yesterday in Falls Church, Va., to Joseph Domenic Koltisko, a son of Mrs.
Joseph E. Koltisko of Falls Church and the late Dr.
Koltisko.
The Rev.
Keith Ramey officiated at St.
Anthony's Roman Catholic Church.


Pitter-Patter On the Roof
To the Editor:
In reading Witold Rybczynski's essay "A Little House on the Prairie Goes to a Museum"  [ April 19 ] , I was reminded of the time in 1944 when I participated in a conference with Buckminster Fuller regarding his Dymaxion House.
I attended at the request of my boss.
He told me he would like to have an engineer accompany him. (I am an aeronautical engineer.) He wanted me as window dressing.
Since I might feel uncomfortable if I said nothing, he advised, "You can say anything you feel like."


Jennifer Ware, Stephen Ellis
Jennifer Peyton Ware and Stephen Ellis were married yesterday at the Hitchcock Presbyterian Church in Scarsdale, N.Y., The Rev.
Dr.
Robert S. MacLennan officiated.
Mrs.
Ellis is the promotion director in New York for Variety.
She graduated from Ohio Wesleyan University and received a master's degree in journalism from Boston University.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John Peyton Ware of Scarsdale.
Her father retired as the industrial sales manager for the New York publishing house of John Wiley &amp; Sons.
He is a co-author of "A Cruising Guide to the New England Coast." Her maternal grandfather, the late Fessenden Seaver Blanchard, invented platform tennis.


St. Augustine's Reaches Centennial
"THERE are older Catholic churches in Westchester, but we feel what is especially interesting about our church is that its history and progress is closely intertwined with the development of Larchmont," said Msgr.
Walter F. Kenny, the pastor of St.
Augustine's Roman Catholic Church here.
The church commemorated its 100th anniversary last Sunday with a Mass said by John Cardinal O'Connor, Archbishop of New York.


MAY 24-30: Profile in Courage; Lowell Weicker Jr. Wants Washington To Take Note
Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr. of Connecticut, who was hanged in effigy, spat upon and likened to Hitler in the bitterest moments of a battle last year over a state income tax, last week found an entirely admiring audience -- in Boston.
He received the John F. Kennedy Library Foundation's Profiles in Courage award for taking an unpopular stand, then holding firm.
The award bestowed a $25,000 cash prize and a Tiffany lamp -- both of which Mr.
Weicker has indicated he will probably keep, despite cries of critics -- as well as a new platform for the Governor to rail against the lack of courage he sees just about everywhere in politics.


More Than 30 Songs by Sammy Fain
THOUGH Sammy Fain (1902-1989) worked with an assortment of lyricists, many of the composer's songs represent dippy excursions into a happy valley of billing and cooing where "hummingbirds are for humming," "all your happy dreams come true" and "the sky is your ceiling." It is where it's possible to "laugh and sing as gaily as elves" and love, besides being "a many splendored thing," is a "silly, silly, silly sappy feeling" that can be lived on "till the clouds roll away."
For most of the first part of "I'll Be Seeing You: The Music of Sammy Fain," which has moved from the Long Wharf's Stage II to the main stage in New Haven, all that sap causes one to crave sugar-free asylum.
To the extent that Dan Siretta, the director, has a concept for this bookless cluster of more than 30 songs, it appears stranded between self-consciousness and sheer unconcern.
In any other context, Mr.
Siretta's aimless maneuvering of five singers, bopping back and forth and to and fro, while a pianist sits there in the background, would simply be called hanging out.
Such obvious perennials as "Let a Smile Be Your Umbrella" and "Dear Hearts and Gentle People" don't need coy underlining; other more balanced standards -- "That Old Feeling," "I Can Dream, Can't I" -- don't deserve it.
Perhaps because the songs in the second act are less familiar, Mr.
Siretta takes a more contextual tack, with more palatable results.
In "By a Waterfall," for one, a most welcome dab of Busby Berkeley parody crops up.
For versatility, the blithe K. T. Sullivan comes off best.
In a daffy "Dickey-Bird Song," she adjusts her pliable voice to a Miss Adelaide-like squeak.
She has a lot of fun with "Are You Having Any Fun?" and "The Secretary Song" but caresses soft tones, sustains high notes and toughs it out when things get too maudlin, as well.
Ms.
Sullivan is dramatically winning, too, in "A Certain Smile," which she sings with Jennifer Prescott, the revue's least distinctive performer.
Mr.
Fain's most ardent ballads are crowned by Ron Raines's many splendored baritone.
Note "A Very Precious Love" in particular.
In duets, Ms.
Sullivan and Mr.
Raines make something haunting of "Face to Face," which has an interesting melodic line that sets it apart from most of the other love songs.
In a nice and easy rendition of "You Brought a New Kind of Love to Me," the spiffy Gregg Burge evinces charm of which he is all too acutely aware.
The performer's gymnastic whirls, balletic leaps and musical comedy high kicks are so masterful, they need not be oversold.
Worse, Mr.
Burge's talent as a hoofer is considerable enough without relegating it to the pointlessly stereotypical droopy mannerisms of a minstrel show throwback.
To Gogi Grant, a veteran singer, falls the task of the evening's chanteuse, and every now and again it is apparent that Mr.
Siretta is trying to save a very special spot for her.
Ms.
Grant's manner is stylish, her voice torchy, weathered and strong and she changes her pajama outfit from red in the first act to bluish in the second.
When the company gathers for the title song at the end, it's too late for anyone to get a grip on this slapdash evening.
Don't expect the program, which does not list the songs, to provide content, but the second number in the overture, "When I Take My Sugar to Tea" offers a clue about style, such as it is.
"I'll Be Seeing You," at the Long Wharf Theater, 222 Sargent Drive, New Haven. 787-4282.
Performances today and June 17 through June 21.


Residential Resales
Closings in the week ending May 16  MANHATTAN  Columbia University Area 425,000
420 Riverside Drive (114th St.)  3-bedroom, 3-bath, 2,200-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, maid's room, dining room, Hudson River view; maintenance $1,200, 40% tax-deductible (Broker: Klara Madlin Real Estate)  Fort Washington 56,500
116 Pinehurst Avenue  (Hudson View Gardens)  1-bedroom, 1-bath, 650-sq.-ft. co-op in a prewar building; dining area, terrace, public garden, partial Hudson River view; maintenance $350, 21% tax-deductible (Broker: Stein-Perry Real Estate)  Greenwich Village 1.6 million
48 Bank Street  5-bedroom, 5 1/2-bath, 5,000-sq.-ft, single-family, 3-story town house; 30-ft. atrium, gymnasium, dining room, 2 terraces, fireplace, c/a, wine cellar, 20- by 91-ft. lot; taxes $10,500 (Broker: Eychner Associates)  Upper East Side 630,000
875 Fifth Avenue (69th St.)  2-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 1,600-sq.-ft. postwar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, manned-elevator, dining room, windowed kitchen, Central Park view; maintenance $2,200, 43% tax-deductible (Brokers: Halstead Property Co.-Corcoran Group)  Upper West Side 410,000
545 West End Avenue (86th St.)  (Florence)  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,650-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; 24-hr. doorman/concierge, dining room, original moldings and details, 3 exposures; maintenance $1,087, 40% tax-deductible (Brokers: Halstead Property Co.-Wendy Walters &amp; Associates)  Upper West Side 515,000
107 West 89th Street  (Columbus Townhouses)  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,710-sq.-ft. postwar condo; 24-hr. doorman, fireplace, garden; common charge $524, taxes $1,027 (Broker: Island Homes, New York)  BRONX  Bedford Park Area 135,000
27-79 Webster Avenue  3-family, semi-attached, frame house; 3 bedrooms, 1 bath, dining room in each unit; 600-sq.-ft. of commercial space on the ground floor, 20- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,500 (Broker: ERA/Marland Real Estate)  Eastchester 130,000
3446 Grace Avenue  3-bedroom, 1-bath, single-family, detached, frame house; dining area, 1-car garage, 35- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,000 (Broker: Century 21/Best Match Real Estate)  BROOKLYN  Flatlands 202,000
4623 Avenue K  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, single-family, semi-attached, brick house; dining room, finished basement, 2-car garage, 20- by 90-ft. lot; taxes $1,300 (Broker: Homes R' Beautiful)  Prospect Park South 380,000
1215 Alebemarle Road  5-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, single-family, brick house; dining room, library, butler's pantry, 3 fireplaces, 2-car garage, 66.8- by 120-ft. lot; taxes $3,300 (Broker: Sommers Real Estate)  QUEENS  Forest Hills 235,000
68-20 Ingram Street  3-bedroom, 2-bath, single-family, attached town house; dining room, fireplace, finished basement, 1-car garage, 19- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,400 (Broker: Madeleine Realty)  College Point 195,000
125-05 Seventh Avenue  2-family, semi-attached, aluminum-sided house; 2 bedrooms in primary unit; 1 bedroom in other, 1 bath in each; finished basement, 25- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,000 (Broker: Century 21/Weber &amp; Rose)  STATEN ISLAND Huguenot 192,500
5 Ruxton Avenue  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, single-family, detached ranch; dining room, fireplace, family room, semi-finished basement, 1-car garage, 119- by 50-ft. lot; taxes $2,463 (Broker: Salmon Real Estate) New Dorp 161,900
147 Locust Avenue  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, single-family, detached colonial; dining room, full basement, private driveway, 40- by 66-ft. lot; taxes $1,550 (Broker: Century 21/Papp Realty)


Jazz Group, a Happy 40 Years Old, Continues the Beat:


Hot Air, and Hopes, at Rio
The leaders of more than 100 countries are now gathering in Rio de Janeiro for an extraordinary Earth Summit, the largest meeting of world leaders ever held.
Their agenda includes pages of lofty rhetoric but no important binding commitments.
It need not have been so vaporous.
Short-sighted politics, North and South, whittled down more ambitious goals and substituted rhetorical fudge for concrete commitments.
The preparatory process revealed a near-scandalous lack of enlightened international leadership


Anti-Arab Tensions Rise in Israel


Q and A
Finding a Travel Partner
Q.
Is there an organization that brings together single people who want to travel but not alone or in tours? -- Helen Thau, Kew Gardens, Queens


Brazil's Other Great Wilderness
WHAT Brazilian ecosystem spreads over a pristine area the size of Britain, is threatened by encroaching development, but offers visitors a combination of wildlife, tropical greenery and primeval solitude?
Wrong.
Don't worry.
Most participants at the Earth Summit starting on Wednesday in Rio de Janeiro would probably also answer: the Amazon.
International nature tourists well versed in the attractions of the Amazon rain forest in Brazil are only now discovering Brazil's Pantanal, the largest expanse of wetlands in the world.
Drawn on 16th-century maps as "an inland sea," this vast, largely untouched area in the geographical heart of South America -- about 900 miles northwest of Rio -- has served since the dawn of time as a convergence point for millions of birds traveling three migratory paths.
With the exception of one small national park and two government ranches, the Pantanal is 95 percent privately owned, largely by private ranchers whose cattle roam freely in ecological harmony with the region's wildlife.
In contrast to the Amazon's closed gallery forests where it can be hard to sight wildlife, these wide open spaces offer a fauna panorama comparable to a safari in East Africa.


New Program Takes Chess Back to Schools
The competitors stared intensely at the chess board, then began pushing queens and rooks.
Less than four minutes and a dozen moves later, a New York State Assemblyman, Richard L. Brodsky, looked up, his face flushed with the realization that he had just been checkmated.


Children's Books
UP NORTH AT THE CABIN
By Marsha Wilson Chall.
Illustrated by Steve Johnson.
Unpaged.
New York: Lothrop, Lee &amp; Shepard Books. $15. (Ages 5 and up)
THE SEASHORE BOOK
By Charlotte Zolotow.
Illustrated by Wendell Minor.
Unpaged.
New York: HarperCollins Publishers. $15. (Ages 3 to 8)


Update; Trial Ends in Fight Over Ownership of 'Dodgers'
The days of the Brooklyn Dodgers may long be over, but scrapping over the name drags on.
In a three-year trademark infringement case that focuses on rights to the Dodger name, the Los Angeles Dodgers baseball team and Major League Baseball returned to court earlier this month against owners of the Brooklyn Dodger Sports Bar and Restaurant.


Business Diary/May 24-29
COMPANIES Bankruptcy Swallows Canary Wharf


Aircraft-Leasing Giant Strives To Insure Its Growth
Tony Ryan, the founder and chairman of the GPA Group P.L.C., the aircraft-leasing giant, seemed unusually subdued the other day for a man whose company, after a year's delay, was about to go public, thereby confirming him as one of Ireland's richest men.
If the public offering in the United States, Europe and Japan goes as planned, investors will pay $10 to $12.50 each for 80 million new and existing GPA shares.


Susan Siegel, Donald Selkin
Dr.
Susan Rae Siegel, a daughter of Aaron N. Siegel of Hartsdale, N.Y., and the late Ruth Rafer Siegel, was married last evening in White Plains to Donald Martin Selkin, a son of Irving N. and Sylvia Selkin of Brooklyn.
Rabbi Arnold Turetsky performed the ceremony at the Temple Israel Center.
The bride is a dentist in Riverdale, the Bronx.
She graduated from Boston University and received a D.D.S. from Georgetown University.
Her father retired as the president of Seeco Supply, an architectural hardware distributor in Elmsford, N.Y.


THING
Eyevan E-54
WHAT: The name sounds industrial; the image is pure glamour, the kind that's properly accessorized with a chiffon head scarf and a peppy little sports car.
"We were trying to bring back the look of the early 60's, with heavy rolled plastic, tortoise shell and black," said Ken Schwartz, who with his partner, Larry Leight, designed the frames for Oliver Peoples, the optical store in West Hollywood that he and Mr.
Leight own.


INSIDE
Disorder in Haitian Army
Eight months after an army coup, soldiers have begun killing soldiers in what many fear is the unraveling of Haiti's military.
Page 3.


Sports of The Times; Allowing U.S. Players Time for Introductions
CRINGING in front of the television set, Chuck Daly watches his American lads flailing away at each other.
Ooops, there was Michael Jordan and Patrick Ewing, nose to nose a few weeks back.
Ooops, there was Clyde Drexler sticking a finger in John Stockton's eye last week.
Ooops, there is Scottie Pippen hobbling around on a tender ankle.
Part of Daly wants to scream, "Boys, boys, boys, take it easy on each other." But these are the playoffs.
This is real life.
The Summer Games in Barcelona are later.


Helen Roob, Marc Jerome
Helen Roob, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard Roob of New York, was married in New York last evening to Marc Matthew Jerome, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Stephen J. Jerome of Cresskill, N.J.
Cantor Richard Botton performed the ceremony at Central Synagogue.
Mrs.
Jerome, 24 years old, is a merchandise analyst and planner in buying at Clifford &amp; Wills, a catalogue clothing company in New York.
She graduated cum laude from Tufts University.
Her father is the chairman of the Benjamin Moore paint company in Montvale, N.J.
Her mother, Rona Roob, is the museum archivist at the Museum of Modern Art in New York.


Remembering the Hostages


Lawyer Seeks Release of Girl In Shooting
The lawyer for a 17-year-old charged with shooting her 38-year-old lover's wife said today that he would seek to have the teen-ager released on bail after her arraignment on a charge of attempted murder.
Law-enforcement officials said prosecutors were reviewing additional information that might be introduced at the court appearance on Tuesday of the high school senior from Baldwin, Amy Fisher, including her possible involvement with an escort service.
Miss Fisher's lawyer, Eric W. Naiburg, said he had told the girl's parents about the additional information but declined to comment further on the allegation about the escort service, which Newsday reported today.


Democratic Senate Battle Fits D'Amato's Strategy
As the New York State Republican Party convenes in Manhattan today to endorse Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato as its unquestioned candidate for a third term, his two chief Democratic rivals stepped up their own competition for the right to challenge him -- a struggle that plays right into Mr.
D'Amato's re-election strategy.
Last week, delegates to State Democratic Convention chose former Representative Geraldine A. Ferraro as their favored candidate, giving her 57 percent of their votes to 41 percent for Attorney General Robert Abrams, in a non-binding preference that nonetheless lent her comeback candidacy an aura of added momentum.


Tech Notes; An Antenna That's a Hybrid
Two Georgia Tech inventors have developed a small broad-band antenna that they say is less expensive and more versatile than existing antennas.
Their device is called a spiral-mode microstrip antenna.
Its advantage, the scientists say, lies in combining the technology of two existing antennas: the broad-band frequency typical of large so-called cavity-backed spiral antennas, which are typically used for a wide range of frequencies transmitted over a fairly large area, and the small size and mounting abilities of the flat microstrip antenna, which employs a printed circuit board and has a very narrow band width.


Corrections
An article on May 3 about the actor Ron Vawter referred inexactly to his education.
He studied at Siena College in Loudonville, N.Y., a private liberal arts college with Franciscan ties, not a seminary.


'Talented Tenth,' Tale of Guilt
IF the value of a play were measurable by the degree of real-life rage to which it corresponds, then "The Talented Tenth" would be an instant classic.
For no sooner had Richard Wesley's comedy-drama about the selling out of black consciousness opened at the Crossroads Theater Company than news reports were filled with accounts of the moral unrest of affluent blacks in the wake of the Los Angeles riots.
With all that up-to-the-minute conflict going for it, Mr.
Wesley's overwritten play, reworked since its premiere at the Manhattan Theater Club in 1989, is at once glib and declamatory, and oddly unconvincing.


A Priest of High-Tech in a Classical Temple
Norman Foster gives one faith in modernism.
That's what his super-sleek, glass-and-metal buildings come down to, really: evidence that the modernist style has not lost all possibility of appearing fresh, that it can still excite us and even provide both contentment and enlightenment.
The world is full of architects who continue to work in a modernist mode, of course, but Sir Norman's work has a special quality.
It is light, tensile and elegant -- as elegant, in its way, as anything the Renaissance ever produced.
And that is perhaps why, for all the potency of Sir Norman's convictions, his architecture sits as comfortably as it does beside older buildings.
While its modernism is uncompromising and its determination to express technology absolute, it seems never to strike a pose of defiance.
Unlike so many modern buildings, Sir Norman's sit gently alonide their neighbors.
Yet they are tough as nails; for all the restraint they seem to represent, they yield not an inch of esthetic turf to anything else.


Edberg, Stich and Chang Are Defeated in Paris
Henri Leconte, the man who calls it a miracle that he is playing tennis at all, got a firm grip on his racquet and suddenly it turned into Excalibur: goodbye, Michael Stich, last year's French Open semifinalist and the defending Wimbledon champion.
Andrei Cherkasov, whose first-round defeat of John McEnroe here last year gave warning that this Muscovite is a most comfortable giant-killer, spent a full three sets in the elusive zone that packs a terminator's punch into every stroke: goodbye, second-ranked Stefan Edberg, the defending United States Open champion, in straight sets.


Public &amp; Private; 49 to 1
Earlier this month Lynn Yeakel stepped to the podium in a Philadelphia hotel to open the annual dinner for Womens Way, the powerful fund-raising organization for women's social service programs.
The ballroom went ballistic.
Perhaps some were standing and cheering Ms.
Yeakel's work as executive director.
Perhaps some were saluting her progressive positions on housing and education.


Arson Rate, After Decline in 80's, Jumps in Northeast Recession
Firefighters and insurance-claims adjusters say they can track a recession as well as any economist.
If arson is up, business is down.
Arson, which declined in the prosperous 1980's, has jumped in states like New York and New Jersey that have been hit hard by the weak economy, adjusters say.
The Northeast leads the nation in fires deliberately set to destroy failing businesses, as well as houses, cars and boats.


Children's Books; Bookshelf
ANGELITA'S MAGIC YARN.
Written and illustrated by Doris Lecher.
Unpaged.
Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $14. (Ages 3 to 8) The people of Oru, a village high in the Andes, knit sweaters they sell at a weekly market in the valley.
Angelita, the finest knitter, is robbed, but triumphs in a most imaginative way.
TOWNSEND'S WARBLER.
By Paul Fleischman.
Illustrated. 52 pp.
Charlotte Zolotow/HarperCollins. $13.
This illustrated essay describes how John Kirk Townsend followed the Oregon Trail in 1834, making notes and gathering specimens on the way.
The habits of the tiny black-and-yellow-striped migrating warbler he observed and collected, and which was subsequently named for him, remained unknown for a century.


And Now, No More Problems of Communism
As Communism has died out around the world, so have the cottage industries that owed their existence to it.
The latest victim is Problems of Communism, the leading journal of Communist affairs, which has been published since 1952 by the United States Information Agency.
The final issue is due toward the end of June.
"The priorities have changed," said Wayne Hall, the magazine's editor.
"We are in an epochal period of political transition, and the energy should be spent in promoting the changes that we have all longed for for so long."


Keeping Theater Alive in the Schools
MUSIC in the halls, paint ings on the walls the arts are still flourishing in local schools, although more strongly in some districts than in others.
Programs using outside artists to enliven the curriculum have their steadfast supporters, who work tirelessly at fund raising for arts and education.
When the arts are cut from school budgets, parent-teacher associations step in to help.
Businesses are wooed for funds, and applications for grants multiply.
Nada Westerman, director of arts and education at the Council for the Arts in Westchester, said the council's visiting-artist program had dropped from 90 participating schools last year to 60 this school year because of cuts in both the state arts budget and local school budgets.
But other organizations have offered new opportunities to county students.


Update; Health-Care Workers Receive Guidelines on H.I.V.
Last fall, the New York State Department of Health responded to a Federal proposal that would have restricted the work performed by H.I.V.-infected health-care workers by promulgating state regulations that took a sharply different tack.
On Thursday the state guidelines were sent to health-care workers around the state.
The Federal Centers for Disease Control is still working on its recommendations -- which state officials believe will turn out to be closer to the New York rules than to its original proposals.


Watering Drop by Drop
IF I were a vegetable, I would want to be growing in Lee Reich's garden in New Paltz, N.Y.
This man doesn't believe in digging.
Every year, for 10 years now, he just adds a couple inches of compost over the entire 900-square-foot plot.
Talk about good garden loam: you can till these beds with your fingers.


Internal Affairs Division Is Itself Under Scrutiny
It was born out of the Police Department's dark days, the late 1960's, when corruption was said to lurk in just about every New York City station house.
The Internal Affairs Division was an acknowledgment that internal corruption was a real and constant threat, and a symbol of the department's commitment to rooting out "bad cops."
Now the division itself is under a kind of surveillance.


Trevino, Two Shots Back, Takes Aim at the Leaders
In dank, dark conditions today, no one shot the lights out in the second round of the Nynex Commemorative, which left Lee Trevino in striking distance of his sixth victory of the year.
The leaders going into today's final round are Dale Douglass and Terry Dill, at seven-under-par 133 on the par-70 Sleepy Hollow Country Club.
Trevino, who battled his way to a 67 despite missing several short putts, is two shots back.


A Lesson From Teacher for City Hall
"Bye, Mr. Madson!" "Bye, Mr. Madson!"
"Get home safe, girls," said Ron Madson, Public School 20's art teacher.
They giggled.
Mr.
Madson's a bit old-fashioned.
He's been at the Brooklyn school for 26 years and at this point is teaching his original students' children.
The principal says he's excellent and he could've climbed the ladder, but Mr.
Madson stays because "I like it here."


Dismissing Inflation Too Easily
To the Editor:
This letter is triggered by Alfred E. Kahn's comments on air fares (Forum, "A Dogfight Over Deregulation," May 17) but does not apply only to him.
Is there no end to our being told that the cost of something has gone down or only up X percent, after allowing for inflation?
The implication is that we really have nothing to complain about.
Tell that to those on fixed incomes.
Yet, nowhere is it mentioned that one of the causes of the inflation for which we are adjusting is that same something whose price has gone up.


A Word of Praise
To the Editor: In response to your articles about airline policies with regard to flight changes and cancellations (April 12 and May 17), I would like to tell you a "happy story," well partly happy at least!
My husband and I flew from Providence, R.I., to New Orleans in March for a week's vacation.
We traveled on USAir using frequent flier tickets.


STOLEN PROMISE
I read Patricia Raybon's Hers column "Stolen Promise"(May 3) with great empathy.
If I had a daughter, I would feel exactly as she does.
However, I am the mother of two African-American sons.
Even before the recent events in Los Angeles and Simi Valley, I harbored a real concern about equipping them with the survival skills they will need to reach manhood.


SOUPED-UP SCHOLAR
After watching Stanley Fish perform last year on William Buckley's "Firing Line," I have to admit that when it comes to thinking fast on your feet Fish is a pro ("Souped-Up Scholar," by Adam Begley, May 3).


Does 'Murphy Brown' Reflect Our Norms, or Set Them?
To the Editor:
Vice President Quayle's remarks on the plot of "Murphy Brown" (news article, May 20) resume an ancient but timeless argument: whether popular entertainment, especially comedy, should reflect society's norms or serve as a forum for lessons on how society can be more "moral." Joseph Addison, an 18th-century critic, remarked, "Comedy is nothing but a Picture of Life, and a Representation of their own Humours and Manners."


WWII IS REPLAYED IN HILLS OF BOSNIA
The old man stiffened as the vehicles approached the fresh-cut pine trunk serving as a roadblock, his bolt-action rifle at the ready.
His uniform was a musty relic of the Chetniks of World War II, guerrillas who took to the mountains to fight the Nazis, and his golden-beret badge was a double-headed eagle, emblem of a medieval Serbian dynasty.
"Attention! Attention!" he said, pointing down the winding mountain road leading toward Sarajevo, the capital of Bosnia and Herzegovina.


Perspectives: Semi-Custom Houses; A Bid for Staten Island's Move-Up Buyers
TO find a location in New York City where a builder is producing semi-custom, single-family houses in a sizable subdivision it is necessary to venture to Staten Island.
There, on 7.3 acres where the Franzreb family ran a riding stable for 42 years, Tom Costa is developing 56 lots under the name Park Place North.
Eighteen of them are reserved for brick colonial models that are priced from $350,000 to $500,000, or more when customers are inclined to greater luxury.


Lynne Pauls, Jerome Baron
Lynne Miller Pauls and Jerome Baron, business executives in West Orange, N.J., were married May 25 in Merion, Pa.
Rabbi Fred Kazan performed the ceremony at Temple Adath Israel.
Mrs.
Baron, 45 years old, is the founder and president of Prescription Capital, a West Orange financial consulting company.
She graduated from Temple University and received an M.B.A. from Indiana University.
Her first marriage ended in divorce.
She is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Benjamin Miller of Philadelphia.


Erika Greene, Peter Saraf
Erika Ann Greene, the daughter of Mary Ann Hannon of New York and Daniel E. Greene of North Salem, N.Y., was married at her father's home yesterday to Peter Nataniel Saraf, the son of Hedi Saraf and Irving Saraf, both of San Francisco.
The Rev.
Grant Fairlie performed the Ethical Culture ceremony.
Ms.
Greene, who is 26 years old and is keeping her name, is an actress in New York.
She graduated from Wesleyan University, as did her husband.
Her father, a member of the National Academy of Design, is a painter and pastel artist in North Salem.
Her mother is a concert soprano in New York.


Lauren Perry, Britton Jones
Lauren Gower Perry, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Hoyt O. Perry Jr. of Southport, Conn., was married there yesterday to Britton Jones, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
James E. Jones of Pass-a-Grille, Fla.
The Rev.
Alastair Votaw performed the ceremony at Trinity Episcopal Church.
Mrs.
Jones, 36 years old, graduated from Trinity College in Hartford, as did her huband.
Until recently she was a product director at the Rockport footwear company in Marlboro, Mass.
Her father, who is retired, was the executive vice president and a director of Citytrust in Bridgeport, Conn.


Blue Jays' Flight Plan On Predictable Course After Third of Season
The best underachievers in baseball have been at their underachieving best this season.
While showing how they could avoid winning the division championship that was generally conceded to them in March, the Toronto Blue Jays have displayed their uncanny but consistent ability to play down to the lowest level of their abundant talent.
For sure, the Blue Jays are winning at a pace that could put them in first place at the end of the season, but they have several other teams they must shed before arriving there.
After nearly one-third of the season, the team with the best talent in the American League East has not buried the other contenders and pretenders. 'They Always Have Talent'
"Everybody expected us to be further ahead, with probably five or six more wins than we have," Pat Gillick, the general manager, said the other day.
"We've won 28 games and we haven't played well at all. I'm hoping when we start playing well, we'll take off."


Wall Street; A Business Eclipsed by Feuds
If Winston Churchill were alive, he would describe the Cooper Companies as lawsuits wrapped in a feud surrounded by a scandal.
Cooper's co-chairman, Gary A. Singer, has been accused by a junk-bond mutual fund analyst of joining in a scheme to profit from tips about the fund's trading plans.
The other co-chairman, Bruce D. Sturman, has sued Mr.
Singer and his fellow directors, who include three Singer family members, claiming they failed to cooperate with authorities investigating those charges.
A former director is waging a proxy battle to oust the entire board.
But at a stormy meeting last Thursday, the company's board did little more than grant Mr.
Singer a leave, suspend Mr.
Sturman as co-chairman and hire a law firm to investigate both of them.


Cheryl LaSota, William Bundy
Cheryl Maria LaSota, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas R. LaSota of Overland Park, Kan., was married yesterday to William Paul Bundy, a son of Dorothy M. Bundy of Olympia, Wash.
The Rev.
Thomas F. Pike performed the Episcopal ceremony at Calvary Church in New York.
Mrs.
Bundy, 25 years old, is a marketing associate at Offitbank, a New York investment-management concern.
She graduated from Smith College.


Results Plus
GOLF  Two Are Tied for L.P.G.A.
Lead Barb Mucha, who played varsity golf at nearby Michigan State, shot a seven-under-par 65 yesterday and climbed into a share of the third-round lead with Deb Richard in the Oldsmobile Classic in East Lansing, Mich.
Richard, playing despite intense back pain, followed her second-round 64 with a 69 at Walnut Hills Country Club.
Mucha and Richard were at 11-under 205 in the $500,000 L.P.G.A. event, two shots ahead of Jane Geddes, who shot a 65.
Mucha had eight birdies without a bogey. (AP)


A Kiss Uncaptured by Rodin
Museum of Modern Art; May 27, 10:30 P.M.


Annie Hunter, David Watt
Elizabeth Anderson Hunter, the daughter of Fraser L. Hunter of Southern Pines, N.C., and Mrs.
Rial P. Ogden of Washington, Conn., was married there yesterday to David Rockwell Watt, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard M. Watt of Mendham, N.J.
The Rev.
Robert L. Ficks performed the Episcopal ceremony at St.
John's Church.
Mrs.
Watt, who is 28 years old and known as Annie, is an assistant buyer in New York for Belk Stores, a department store chain in the Southeast.
She graduated from Kenyon College.
Her father is the chairman of the Bethesda Group, a holding company that specializes in furniture manufacturing.


Gondola Dreams
WATERMARK
By Joseph Brodsky. 135 pp. New York: Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux.


