About Those A.I.D. Charges . . .
To the Editor:
In "How Washington Exports U.S. Jobs" (Forum, Oct. 18), Jack Sheinkman, president of the Amalgamated Clothing and Textile Workers Union, alleges that "A.I.D. programs are contributing to the deindustrialization of the American economy while preying on, and compounding the misery of, the people of the Caribbean." That charge is just plain wrong.


Gallery in West Nyack Bursts With Art, History and Politics
THAT the uproar at the Rockland Center for the Arts is strictly visual does not make it any less overwhelming.
Like contestants in a televised debate, most of the artists in "Troubled Waters" seem to be talking at once and in the same decibel range.
This is yet another political show, but unlike the competition -- for example, last month's political display at the Katonah Museum -- it comes right out with the similarities between "then" (1930 to 1942) and "now" (1980 to 1992).
Also addressed are the differences between the periods, although not the principal one, which is that the first ended with global war and the second has yet to be resolved and may only have just begun.
Then there are the esthetic disparities, which boil down to the overall seediness of the 1930's versus the relative lushness and grandiosity of the present era.


Quiet Draw for Fischer and Spassky
Bobby Fischer tried the same type of quiet positional play yesterday in Game 27 that he had used to defeat Boris Spassky in Game 9, but this time it got him nothing.
The players agreed to a draw after 46 moves of uneventful, though stubborn, maneuvering.
Fischer has nine victories in their Belgrade match, and will be awarded the winner's $3.35 million prize if he can add one more to his score.
Spassky has won five, and seems headed for the loser's share, $1.65 million.
Nevertheless, he seems determined not to be a pushover.


Talking: Closing Costs; Lenders And Sellers Helping
BECAUSE the depressed economy is making it difficult for borrowers to come up with the cash to pay mortgage loan closing costs, lenders and sellers are being forced to do more to help.
"Nobody has any cash anymore," said Michael Sovereign, manager of the Buffalo office of Norwest Mortgage Inc., a national lender.
"And even if they do, they're afraid to use it."


The Gang That Really Drove Straight
The police nicknamed them the "crash and carry gang," and they robbed fancy New York stores like Lanvin, Tourneau Corner and Antonovich Furs.
The name came from their unsubtle methods -- more like rhino burglary than cat burglary: They would crash a stolen truck through the front windows in the early morning darkness, grab what they could and race away.
"It was like a bomb hit the store," said the vice president of Jindo Furs, whose shop on Manhattan's East Side was cleaned out four years ago.


Lisa W. Manson, Kevin J. Degen
Geraldine W. Manson of Fair Haven, N.J., and William J. Manson Jr. of Palm Beach, Fla., have announced the engagement of their daughter Lisa Witmer Manson to Kevin Joseph Degen, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert F. Degen Jr. of Larchmont, N.Y.
A December wedding is planned.
Miss Manson is a vice president of and the New York unit manager for the Bank of Boston International.
She graduated from the University of New Hampshire.
Her father is the chairman of the Kari Corporation, an insurance consulting company in Washington.


Carla Gochman, Claude Devillers
Carla Ellen Gochman, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Mervin Gochman of Closter, N.J., was married on Thursday in Paris to Claude Herve Devillers, the son of Gerard Devillers and Francoise Devillers, both of Paris.
Rabbi Daniel Gotlieb performed the ceremony at Synagogue de Montevideo.
Mrs.
Devillers, 29 years old, is the manager of treasury services for Coca-Cola France in Paris.
She graduated cum laude from Yale University and received an M.B.A. and a master's degree in international studies from the University of Pennsylvania.
Her father is a life sales consultant with the Aetna Life Insurance Company in New York.
Her mother, Barbara Gochman, is an advertising assistant at the Sony Corporation of America in Park Ridge, N.J.


Who Wants Only 'Tosca' At Bedtime?
Recent hand-wringing in these pages about the absence of black musicians and black listeners at symphony orchestra concerts came to my attention while I was sitting at home listening to Little Jimmy Scott and Kenny Barron sing and play popular ballads via compact disk.
The article noted the small number of black conductors and rehearsed a number of reasons why so few blacks go into this line of work, or are even interested in the product.
It is a worrisome problem for the orchestra business, but I admit that when Mr.
Scott started singing "Embraceable You," I forgot all about it.
One explanation that did not come up in this article is that black people may have more important things to do with their time.


Abrams Apologizes; Ferraro Endorses
Robert Abrams apologized to Geraldine Ferraro for the negative tone of New York's Democratic primary and said that allegations about her links to organized crime were "unfortunate and inaccurate." His campaign released a television advertisement in which Ms.
Ferraro endorsed Mr.
Abrams and criticized his rival, Alfonse M. D'Amato, for his anti-abortion stand.
Article, page 49.


Not Just What We See, But How We See
JOE McNALLY took 36,000 pictures for a magazine assignment, which resulted in the 40-page, 40-picture story, "The Sense of Sight," that dominates the November issue of National Geographic.
Mr.
McNally described the story's genesis to 100 young photographers at the fifth annual Eddie Adams Workshop last month in Jeffersonville, N.Y.
He said that he got a phone call from Thomas R. Kennedy, the National Geographic senior assistant editor who is in charge of photography at the magazine.


Crazy for Birds, but No Birdy
Jane March, the 19-year-old British model who stars in Jean-Jacques Annaud's "The Lover," has birds on the brain.
"I kept two birds while we were filming in Vietnam," she said on Tuesday, while visiting the Houston Street apartment of Hunt Slonem, a painter and collector of exotic fowl.
"The owl I found. One day, I saw some kids chasing it with a stone. They weren't going to give up at this game, so I bought it off them for $1. I nursed him back to health and let him go. I also had a banana bird. It ate nothing but bananas and sang all day."


POSTINGS: Retail Opening; Three B's on Ladies' Mile
Developers have had modest success in carving office spaces out of the upper floors of Ladies' Mile buildings on Sixth Avenue below 23d Street.
But retailers have not followed new office tenants to the huge turn-of-the century buildings there.
That may change with the opening today of Bed, Bath and Beyond, a 50,000-square-foot home accessories store that will occupy the ground floor of the former Siegel-Cooper building at 620 Sixth Avenue, between 18th and 19th Streets.
The store has also leased an equal amount of basement space.
Most of the upper floors in the six-story building are vacant.


Officials Warn Of Violence In South Egypt
Embassy officials of the United States, Britain and Australia have warned their citizens to stay out of areas in southern Egypt following an attack last week by Islamic militants on an open safari-type vehicle that killed a British tourist.
The officials said their warning did not apply to the major tourist sites, such as Luxor and Aswan.
The State Department's advisory cautioned Americans against traveling to Minya and Asyut provinces, particularly the town of Dairut, in Asyut, and surrounding areas.
The underground Islamic Group warned foreign visitors at the end of August to stop going tourist sites in Upper Egypt or risk injury.
The group has vowed that the attacks against foreign visitors will continue "unless the regime stops repeated detentions, frees all detainees immediately, stops torture and allows the call to God to resume."


Texas Banks Closed; Bailout May Cost $500 Million
Federal banking authorities said they have closed the First City Bancorporation of Houston, one of the largest banks in Texas, after finding that its two largest subsidiaries were insolvent.
Officials of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation said Friday night that the Government would have to put up about $500 million to protect depositors in First City and its 20 bank subsidiaries, which had total assets of $8.8 billion, and prepare the bank for sale to private interests.


TRANSACTIONS
Football National Football League  NEW YORK JETS -- Activated Dennis Byrd, defensive end, from the practice squad.
Placed Bill Pickel, defensive tackle, on injured reserve.


Wall Street; You Thought You'd Seen All the Election Indicators?
What's in a name?
Maybe more than you think.
Three stocks with familiar names in this election year have shown a surprising tendency to mirror the performance of their unrelated namesakes.
In the chart at right, which measures the 1992 performance of three stocks, the early high flyer was Ross Cosmetics of Duncan, S.C., an importer of faux perfumes that crashed last summer amid suspicions that its reported profits were phony. (Last week the company said most of its figures were right, and the stock rallied.)


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
CELTIC CULTURE
All things Irish will be celebrated at the Eleventh Annual Wild Geese Celtic New Year Ball Saturday at the Hyatt Regency in Old Greenwich.
Each year the nonprofit organization brings Catholic and Protestant children to the United States for six-week stays with American families, and transports American high school students to Ireland for five-week study programs.


Misstep?
To the Editor:
Anna Kisselgoff's article about American Ballet Theater, "In the Wings, Survival Tactics"  [ Oct. 18 ] , reminded me of a baffling situation that has existed for at least a decade: Why must the Ballet Theater season invariably coincide with the New York City Ballet spring season across the Lincoln Center plaza, thereby dividing the ever-shrinking ballet audience?
RICHARD OSTERWEIL New York


Trading Low-Income Housing for Bonuses
EARTHMOVING equipment is shifting tons of material on a full block near Lincoln Center for the Lincoln Square project, a $234-million complex that will be 20 percent larger than normal zoning would allow because of low-income housing built on 104th and 107th Streets.
On West End Avenue, a few blocks from Lincoln Square, a $180-million complex is planned to include 1,000 rental apartments.
Because 20 percent of the apartments in the development, which is called Manhattan West, are to be rented to low-income tenants, the project's owners will pay no city property taxes on their building for its first 10 years and will not be taxed on the basis on its full value for 20 years.


With Apologies to Wordsworth
To the Editor:
Alison Lurie's admiring review of Peter Ackroyd's novel "English Music" (Oct. 11) singles out for special comment Mr.
Ackroyd's description of what she calls "a perfect country dawn": "As  [ Timothy ]  crossed the meadow, he noticed a hare ahead of him; with her feet she was raising a mist from the dew which, glittering in the sun, hovered around her wherever she leapt."


No Party for Expansion Managers
Don Baylor, who has never managed, and Rene Lachemann, who hasn't for eight years, are delighted to have landed long-sought jobs, but the Colorado Rockies and the Florida Marlins haven't done them any favors.
History makes that painfully clear.
Baylor and Lachemann join an elite circle of 10 predecessors who have managed baseball expansion teams.
Only one, Bill Rigney with the Los Angeles and California Angels, had anything other than a losing season.
In 34 full seasons, the expansion managers experienced only 3 seasons at or above .500, all belonging to Rigney.
All of them, including Rigney, wound up with losing records for their tenures with the expansion teams.


Roaring Twenties


Ellsworth Kelly's Coming of Age in Paris
Even in this art season, with so many major exhibitions jostling for attention, "Ellsworth Kelly: The Years in France, 1948-1954" is special.
The show, which opens here today at the National Gallery of Art, tells the story of a young expatriate finding himself artistically.
Because the subject is Mr.
Kelly, the story is dense, inspired and meaningful for what it suggests about the evolution of postwar American art.
It begins with a room of small, quirky abstractions, mostly gray like the convalescent city of Paris to which Mr.
Kelly moved as a 25-year-old student on the G.I.
Bill; it ends with one room after another that is bathed in the generous, glorious colors of the large paintings he eventually produced in France, and which have been the basis for his work ever since.
Far from radical, the transition unfolds as logical and almost inevitable, given Mr.
Kelly's idiosyncratic interests.


While You're Saving for a van Gogh: A Guide to Inexpensive Art Books
IT is a widespread opinion, and one not quite without foundation, that art books are getting to be painfully, not to say prohibitively, expensive.
This is conspicuously the case with exhibition catalogues.
There is simply no way to reach the standard now expected of a great museum at a bargain price.
That is doubtless one reason why in 1988 the Metropolitan Museum of Art began setting up, for many of its major exhibitions, a reading room in which visitors can draw up a chair, sit at a table and read the catalogue.
It is a fine idea.
That room is constantly thronged with serious readers who clutch the catalogue with both hands as if their very futures hung upon it.


'A Day Away From Tallulah . . .'
To the Editor:
The quotation "A day with Tallulah Bankhead is equal to a month in the country" insinuates that a day with Tallulah is restful (where has Mr. Sheed been?).


Correction
The diagram for the chess column last Sunday included a misplaced piece.
The white queen should have been at e4.


For Fresh Salads In Winter
LATE last summer, I actually remembered to plant some fall crops, and last night we feasted on tender spinach, arugula, Red Sails lettuce and lemon sorrel.
I also have some young bok choi that probably won't take a freeze, but there's a little thumb-shaped dark-green leaf called shungiku and a patch of mache that I have high hopes for.
These greens are supposed to make it through a snowstorm.
I have one kale plant about as big as my little finger, so I doubt it will make it through the winter, but we'll see.
My mother planted a whole row of this hardy green, but a heavy rain washed most of the seeds away.
So it goes.
We all know about fall crops, but by late August or September I can rarely get up the enthusiasm even to throw a few seeds in the ground.
But spinach picked five minutes before dinner is just as welcome in November as in late March, especially when the first hard frost has left all the tomatoes lying in a mushy heap and the nasturtiums as soggy as wet newspaper. (I also didn't get around to protecting my baby fig tree, so I don't know if it will come back next year.)


Olivia Sohmer, D. J. Rosenbaum
Bernard and Margot Sohmer of Jackson Heights, Queens, have announced the engagement of their daughter Olivia Sohmer to Daniel Jesse Rosenbaum, a son of Herbert and Nahoma Rosenbaum of Rockville Centre, L.I.
A March wedding is planned.
Ms.
Sohmer, 31 years old, is an assistant district attorney in New York.
She graduated summa cum laude from Queens College, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and she received a law degree from Yale University.
Her father is a mathematics professor and the ombudsman at City College in New York.
Her mother is a teacher of English as a second language in New York.


A Violinist and a Violist: Love For Music and Each Other
IN a way, they form a quartet the two of them with their instruments.
The viola and the violin are leading characters in the story of Emanuel Vardi and Lenore Weinstock, fellow musicians, teacher and student, husband and wife.
He doesn't look his 75 years, although he readily refers to his days playing in the NBC Symphony under Arturo Toscanini.
Neither does she look 42, as she sits in jeans, a sweat shirt and cowboy boots in the couple's dramatic living room here, in this hamlet in the town of Cortlandt, discussing their life together in music and the concert they will give next Saturday in Croton-on-Hudson.


Of My Friend Hector And My Achilles Heel
THIS STORY is about prejudice and stupidity. My own.
It begins in 1945 when I was a 7-year-old living on the fifth floor of a tenement walkup on 107th Street between Columbus and Manhattan Avenues in New York City.
The block was almost entirely Irish and Italian, and I believe my family was the only Jewish one around.


Joan A. Herz, Peter M. Tafti
Joan Alison Herz, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Marvin Herz of Rochester, was married there last evening to Peter M. Tafti, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Shapoor B. Tafti of New York.
Judge John J. Ark of the Brighton, N.Y., town court performed the ceremony at the Genesee Valley Club.
Mrs.
Tafti, 32 years old, is a doctoral candidate in counseling psychology at Columbia University, as is her husband.
She graduated from Tulane University and received a master's degree in psychology counseling from Harvard University.
Her father is a professor of psychiatry at the University of Rochester Medical School.


G.O.P. Defectors: Who and Why?
JENNIFER HAUGE of Secaucus is a 32-year-old lawyer and Republican whose roots in the party run deep.
Her father was a speech writer for President Dwight D. Eisenhower.
Heidi Ehman, a 27-year-old Hawthorne resident, voted for Ronald Reagan and George Bush.
Her parents worked in Barry Goldwater's campaign in 1964.


Medical Malpractice Study Finds Unjust Payments Are Rare
A new study of medical malpractice cases finds that, contrary to popular belief, unjustified payments are rare.
The study, published today in Annals of Internal Medicine, says that doctors' care was, in fact, substandard in most cases in which patients won payment for injuries.


HBO as a Modern-Day Dickens
CHARLES DICKENS and Home Box Office would seem to have little in common -- except perhaps that they have both charged for their services, Dickens by the word and HBO by the month.
But Michael J. Fuchs, the chairman of Home Box Office Inc., thinks the pay-television company, which began 20 years ago next Sunday, can be the new Dickens for the American underclass.
It will soon roll out programs including a mini-series on black families and movies about Latino gangs, the gun culture in the ghetto and a potential medical epidemic among the poor.


OCT. 25-31: The Name on the Dollar; U.S. Treasurer Is Suspended As F.B.I. Raids Ex-Employer
In another late-season surprise for the Bush Administration, Federal agents raided homes and offices in Washington and Georgia as part of an influence-peddling investigation aimed at Catalina V. Villalpando, the United States Treasurer.
On Thursday, the Treasury Department placed Ms.
Villalpando on paid leave from her $112,300-a-year post overseeing the Mint and savings bonds.
She said her actions were "proper and lawful."


Cola Coattails Presidential Pop And Circumstance
COME Tuesday, Americans will be voting for more than just a President.
They will also be selecting a soft drink.
Presidential spokesman Marlin Fitzwater may have dismissed the relatively youthful Clinton-Gore ticket as "The Pepsi Boys" and said the Republicans "have the real thing," but history suggests that he's got the wrong one, baby, unh-unh.


Vote on the Issues, and May the Best Man Win; He Led Us to Peace
To the Editor:
Within days we elect the next President of the United States.
As I watched the debates and read the commentaries in newspapers and news magazines, I reflected on a precedent that might repeat itself.


Retronym Watch
THe story is told of a modern mother laying a guilt trip on her grown-up son: "You never call, you never write, you never fax. . . ."
If he sends her a fax in response, we have a name for what she receives:
fax mail
.  And if he leaves a message on her answering machine, that is becoming known as
voice mail
.
But what of the stuff that comes in a paper envelope along with the greeting cards, bills, catalogues, charity solicitations and junk mail?


Little Rock Primes for Election Night Party
The center of downtown Little Rock promises to be an untidy but festive clutter of television satellite trucks, snaking cables, oversized video screens, street vendors and a projected 20,000 to 25,000 strolling party-goers on election night.
Nearly 16 square blocks will be closed to automobile traffic, and luxury hotel suites overlooking the Arkansas River will be taken over by private parties for wealthy Democratic Party contributors and officials.


Messiaen's 'Eclairs": Assembly Required
Even in the best of circumstances, the task Zubin Mehta set himself for his return to the New York Philharmonic on Thursday would not have been easy.
Conducting the orchestra for the first time since he departed as its music director a year and a half ago, Mr.
Mehta will present the premiere of an imposing full-evening work by the French composer Olivier Messiaen, "Eclairs sur l'Au-Dela," which the Philharmonic commissioned at the conductor's instigation as part of its 150th-anniversary celebration.
And circumstances, as they are wont to do, took a severe turn for the worse last spring, when Messiaen died at the age of 83.


ABOUT-FACE
Norman says he longs "for the day a pacifist . . . sits in the Oval Office." However, he perpetuates the notion that battle shapes the man and makes him more capable of bold leadership.
I suggest that in this time of extraordinary change, when new commitments to friendship and cooperation are being made among cold-war enemies, that there are new opportunities for heroism.


Andrea M. Messina and John R. Cahill
Andrea Marie Messina, a senior writer at Family Circle magazine in New York, was married yesterday in New Brunswick, N.J., to John Robert Cahill, an associate at the New York law firm of Berger Steingut Tarnoff &amp; Stern.
The Rev.
Joan Fleming performed the Episcopal ceremony at Christ Church.
Ms.
Messina, who is 31 years old and is keeping her name, is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Philip Messina of Colonia, N.J.
She graduated from Fordham University and received a master's degree in English literature from the University of Warwick in England.
Her father is a consultant to the chemical industry.
Her mother, Helen Messina, is a regional manager in Colonia with ERA Marketing, a product demonstration company.


Weicker's Gambit: New Party or Old Politics?
Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr. has stumped the state and urged residents in radio ads to elect a State Legislature on Tuesday that would be packed to the rafters with third-party candidates from Mr.
Weicker's own independent Connecticut Party.
But there's a significant caveat: Most of the candidates that his party has endorsed and that will appear on its ballot line, which reads "A Connecticut Party," are not members of the party at all.
Many say that if they win, they won't owe the Governor anything.


Lincoln Center Needs Jazz More Than Jazz Needs High Prices; Legendary Licks
To the Editor:
Re "Jazzing Up Lincoln Center" (editorial, Oct. 19): The Postal Service should create a series of stamps featuring America's jazz greats (no, not Elvis).
Many Americans would treasure such a series.
So would stamp collectors around the world, where jazz is appreciated more than in this country.
Here's a starter list:


Local Cable TV Zaps Back at a Congressman
They used to say you can't fight City Hall.
But in this city, filled with aircraft factories and surrounded by wheat farms, an incumbent Congressman has found it can be even harder to take on the local cable television company.
In what appears to be a determined effort to inflict political punishment, Wichita's cable system has run a barrage of blistering editorials -- more than 1,000 times in the last two weeks -- against Representative Dan Glickman, a 47-year-old Democrat who has represented Kansas's Fourth Congressional District for 16 years.


Brett Says the Royals Want Him to Retire
There is apparently some miscommunication between the Kansas City Royals and GEORGE BRETT.
The Royals on Friday exercised their option on their franchise player, clearing the way for Brett to return for a 20th season at $2.5 million.


Selecting Specials From the TV Screen
TUTTO PAZZO is enlivening the Huntington Harbor area.
No, this new spot in Halesite is not part of the burgeoning bar scene that has made Huntington Village a late-night mecca for the Island's youth.
Rather, it is a snappy, bright, casual pasta cafe with multigenerational appeal.
There is action in the bar, but it centers on devouring complimentary hors d'oeuvres and viewing the antipasto and dessert gustatory floor show displayed nearby.


Vietnamese Photos Resolve Fate of 4 Missing Americans
In months of analyzing hundreds of Vietnamese archival photographs, the Pentagon has been able to resolve with any certainty only four new cases of Americans unaccounted for since the war.
In all cases, the servicemen have been confirmed dead, officials said, and the families have been told.
Analysts are close to identifying at least another three others, according to the Pentagon, but the photographs have yielded more clues than conclusions.


Chic Or Cruel?
THE tag on Cindy Crawford's garment rack read, "Cindy Sado-Maso." Presumably, it referred to the Gianni Versace ensemble hanging beneath it, a mechanically correct harness-bodice paired with a studded leather skirt and gladiator sandals.
That night, in a makeshift dressing room at the Seventh Regiment Armory, at Park Avenue and 66th Street, a transformed Ms.
Crawford stood behind Christy Turlington, who wore her own version of the Versace whip-lady look.
It was mid-September, and the occasion was "Rock and Rule," Mr.
Versace's first New York show in 15 years.


Bachelors' Night Out
Honoring 54 men at the Rainbow Room, Oct. 26.


WHITE MEN CAN'T DRUM
In "White Men Can't Drum" (Oct. 4), Sherman Alexie demonstrates his knowledge of Native American customs as well as his ignorance of the men's movement and the use of pre-industrial symbols in it.


Salmonella Poisoning Strikes 145 Who Attended Luncheon
The New York City Health Department is investigating an outbreak of salmonella poisoning that struck 145 people at a recent luncheon held by the Foreign Policy Association, a nonprofit educational group that attracts many prominent speakers to its meetings.
A spokeswoman for the City Department of Health, Margaret Karanjai, said that 15 people were hospitalized in the days following the Oct. 14 luncheon, which was catered by the Brasserie, a well-known French restaurant in midtown, and that one person died.
But the Medical Examiner's office said that the death was due to a heart attack, and that it is not yet known whether salmonella was a factor.


Death Again Dims Racing's Biggest Day
The Breeders' Cup, the most glamorous day of the racing year, was only one minute old today when it turned into the most distressing day of the racing year.
Fourteen horses were in full flight entering the turn into the homestretch of the six-furlong race known as the Sprint when the 5-year-old British horse Mr.
Brooks collapsed under a broken right foreleg, pitched to the dirt track and rolled over 56-year-old Lester Piggott, the most accomplished jockey in European racing.


Fiesta Time
The Casita Maria benefit at the Plaza, Oct. 27.


The Right Stuff
To the Sports Editor:
"Football the Way It Oughta Be Played" (The Times, Oct. 2) made this Columbia man stand up and cheer.
I played in 1939-41, and graduated in 1942.
October 31 was our 50th reunion homecoming game against Princeton.
My team's last game, against Princeton, was played at Princeton in 1941.
We won, 21-0, and our three touchdowns were scored by three men worth remembering: Paul Governali, an all-American and the Maxwell Award winner; Phil Bayer, who scored the winning touchdown against Georgia in 1940 and a Marine killed in action on Palau in 1944, and Stewart McIlvennen, a 170-pound fullback, basketball captain, recently retired lawyer and the only survivor of the three.


Court Curtails the Use of Co-ops as Bed-and-Breakfasts
Over the last few years, hundreds of co-op owners in New York City have furtively turned their spare bedrooms and vacant apartments into bed-and-breakfasts, helping them keep up with the cost of property that many cannot resell, and offering tourists a homey, inexpensive alternative to the city's hotels.
But now, overturning a judge's ruling that had given some legitimacy to these hosts, a state appeals court has held that a co-op's board of directors has the right to prohibit a shareholder from operating a bed-and-breakfast in his apartment.


The Trouble With Going By the Book
ONCE upon a time I really did speak Spanish, in that halcyon interval between my last year of high school Spanish and my first year of Russian in college.
The subsequent hiatus of more than three decades is a roundabout way of explaining why words failed when my rental car was towed away in Granada.
When my wife Jaqueline and I vacationed in Spain this summer, our first encounters with local residents made clear that my vaunted Spanish was much rustier than my ego had acknowledged.
What I needed was a little prompting, which is why one afternoon in Madrid, I forwent my siesta to buy a Spanish phrase book.


Days Dwindle Down for Successful Striped Bass Fishing
By mid-July before the quest for Atlantic salmon claimed my attention, I had caught more than 130 striped bass with a fly rod this season and had kept only two of them.
It isn't that I don't enjoy eating stripers.
Only two of those fish reached or exceeded Massachusetts' minimum length limit -- 36 inches -- for the species, although two dozen of them were over 30 inches.
On the Vineyard, angling for stripers traditionally slows in mid-summer, picking up again in September.
In late September, I pursued bass with a fly rod from the Vineyard's beaches for seven nights over a two-week period and was rewarded with less than half a dozen small fish.


High School Football Report
P.S.A.L.
BACK TO THE FRIDGE: George Najjar, the coach of LINCOLN (7-0), took a page out of Mike Ditka's playbook yesterday in the Railsplitters 42-8 victory over MADISON (2-5) as he let Vic Allotey, a 6-foot-4-inch, 265-pound tackle, run it in from 1-yard out.
Corey Valentine (7 of 15 for 166 yards) threw two of his three touchdown strikes to Jeff Miller.
Frankie Sinclair (11 carries, 119 yards) scored 2 touchdowns, bringing his season total to 15.
FALCONS FLYING HIGH: Tom Reali (11 of 22, 200 yards) tossed 2 touchdowns and Javonne Darling (14 carries, 100 yards) rushed for 2 others as WAGNER (8-0) continued its dominance over P.S.A.L. opponents and defeated KENNEDY (6-2), 36-20.
In eight games, the Falcons have outscored their opponents, 282-66.
Aaron Sullivan caught 7 for 131 yards, including a 41-yard touchdown reception.
Sullivan also recovered 2 fumbles, including one that he returned 20 yards.
A FIELDS DAY FOR MARTIN: Chris Fields caught 5 passes for 147 yards and 2 touchdowns to catapult AUGUST MARTIN (3-3-1) over CLINTON (2-5), 24-13.
STOPPERS: Erick Van Tuyl picked off 2 passes and Mitch Janoff recorded 10 tackles as STUYVESANT defeated FLUSHING, 15-8.
C.H.S.F.L.
MOUNTING A SHUTOUT: Senior halfback Kiron Dawkins had 103 yards on 9 carries including a 49-yard touchdown run, his ninth of the year, to lead MOUNT ST.
MICHAEL to a 33-0 drubbing of FORDHAM PREP.
The Mounties' backs rushed for 300 yards on the afternoon, and Chris Mayo gained 98 yards on 18 carries.
Mayo, who scored two touchdowns yesterday, has scored at least one touchdown in each of the Mounties' games.
Long Island ONE-MAN SHOW: Dennis Kramer rushed 25 times for 184 yards and 3 touchdowns as SACHEM (5-0-1) dumped WARD MELVILLE (2-3-1), 34-14. . . .
Brian Herbert caught touchdown passes of 53 yards and 24 yards, and returned a fumble 5 yards for another score as BETHPAGE pounded PLAINEDGE 35-3. . . .
Anthony Brooks scored all three of GREAT NECK NORTH's touchdowns and rushed for 133 yards on 18 carries as the Blazers defeated ROSLYN, 19-6.
Patrick Moffett had three sacks and David Seaman had three interceptions. . . .
Dan Rosario returned an interception 37 yards and caught one of Jim McGowan's 2 touchdown passes as BELLPORT (6-0), the Sports Writers Association's No. 1 rated team in the state, cruised past HUNTINGTON (2-4), 28-7.
WHAT'S GOOD FOR THE GOOSE EGG: Courtney Watson recorded 7 tackles, 2 sacks and caused 2 fumbles, including one that was returned 60 yards by tackle Richard Etheridge, to help HEMPSTEAD (5-1) shut out FARMINGDALE (4-1-1), 12-0.
Larry Watts connected with Alvin Virgo with a 65-yard scoring strike to help the Tigers avenge last year's 20-0 loss to Farmingdale in the Conference I championship game.
The Dalers also defeated Hempstead, 30-0, last year during the regular season.
THE M&amp;M BOYS: On the last play of the game, Charles Martin threw a 55-yard desperation pass to his younger brother, Marvin, to lift ROOSEVELT (5-1) over MINEOLA (2-4), 26-22.
Yesterday's game was the first Marvin Martin has started.
"After what he did today, how could I take him out of the lineup," said Roosevelt Coach Joseph Vito.
While all-Nassau County runner Andrew Pittman was held to only 10 yards yesterday, it was all he needed to become the first running back on Long Island to reach 4,000 career yards.
RECORD SETTERS: Peter Murphy scored three touchdowns and Devin Laden returned an interception 30 yards as GARDEN CITY (6-0) won its 26th consecutive game, breaking Long Island's consecutive victory string of 25, by defeating WESTBURY (1-5), 34-0.
The previous record was set by Farmingdale in 1973.
MISSED CROSS BARS ACROSS TOWN: Steve DeAmicus of EAST ISLIP (4-1-1) missed a 40-yard field goal with 3 seconds to play as the Redmen were forced to settle for a 14-14 tie with cross-town rival WEST ISLIP (5-0-1).
SECRETARIES OF DEFENSE: Peter Connolly recorded 7 tackles and 2 sacks as MASSAPEQUA's (4-2) defense allowed only 22 yards in its 20-7 victory over BALDWIN (2-4). . . .
ISLAND TREES (5-1) led by John Kaiser (8 tackles, 1 sack) and Carmine Apuzzo (2 sacks) held LOCUST VALLEY's (4-2) offense to 17 total yards and won, 27-8.
Apuzzo (17 carries for 169 yards) and Doug Reitzen (10 carries for 127) each scored 2 touchdowns for the Bulldogs.
Preps HOMECOMING KING: Sam Gilbert ran 35 yards for a touchdown and caught 79-yard pass for another score as FIELDSTON won its homecoming game, 21-6, over DWIGHT-ENGLEWOOD.
TRIFECTA PAYOFF: Todd Pollack threw 3 touchdowns and Gil Manuch returned a punt 88 yards as BRUNSWICK (7-0) routed HARVEY (1-6), 38-0.
Connecticut THREE OF A KIND: Roy Richards rushed for 3 touchdowns and 166 yards on 15 carries as BULKELEY (4-3) routed SOUTHINGTON (1-6), 33-0.
COMBINED EFFORT: Mike Fitzpatrick and Tim Fleiszer teamed up to rushed for 256 yards on 38 carries to help lead CHOATE (4-2) over NORTHFIELD MT HERMON (0-6), 24-6.
Nick Bockh kicked a 30-yard field goal.
New Jersey SWEET SEVENTEEN: Mark DeRosa (6 of 10 for 229 yards) threw a school-record 4 touchdowns, 2 to Mark Fabish (3 receptions, 151 yards) as BERGEN CATHOLIC (6-0) gained its 17 consecutive victory and routed PATTERSON EASTSIDE (1-5), 48-7.
Fabish also returned a kickoff 79 yards for a score.
In six games, the Crusaders have outscored their opponents, 256-35.
DEUCES WILD: Mike Marchiano (19 carries, 127 yards) and Mike Barnish (4 carries, 98 yards) each rushed for two scores as JEFFERSON (6-1) pounded VERNON VALLEY (1-6), 42-8.


POSTINGS: More Space for the Feds; White Plains Courthouse
Construction is scheduled to start in January on a $33 million Federal Courthouse in White Plains.
Occupying 155,000 square feet, the seven-story building, which is scheduled to be completed in September 1994, will be situated on a 99,600-square-foot downtown site at South Lexington Avenue and Quarropas Street.


Apartheid Party's New Allies: Mixed-Race Voters
David Valentine, one of the three million mixed-race South Africans classified in the apartheid caste system as "coloreds," was 7 years old when the governing white National Party stripped his people of their right to vote.
He was 17 when a National Party Government evicted his family and 60,000 neighbors from their homes in Cape Town and scattered them across the windblown flats of the Cape Penninsula.


Behind Vietnam's Candor: A Fear of Being Isolated
A Vietnamese-speaking Russian named Irina Zisman is now touring the United States to the applause of Vietnamese-Americans and the consternation of Hanoi.
Ms.
Zisman recently began a prime-time evening broadcast on Radio Moscow that beams pro-democracy messages to Vietnam through the same powerful Siberian transmitters that once relayed programs on the glories of Communism.
Hanoi's stunned officials have branded the broadcasts subversive, but their protests to Moscow have been unavailing.
For them, the experience has been a painful illustration of how the world has changed; it also offers a clue to Hanoi's motives in pledging, after 20 years of obfuscation, to finally reveal what it knows about Americans unaccounted for in Indochina since the war.


Rafting Jamaica's Rio Grande
WHITE herons are swarming into the pocked cliff above the river as the sun slants westward.
The sky darkens over the jungle.
But there is no menace on Jamaica's Rio Grande, even when the vultures circle high above our raft.
Instead, there is stillness and romance.
There are the sounds of reggae from the shore, although no one is visible.
It seems to dance over the palm fronds, then fades away as the raft skims through the rapids.
Occasionally, we can see a naked man bathing on the shore.
Twilight comes and the clouds are turning purple in the far distance.
Rafting along the Rio Grande on Jamaica's unspoiled northeast coast does not come sanitized and packaged, even though rafting is an advertised tourist attraction.


New &amp; Noteworthy
MAKING HISTORY, by Carolyn See. (Laurel/Dell, $10.) Jerry Bridges, a California businessman, believes in technology's ability to perfect the world -- until human error and the randomness of fate intrude.
In a story framed by two devastating accidents, his family drifts apart, then reconnects.
"Ms. See sets out to catch the sound of our world singing its way into the future," Susan Fromberg Schaeffer said here last year.
"The miracle is how well she has succeeded."
LONE STAR RISING: Lyndon Johnson and His Times, 1908-1960, by Robert Dallek. (Oxford University, $16.95.) Former President Lyndon B. Johnson was a complicated man, guilty of both egotism and ethical lapses, yet deeply dedicated to making government an agent of social progress.
In this biography, the first of two volumes, Robert Dallek has taken the position of "a seeker after truth rather than someone out to attack or defend," our reviewer, Nicholas Lemann, said last year.
He added: "For better and for worse, Mr. Dallek is the rare present-day practitioner of the 'three yards and a cloud of dust' school of biography. He lays out the facts and allows the grand themes to emanate from them, relatively untouched by authorial hands." A later and more personal portrait is offered by Joseph A. Califano Jr., who was Johnson's special assistant for domestic affairs, in THE TRIUMPH &amp; TRAGEDY OF LYNDON JOHNSON: The White House Years (Touchstone/Simon &amp; Schuster, $13).
"What makes this memoir . . . stand out is its vividness," Laura Kalman said here last year.
"Johnson leaps out of the pages in all his raw and earthy glory."


OCT. 25-31: Iran-Contra Indictment; New Weinberger Notes Say Bush Approved Selling Iran Missiles for Hostages
President Bush has long said that he was "out of the loop" on any decisions within the Reagan Administration to secretly sell arms to Iran in exchange for help in getting hostages in Lebanon released.
But Caspar W. Weinberger's handwritten notes of a January 1986 meeting in the Oval Office were released last week by a grand jury, and they say that there was a debate among the men there and that Mr.
Bush favored letting Israel sell the Iranians 4,000 anti-tank missiles in return for getting five hostages out.
The notes read: "President decided to go with Israeli-Iranian offer to release our 5 hostages in return for sale of 4,000 TOW's to Iran by Israel -- George Shultz &amp; I opposed -- Bill Casey, Ed Meese &amp; VP favored -- as did Poindexter."


Spicing Up Fresh Fish and Shellfish
Most fresh fish and even some shellfish are extremely delicate tasting.
Yet this does not preclude using lusty seasonings when preparing them.
The relatively bland flavor of the seafood can serve as the background for more than a mere touch of garlic, hot pepper, curry and the like.
But at the same time, when using flavorings like these, there must be some balance so the sharp spicing does not overwhelm the dish.


Issues of Race and Home Rule Confound Death Penalty Vote in Washington
On an unusually warm day last January, the District of Columbia recorded two murders, about average for the city with the nation's highest murder rate.
One killing had little effect beyond the grief to the victim's friends and family.
But the death of the other victim, Thomas Barnes of Tuscaloosa, Ala., meant something else.


Torretta's Passes Lead Miami, 34-23
Linebacker James Wright had predicted West Virginia would have a Halloween surprise tonight.
He said if his team scored 17 points, Miami would leave the Orange Bowl no longer unbeaten.
Center Mike Compton chimed in, "We need a win and we're going to get one against Miami."
So much for talk.
The outcome was never in doubt even though Miami surrendered three late touchdowns before prevailing, 35-23, in the Big East Conference game.


The Chills and Thrills of Physics
AMID the scent of caramel-dipped apples, the whimsical whistle of a calliope, the clatter, clank and screech of giant rides climbing, plunging, whirling, two dozen teachers roam an amusement park midway and, like squealing children liberated from class, revel in a grand-scale physics lesson.
Batman, The Ride: Strapped side by side, feet dangling as though from a ski lift, they are cranked slowly, menacingly, relentlessly to the top of a 120-foot-high roller coaster, then plummeted toward earth to be swept at the last moment into, up and over a 60-foot-high teardrop-shaped loop, at the bottom of which they are propelled to the top of an arch to be twirled, head over heels, as though spun on a barbecue spit.


Topics of The Times; Keeping the Cork on
For Ben Feder, the Clinton campaign has been a bonanza.
Mr.
Feder is a pioneer Hudson Valley vintner.
Since 1977, he has made a crisp, dry white wine from the seyval blanc grape.
Mr.
Feder's estate is in Clinton Corners, N.Y., and his label says Clinton Vineyards.
By late October, Mr.
Feder usually has 700 cases of vintage-dated still wine in stock and 150 of nonvintage sparkling wine.
But today his inventory has shrunk to 95 and 25, respectively.
With the election approaching, Democrats, thirsty for more than the White House, have rung the winery's phone off the hook.


WHITE MEN CAN'T DRUM
What a pleasure to read such common sense about the men's movement.
As a woman, I have had a hard time sympathizing with the distress of this overprivileged segment of our population.
I hope men will see the good sense behind the humor in Sherman Alexie's article.
CLAIRE D. COLES
Atlanta


Perspectives: Lead Paint Legislation; Tailoring Responses to the Level of Risk
A NEW mayoral housing bill dealing with lead paint in New York City apartments has started to wend its way through the City Council, providing another case study of the complexities of dealing with newly discovered environmental risks in old buildings.
The bill would establish a new regulatory system and a grants-and-loan program for rental housing to deal with the danger toyoung children from inhaling lead dust or swallowing lead chips.


Spicing Up Fresh Fish and Shellfish
Most fresh fish and even some shellfish are extremely delicate tasting.
Yet this does not preclude using lusty seasonings when preparing them.
The relatively bland flavor of the seafood can serve as the background for more than a mere touch of garlic, hot pepper, curry and the like.
But at the same time, when using flavorings like these, there must be some balance so the sharp spicing does not overwhelm the dish.


Where ZIP Codes Rank In the World Order
I am incredulous that any of my neighbors could possibly expend any amount of time, energy or concern into changing the last digit of their ZIP code to either appear more affluent than they already are or to purportedly improve the speed of their mail delivery.
Our world is in desperate need of people willing to give comfort to those experiencing the ravages of diseases such as AIDS and cancer.
The very lives of young children are being snuffed out.


Provider
When i was growing up in the 50's, there was only one sort of family, the one we watched on television every day.
Right in front of us, in black and white, was everything we needed to know about family values: the neat patch of lawn, the apple tree, the mother who never once raised her voice, the three lovely children: a Princess, a Kitten, a Bud and, always, the father who knew best.
People stayed married forever back then, and roses grew by the front door.
We had glass bottles filled with lightning bugs and brand-new swing sets in the backyard, and softball games at dusk.
We had summer nights that lasted forever and well-balanced meals, three times a day, in our identical houses, on our identical streets.
There was only one small bargain we had to make to exist in this world: we were never to ask questions, never to think about people who didn't have as much or who were different in any way.
We ignored desperate marriages and piercing loneliness.
And we were never, ever, to wonder what might be hidden from view, behind the unlocked doors, in the privacy of our neighbors' bedrooms and knotty-pine-paneled dens.


Where New Plays Find A 'Home' for Tryouts
KAREN is breathing -- hoo, hoo, hoo, hoo, hoo, hoo -- in the manner of the Lamaze method of natural childbirth.
By the end of Act I, the baby's head is out.
Intermission takes place between contractions.
In Act II of "DaDa," which opens on Thursday at Playwrights Theater of New Jersey in Madison, the baby, a boy, is born -- and David, Karen's panicky husband, completes his "inner journey from fear to ambivalence to commitment," according to Haris Orkin, the playwright.


GAY POLITICS GOES MAINSTREAM
Schmalz's article underscores how far lesbians and gay men have come out of the political closet this year.
While we have always been politically active, our power as a voting bloc has been recognized only recently.
We have made progress, but we still have a long way to go.
Although most Americans oppose job discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation, less than a majority find homosexuality to be an acceptable "life style." Why?
Because we have been invisible for far too long.
When we are visible in the news media, we too often are depicted as an "issue," rather than as individuals with the same hopes, fears and dreams that all Americans share.


Correction
A map on Oct. 4 with an article about cheese in Switzerland referred incorrectly to the town of Olten, and a correction in this section on Oct. 18 misstated its location.
Olten is 20 miles south-southeast of Basel, not Bern.


Traffic Alert
The New York City Marathon will close several streets and bridges today.
A map appears today in SportsSunday, page 3.


Short-Term Camps Go Year Round
"WE SPENT all day by the seashore, collecting sea stars and sea urchins, with someone talking about the environment," said Blake Benjamin, a sixth grader at the Brookfield Elementary School in Brookfield, Mass.
She was describing part of her camping experience, 1990's style.
And she didn't have to wait until summer camp to commune with nature: she had joined a rapidly growing number of students taking part in short-term camps for outdoor education during the regular school year.
"This connects the academic with the real for many kids," said David VanDerWege, director of member and field services for the American Camping Association.
"A lot of schools use it for team building, with the kids coming together in a community."


Ferraro Gets An Apology From Abrams
Ending weeks of behind-the-scenes negotiations with an apology and effusive praise, Robert Abrams said yesterday that he felt "genuine regret" for the tone of the recent Democratic primary battle against Geraldine A. Ferraro, and that "allegations and insinuations" about her links to organized crime "were unfortunate and inaccurate."
Mr.
Abrams, who is challenging Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato in Tuesday's election, lauded his former rival Ms.
Ferraro as an "outstanding leader" and a "pioneer for women," and he recalled that he was "proud to support her in her quest for the Vice Presidency" in 1984.


County Would Get $26.3 Million From Bond Act Approval
FOR the village of Dobbs Ferry, passage of a referendum going before voters on Tuesday could provide $750,000 for a two-tier parking lot in a downtown shopping area that has been hit hard by the recession.
For Mount Vernon, a city that is struggling economically, it could mean $6 million for an urban-renewal project to build a multiservice transportation center.
For 15 Westchester communities and the county, passage of the New York State Jobs Bond Act on Election Day would mean that $26.3 million in state aid will be available for projects designed to help local economies and generate jobs in the private sector.


New Heights in Political Low Blows
TELEVISION shows win Emmys, plays receive Tonys and songs get Grammys.
Should political ads get Meanies?
Compared to the 1988 Presidential campaign, which gave us such memorable images as Willie Horton, Boston Harbor oozing slime and Michael Dukakis driving a tank, the 1992 race has been something of a disappointment.
To be sure, the Bush campaign this weekend is running a commercial that depicts Arkansas as a spooky wasteland, like a scene out of "Pet Sematary." But the old trick of making the opponent's state look like the underworld isn't going to win any prizes for originality.


Trial to Begin in 1989 Slaying Case in Boston
Three years after a pregnant Carol Stuart was murdered, apparently by her husband, Charles, who the police believe committed suicide soon afterward, Mr.
Stuart's brother is scheduled to go on trial Monday for his role in the crime.
Matthew Stuart, 26 years old, has not been charged as an accomplice to the murder.
He is accused of conspiring with his brother to commit life insurance fraud, a scheme that prosecutors say led to Mrs.
Stuart's slaying.
He is also charged with related crimes.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Candidate's Health; Unlike Other Candidates, Perot Won't Give Out Medical Data
Ross Perot is in excellent health, his spokeswoman says.
But unlike the two other major Presidential candidates, the 62-year-old Mr.
Perot has refused to disclose any information about his health.
Mr.
Perot appears trim and healthy, and nothing has surfaced to indicate any serious medical problems.


Benefits
Celebrity Cook-Out
MONDAY -- A score of notables including Paloma Picasso, Peter Boyle, Tatum O'Neal, Joan Rivers and Tony Randall will match their culinary skills at a benefit at the Plaza for the March of Dimes.
Cocktails at 7 P.M. will be followed by the celebrity smorgasbord of hors d'oeuvres, dinner and dancing.
Black tie.
Tickets, $750, or $125 for people 35 years old and under for reception from 7 to 8:30 P.M., from (212) 353-8353.
For Hudson Valley Heritage
MONDAY -- Historic Hudson Valley, which operates five properties along the Hudson River as part of its program to preserve the heritage of the Hudson River Valley, will hold a black-tie dinner-dance benefit at the Rainbow Room.
Cocktails at 7 P.M.
Tickets, $600, from (914) 631-8200.
Senior Gay Benefit
MONDAY -- Senior Action in a Gay Environment, or SAGE, will hold a champagne reception and a concert of the show music of the composer John Kander and the lyricist Fred Ebb ("Cabaret," "Zorba," "Chicago").
Reception at 6:45 P.M. followed by the concert at the Promenade Theater, Broadway at 76th Street.
Tickets, $100, or for the show alone, $75, from (212) 741-2247.
Aid for Medical Students
MONDAY -- A black-tie dinner and dance at the Waldorf-Astoria will raise money for scholarships to New York Medical College.
Cocktails at 6:30 P.M.
Tickets, $350, from (914) 993-4550.
Longtime New Yorkers
WEDNESDAY -- The Hundred Year Association of New York, made up of companies and institutions that have been in the city for at least a century, will honor William R. Chaney, chairman of Tiffany &amp; Company.
The annual black-tie Gold Medal Award Dinner will be held at the Museum of the City of New York, starting with cocktails at 6:30 P.M.
Tickets, $500, from (914) 654-4520.
Pan Asian Theater Benefit
WEDNESDAY -- The premiere of the Pan Asian Repertory Theater production of "Cambodia Agonistes" will be a benefit performance for the theater company at Playhouse 46 at St.
Clement's Church, 423 West 46th Street.
Cocktails at 7:30 P.M.
Tickets, $100, from (212) 245-2660.
A Season Preview
WEDNESDAY -- A cocktail party, auction and preview of the annual Christmas boutique of the Auxiliary of St.
Vincent's Hospital and Medical Center will be held from 6 to 9 P.M. at the Westbury Hotel, Madison Avenue at 69th Street.
Tickets, $100, from (212) 790-8584.
Pajama Party
WEDNESDAY -- Fashion Accessories Industry Together for Health -- Faith -- will hold its first benefit to raise money for the American Foundation for AIDS Research at City, a club at 124 West 43d Street.
Dress is "creative pajamas." Tickets, $250, for cocktails, a fashion show, buffet, dancing and entertainment starting at 8 P.M., or $100 for entrance at 9 P.M., from (212) 355-5049.
Renewal for Israeli Youth
THURSDAY -- The Youth Renewal Fund, which provides educational services for young people in Israel, is holding a dinner-dance benefit at the Harmonie Club, 4 East 60th Street, at 7 P.M.
Tickets, $100, from (212) 687-9022, or $125 at the door.
Greenery for the Bronx
THURSDAY -- The New York Botanical Garden in the Bronx will hold a dinner and dance in its Conservatory to benefit Bronx community gardening programs.
The event starts with cocktails at 6 P.M.
Tickets, $150, from (212) 220-8958.
Amnesty International Event
THURSDAY -- Amnesty International, the worldwide organization that speaks out against the persecution of people for their beliefs, will benefit from the 6:30 P.M.
American premiere of the movie "Indochine" at the Gotham Theater, Third Avenue at 58th Street.
It will be followed by a 9:30 P.M. buffet at the French Embassy Cultural Services, 972 Fifth Avenue, at 79th Street, with Catherine Deneuve, the star of the movie about the French era in Vietnam.
Tickets, $125 -- or for the movie alone, $30 -- from (212) 633-4212.  19th Precinct Programs
THURSDAY -- To help local crime-prevention and athletic programs, the 19th Precinct Community Council of the Upper East Side will hold a cocktail party from 6 to 9 P.M. at the Americas Society, Park Avenue at 68th Street.
The Ballet Hispanico Student Company, the Police Department's Emerald Society Pipe and Drum Band, and the jazz harpist Daphne Hellman will perform.
Tickets, $35, at the door.
Information: (212) 348-4116.
Gold Gloves for Charity
THURSDAY -- Eighteen Major League Baseball players will receive awards for outstanding defense at the Rawlings Gold Glove Award Charity Dinner at the Sheraton New York.
The black-tie evening, starting with cocktails at 6 P.M., will provide money for scholarship funds and the American Cancer Society.
Tickets, $500, from (212) 874-3165.
Night Out for Cerebral Palsy
THURSDAY -- A buffet dinner, drinks, dancing and raffles are on tap at a 7:30 P.M. party at the Broadway Grill, 1605 Broadway, near 48th Street, to benefit United Cerebral Palsy of New York City.
Black tie.
Tickets, $50, from (212) 683-6700, ext. 217, and at the door.
Subterranean Party
THURSDAY -- Dining in 18 restored subway and elevated rapid transit cars dating to 1904 will be part of one of the city's more distinctive benefits at the New York Transit Museum.
The black-tie benefit is for the museum, which is in the former Court Street station, at the corner of Boerum Place and Schermerhorn Street in Brooklyn Heights, two blocks from Borough Hall, and which has some 80,000 visitors a years.
Cocktails will be at 6:30 P.M., followed by dinner and dancing on the mezzanine level.
Tickets, $250, from (718) 330-3063.
Berlin Opera Party
FRIDAY -- The baritone Sherrill Milnes will be honored at a black-tie dinner-dance at the University Club, 1 West 54th Street, sponsored by the American Berlin Opera Foundation, which raises funds for the Deutsche Oper Berlin and for scholarships for Americans to study with the Berlin Opera.
Tickets, $500, from (203) 972-0854.
Staten Island Institute Ball
FRIDAY -- The annual anniversary ball of the Staten Island Institute of Arts and Sciences, one of the city's oldest and most diverse museums, will be at the Monte Bianco, 2131 Hylan Boulevard, near Bedford Avenue in New Dorp.
Cocktails at 7:30 P.M.
Black tie.
Tickets, $125, from (718) 727-1135.
Send In the Clowns
FRIDAY -- The Big Apple Circus will celebrate its 15th anniversary with a fund-raising performance in Lincoln Center's Damrosch Park.
The evening will benefit circus programs including visits by 40 clowns three times a week to eight local hospitals.
Cocktails and a picnic supper, at 6 P.M., will be followed by a full performance, after which the performers will join the audience for dessert and dancing.
Tickets start at $75 for adults and $50 for children, 12 under, from (212) 268-2500.
For Children With Cancer
SATURDAY -- The Tomorrows Children's Fund, an organization of parents aiding children with cancer and serious blood disorders, will hold its annual awards dinner at the Grand Hyatt New York Hotel.
Don Imus, the radio personality, will be honored.
Cocktails, at 6:30 P.M., will be followed by dinner and entertainment by the blues singer Delbert McClinton.
Tickets, $250, from (201) 996-2900.
Jazz in White Plains
SATURDAY -- The jazz musician Billy Taylor will entertain at the Performing Arts Center at the State University at Purchase, N.Y.
The evening, starting at 7 P.M. with cocktails and followed by a buffet dinner, the performance and champagne and dessert, will benefit a proposed cancer diagnostic and treatment center and hospice program at the White Plains Hospital Center.
Tickets, $200, or for concert and post-concert reception alone, $100, from (914) 681-1120.
Salute for an Activist
NOV. 8 -- Arthur B. Krim, the 83-year-old Hollywood producer of more than 1,000 films and a civil rights and political activist, will be honored by People for the American Way, an organization founded in 1980 to protect Constitutional liberties.
A black-tie benefit for the group will be held at the Waldorf-Astoria starting with cocktails, at 6 P.M., and followed by dinner, dancing and entertainment, including a performance by Harry Belafonte.
Tickets, $500, from (212) 944-5820.
Connecticut Afternoon
NOV. 8 -- The Housatonic Valley Association, an environmental group concerned with one of Connecticut's most scenic river valleys, will hold a brunch and auction.
The events and items for bid include a private piano lesson with Peter Duchin, lunch with Erica Jong, fly fishing with Tom Brokaw, original manuscripts from Philip Roth's forthcoming book and exotic trips.
Brunch is scheduled for 1 P.M at the Litchfield Inn on Route 202 in Litchfield, Conn., followed by a champagne reception, viewing of the items and the auction at 3:30 P.M.
Tickets, $100, or for the reception and auction only starting at 2 P.M., $25, from (203) 672-6678.
New Jersey Cruise
NOV. 8 -- The Paper Mill Playhouse will hold a four-hour cruise around New York Harbor to mark its 10th anniversary in its playhouse in Millburn, N.J., which was built after fire destroyed the original building.
Boarding will be at 5 P.M. at Harborside Dock in Jersey City for the cruise that will include cocktails, dinner and entertainment.
Parking is available at the dock or at the playhouse, where there will be buses to the dock.
Tickets, $250, from (201) 379-3636, ext. 2623.
Family Benefit
NOV. 8 -- "Freaky Friday," a sort of children's comedic version of Kafka's "Metamorphosis," is about Annabel who wakes one morning to find she has turned into her mother.
The musical's 12:30 P.M. performance at the Promenade Theater, Broadway at 76th Street, will benefit Caring, a program at Columbia University's College of Physicians and Surgeons that teaches child psychiatrists about the emotional needs of poor children.
A dim sum lunch at Shun Lee West, 65th Street near Central Park West, follows the show.
Tickets, $150 for adults, $50 for children 12 years and under, from (212) 355-0356.


Years After a War Death, Proof Brings a New Grief
Day after day, long after Joseph C. Morrison's fighter plane was shot down over Vietnam, long after the dreaded knock at the door with the news that her husband was missing in action, Peggy Morrison continued to get his letters.
She would open the mailbox each morning, find the thin airmail envelope addressed weeks earlier in his distinctive script, and she would tremble with longing for her lost husband and with fear for herself and her children.


Who's Educated? Who Knows?
WHAT is an educated person?
Someone who watches public television voluntarily and cites The Atlantic magazineand Harper's instead of People and Us?
Is it someone who breaks into Tennyson at odd moments or programs a computer in machine language?
Confucius believed that the educated person knows "the ordinances of Heaven," "the rules of propriety" and the "force of words." But some people envision a walking course catalogue.
Dr.
H.
Keith H. Brodie, president of Duke University, suggested that the all-knowing should know "something of history and literature; of the rules and laws of the universe; of human laws, government and behavior, and something of art -- how to understand and respect the play of imagination, and how to be enriched and kept whole by it."


Guadeloupe's Sleepy Satellites
IN 1962, when I was 15, my Uncle Buck, who had been a commander in the United States Navy, suggested that it might be interesting for me to work for the summer on a freighter.
We were in Tampa, Fla. -- then a smallish cigar-manufacturing town and phosphate port -- and there were plenty of ships in the harbor, so we went down to the docks and looked them over.
Buck struck up a conversation with the captain of a Norwegian cargo boat.
We repaired to a bar, where the two men drank whisky and I had a root beer.
Buck tried to convince the skipper to take me on as a cabin boy, but since I had no seaman's papers he couldn't do it.
His boat was heading down through the Caribbean; its only definite destinations at that point were Pointe-a-Pitre, in Guadeloupe, and Fort-de-France, in Martinique.
I don't remember much of what the captain said, but I still recall his remarking on the extraordinary skills of his Colombian crewmen who played soccer on the deck and never once kicked the ball overboard.
It was also the first time I had ever heard of Pointe-a-Pitre.
It was many years before I made it to Pointe-a-Pitre, on a different kind of adventure.
That port is the jumping-off point for the Iles des Saintes and Marie-Galante, islands in the Guadeloupe archipelago in the French West Indies.


A Bronx Man Dies In Police Custody
A 29-year-old Bronx man, whom the police described as emotionally disturbed, died early yesterday as police officers took him to a hospital.
The police said he died of cardiac arrest.
The man, Richard Jones, died about 4 A.M. after police officers, responding to a 911 call, and private security guards found him naked and acting irrationally in the hallway outside his 24th-floor apartment at 900 Co-op City Boulevard in the Co-op City housing development, a police spokesman said.


Marie-Claire Cunningham and Earl Rix
Marie-Claire Cunningham, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William J. Cunningham of Houston, was married yesterday to Earl Gerard Rix, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Earl J. Rix of Wheeling, Ill.
The Rev.
Lawrence Inzeo performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Church of the Resurrection in Rye, N.Y.


Lynn Friedberg, Jeffrey Citron
Lynn Robin Friedberg, the daughter of Judie Friedberg-Chessin of Old Westbury, L.I., and the late Marvin C. Friedberg, has become engaged to Jeffrey Marc Citron, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
David Citron of Great Neck, L.I.
A March wedding is planned.
Ms.
Friedberg, 28 years old, graduated from Boston University, from which she also received a master's degree in reading.
She is a reading specialist at Intermediate School 61 in Ozone Park, Queens.
Her father was the president of Marvel Trading and Educational Corporations, now Marvel Education Corporation, importers of toys and novelties in New York, where her mother is now the president.
The bride's stepfather, Dr.
Herbert Chessin, is an obstetrician and gynecologist in Great Neck.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Mass Mailings; Fliers: Stealth Messages Zero In on Their Targets
To citizens who think they have steeled themselves against political assaults from their televisions, beware the reinforcements approaching on another front: their mailboxes.
In Ohio, the state Republican Party is blanketing households with a flier that warns: "What 'Clintonomics' will do to Ohio: Total Ohio Jobs Lost: 384,170. Ohio Can't Afford Bill Clinton." The leaflet contends that 282,636 of those jobs would fall victim to a "Clinton carbon tax." But the premise is false because Mr.
Clinton has never proposed a carbon tax, though Senator Al Gore advocated one in his book "Earth in the Balance."


Miss Karcher, Matthew Nelson
Mr. and Mrs.
John D. Karcher of Darien, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Kimberly Price Karcher, to Matthew Robert Nelson, a son of Robert C. Nelson of Lake George, N.Y., and Marion E. Nelson of Latham, N.Y.
A December wedding is planned.
Miss Karcher, 27 years old, graduated from Duke University and is a candidate for a master's degree in architecture at the University of California at Los Angeles.
Her father is the chairman and chief executive of P. L. Industries Inc., a jeans maker in New York.
Her mother, Lois L. Karcher, is a lawyer in Darien.


Rane In a Bottle
The smells of the city can't reach you when you're in a cloud of Rane.
Its fresh, countryish notes -- morning dew and green grass -- have made it the long-time best-seller at both Fragrance Shoppes.
Teen-agers, especially, love its uncloying scent.
A mix of lily of the valley and rose, with a drop of musk, it's also available in a sweeter, muskier version, called Persian Rane.


When Chefs Celebrate; Salute to A Southern Master Chef
THE OCCASION is Edna Lewis's 76th birthday, but the renowned Southern chef is the one bestowing the gifts.
Tall, straight and regal in the African batik garb that has been her signature since the 1970's, Lewis moves serenely from table to cutting board in a borrowed Florida kitchen as Scott Peacock, who until last year was chef at the Georgia Governor's mansion, does the honors at the stove.
She whispers encouragement and points out nuances in timing, flavoring or kitchen practice for the pig's ear salad, the benne seed biscuits and the pickled turnips, part of a larger menu of dishes they are preparing for about 100 guests.
The dinner is the first event in a four-day conference on the Southern culinary tradition at Seaside, a small resort community in the Florida Panhandle.
Friends and associates of Peacock and Lewis, as well as Southern food aficionados, will take part.


Christy Falcon, Bruce Maasbach
Howard J. Falcon of Palm Beach, Fla., has announced the engagement of his daughter, Clair Christian Falcon, to Bruce Gardner Maasbach, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Henry Maasbach of New York.
A January wedding is planned.
Miss Falcon, 33 years old, is known as Christy.
She is a first vice president in institutional sales at Paine Webber in New York.
She graduated cum laude from Sweet Briar College and received an M.B.A. from New York University.
Her father is of counsel to the New York law firm of Winthrop, Stimson, Putnam &amp; Roberts.
She also is the daughter of the late Shirley U. Falcon.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
LEONARD BERNSTEIN Notes From a Friend. By Schuyler Chapin. Walker, $17.95.


If You're Thinking of Living in: Park Slope
PARK SLOPE is families everywhere and brownstones, street after street of them.
Far enough from Manhattan for a neighborhood feel, it maintains, in its multiracial population and cultural institutions, what many residents call an urban sophistication.
"A very small-town community with a cosmopolitan attitude," said George Etchison, a 20-year resident and owner of the Brownstone Gallery on Seventh Avenue, the Slope's main street.
The gallery's current exhibition, "Made in Brooklyn," features local artists and memorabilia from the borough's heyday.


Impressionist Master
Out on the campaign trail, the voters are getting a double dose of the character and trust issue, the family-values issue, the come-clean-on-the-draft issue.
But on stage at Stand-Up NY, a brick-walled comedy club, a familiar-sounding figure is getting right down to bedrock, lambasting Bill Clinton's economic program.
"I call it Elvis economics," says the shrill and insistent voice of George Bush, "a reckless policy of excessive spending that causes the Government to get fatter and fatter until one day the economy just falls off the toilet and dies."
The line is funny, but not, by itself, hysterical.
What has the audience doubled over are the voice and the mannerisms, the grin that wanders up the right side of the face, the hectoring tone that slides right into a whine, the short intakes of breath after every third word to buy precious time in the desperate struggle to hold syntax together.
It is a trulyPresidential performance, one that Jim Morris, a political humorist who specializes in impressions, has refined for a dozen years now.


POSTINGS: First Is Monte Carlo; 5th Now 6th for a Residence
Fifth Avenue in Manhattan still isn't a cheap address, but the price of apartments there has dropped in the last year, from an average of $725 to $529 a square foot, moving the Upper East Side neighborhood from fourth to sixth place in the world's rankings of expensive real estate.
Monte Carlo's waterfront and Avenue Henri Martin in Paris are currently the world's first and second most expensive neighborhoods, respectively, with apartments costing nearly $1,200 a foot.
Tokyo's Azabu section is third; London's Knightsbridge, Mayfair and Kensington sections are fourth and Zurichberg in Zurich is fifth.


Chairs That Aren't for Sitting, and Other Fantasy Furniture
Throughout history, the most outrageous and romantic forms of fantasy furniture have flourished when the economy sagged and dreams flourished.
In the late 1930's, for example, Helena Rubinstein acquired a flamboyant suite of shell-shaped furniture for her New York apartment.
And in 1938 Jean-Michel Frank, the French decorator, commissioned Salvador Dali to design a sofa shaped like the mouth of Mae West for the showroom of Schiaparelli, the Paris couturiere.
"Fantasy furniture is more popular now than it's ever been," said Bruce M. Newman, a New York dealer and collector of such exotica.
He and his wife, Judith, have written a book on the subject, "Fantasy Furniture," and they have recently donated 16 exuberantly embellished pieces to the Brooklyn Museum, where they are now on permanent exhibition.


Advice From the Trenches
MOVING MOUNTAINS
Lessons in Leadership and Logistics From the Gulf War.
By William G. Pagonis with Jeffrey L. Cruikshank.
Illustrated. 248 pp.
Boston: Harvard Business School Press.


Business Diary/October 25-30
COMPANIES At G.M., Shakeups and Promises, Promises


Helen Costalas, David K. Dwyer
Mr. and Mrs.
Nicholas J. Costalas of Short Hills, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Helen Barbara Costalas to David Keith Dwyer, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas Dwyer of Painted Post, N.Y.
A December wedding is planned.
Ms.
Costalas, 24 years old, is a sales assistant at the Donaldson, Lufkin &amp; Jenrette Securities Corporation in New York.
She graduated from Susquehanna University.
Her father is the president of N. J. Costalas Inc., a chartering and shipping company in New York.


Jacksonville
To the Editor: "What's Doing in Jacksonville" (Sept. 20), made no mention of two of the most important attractions of the city.
The Cummer Gallery of Art, in the graceful older section of Jacksonville, Riverside, houses the largest collection of early Meissen porcelain in the world.
In addition, it is an encyclopedic museum with an outstanding collection of 19th-century painting, to mention but one of its strengths.
Located on the St.
Johns River, it has outstanding gardens.
On the other side of the St.
Johns River, the Jacksonville Art Museum, newly renovated, is the venue for contemporary art, as well as a fine collection of pre-Columbian art.


Minority Groups Call for Changes in Police Recruiting Methods
The political compromise on a new all-civilian police review board reached last week by Mayor David N. Dinkins and the City Council's leaders was devised to help ease concern among many black and Hispanic New Yorkers who believe police officers often fail to treat them respectfully.
But many black police officers and law-enforcement experts, including many who support the new review board, contend that the Police Department itself must take much more far-reaching actions if it wants to improve its relations with the city's minority groups.
In particular, they say, it must do a far better job of recruiting young black and Hispanic New Yorkers to join its ranks.


Adrift on the Bottom of the World
For four months this year, 16 Russians and 16 Americans lived in a "town" of 30 huts on an ice floe adrift in the least-explored body of water on earth.
The crushing ice of the western Weddell Sea had long been the nemesis of any ship that ventured into it, including, in 1915, that of Sir Ernest Shackleton.
Until May, when the new American icebreaker Nathaniel B. Palmer came within 45 miles of Ice Station Weddell, as the floating town was named, no ship had reached this area and survived.
Although the Weddell Sea is comparable in size to the Gulf of Mexico, it is so far south that it does not show up on many maps of the world.
Yet it plays an important role in circulation of the world's oceans and atmosphere.
Frigid water flows from its depths into the deep waters of the southern oceans, eventually creeping north past the Equator and forming a frigid layer that underlies all the oceans except the Arctic.
It is thought to play a role in circulation of the planet's entire watery envelope, which keeps Europe warm, the Pacific Northwest damp and the west coast of South America dry.
Recent evidence from southern-ocean sediments, from the Greenland icecap and from a deep oceanic trench off Norway shows that, particularly near the end of the last ice age, climate and ocean circulation underwent several sudden, drastic changes.
Each took place over only a few decades.
The scientists at Ice Station Weddell hoped to learn what caused them, and whether they might recur.


Things to Think About on Election Day
To the Editor:
As one whose immigrant father came to this country in 1910 and with his own energy and intelligence succeeded in a free-market economy, I could not agree more with Mr.
Forstmann.
More and more Government interference -- as opposed to private initiative -- will eventually fail, as we saw in the great Russian experiment of 70 years.


Japanese Premier Dawdles in Scandal's Wake
The other day, Prime Minister Kiichi Miyazawa finally made what his aides characterized as a bold declaration of how Japanese politics must change.
Opening a new session of Parliament, he apologized to the public for the flood of accusations "that political figures were involved with organized crime," adding that "it goes without saying that politicians should not consort with people of that ilk."
The Prime Minister's comments drew headlines here for the simple reason that he had said anything at all about the charges.
And while a battle has raged among top leaders for control of the most powerful political entity in the country -- the Takeshita faction of the governing Liberal Democratic Party -- Mr.
Miyazawa has largely stayed on the sidelines.


Be Nice, And They Will Come
NAME: Ariel Lacayo.
IDENTITY: Nicaraguan-born former maitre d'hotel for Pino Luongo, the restaurateur who owns Le Madri, Sapore di Mare and Coco Pazzo.


Britta Keehn And Edward Scott
Britta Keehn, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Silas Keehn of Winnetka, Ill., was married yesterday to Edward Ward Scott, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert T. Scott of Basking Ridge, N.J.
Dr.
Gilbert W. Bowen, a Presbyterian minister, officiated at the Kenilworth Union Church in Kenilworth, Ill.
The Rev.
Jeffrey Grob, a Roman Catholic priest, took part in the ceremony.
Mrs.
Scott is a vice president of Oppenheimer &amp; Company, the securities company, in New York.
She graduated from Trinity College in Hartford and received an M.B.A. from Northwestern University.
Her father, a former vice chairman of the Mellon Bank in Pittsburgh, is the president of the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago.
Her grandfather, the late Grant Keehn, was the president of the Equitable Life Assurance Society of the United States and a limited partner in Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company in New York.


Five U.S. Nuns Are Shot to Death While Trapped by Liberian War
Five American nuns, trapped in the heaviest siege of Liberia's three-year-old civil war, have been shot to death near their convent on the outskirts of Monrovia, the capital's Roman Catholic Archbishop said yesterday.
Four Liberian novices were also reported slain.
L'Osservatore Romano, the semiofficial Vatican newspaper, reported the deaths of the novices, but there was no more information about them from Liberia.


A Mixed-Race Mayor Holds the Swing Votes
Although he is the Mayor of this valley idyll in the Cape wine country, Frank Arendse does not quite live here.
He lives down the road in the mixed-race or "colored" township called Groendal, beyond the antique shops and the food boutiques, where the road turns from asphalt to red mud.
Mr.
Arendse, whose forebears include an English soldier and a slave from Madagascar, is the first nonwhite Mayor to preside over a white jurisdiction in modern South Africa.


Navy Loses to Irish For 29th Time in Row
Navy and Notre Dame, two teams wearing gold helmets but with little else in common, played a predictable contest this afternoon at Giants Stadium, and the Fighting Irish, who had been favored by as many as 38 points, won by 38-7.
It was Notre Dame's 29th consecutive victory in the schools' series, an annual one that began in Baltimore in 1927.


Cover Girls Galore
Everyone was picture perfect at the Rita Hayworth Gala, Oct. 29.


2 Britons Reinstated
Two British weight lifters, ANDREW DAVIES and ANDREW SAXTON, sent home from the Barcelona Olympics for failing drug tests, were cleared to resume competition yesterday.
They had tested positive for the stimulant Clenbuterol in a pre-Games drug test.
They were sent home in disgrace from Barcelona when the result was made public.


The March Of the Sex Fiends
If you think you've seen it all ("Basic Instinct," "Single White Female," "Innocent Blood," "Consenting Adults"), brace yourself.
Whether big budget or small, a bevy of forthcoming films have a common denominator: erotic obsession that leads to trouble.
*
"Bram Stoker's Dracula": Vampires battle Victorian sexual repression.
With Gary Oldman as the attacker-seducer, Winona Ryder as his hoped-for eternal love.
Francis Coppola directs.
Opens on Nov. 13.


An Old Shadow Dims Major's Path to Europe
As Prime Minister John Major digs in for what some describe as possibly his last stand, staking his political survival and the future of his Government on seeing the treaty on European union through Parliament this fall, a familiar shadow has fallen across Mr.
Major's path.
It belongs to Margaret Thatcher, his predecessor as Prime Minister.
Now Lady Thatcher, a Baroness and member of the House of Lords, she is an ardent skeptic of European union and, by common acclaim, the spiritual leader of the Tory rebels who are determined to block the ratification of Mr.
Major's treaty at all costs.


Pull Up a Chair, Boys. Can You Take Dictation?
TO: Mayor David N. Dinkins, City Council President Andrew J. Stein, the Senate Judiciary Committee, et alia From: The private sector Re: Sexual harassment -- cutting it off at the pass.
Gentlemen:
Mortifying, yes.
Maddening, of course.
Political quicksand?
Absolutely.
And the scandals keep coming.


Some Chores to Do Before Winter Sets In
With those cherished extra hours of light now gone, the timetable for getting things done is reduced.
Signals are everywhere.
The plant kingdom is winding down.
Deciduous trees have completed their cycle.
The annual foliage display was fantastic this year.
But the leaves are falling and the old get-out-the-rakes-and-blowers ritual has begun.
Even the conifers have completed their cycle and old needles are dropping off at rapid rates.
Plants are on their own, at last, as nature intended.


Conversations/Peter C. Newman; A Canadian Warns: Breaking Up Is Now Much Easier to Do
LAST week, voters in Canada rejected a far-reaching package of constitutional reforms aimed at keeping their fractious nation unified.
The changes would have recognized French-speaking Quebec as a "distinct society," given native peoples the right to self-government and addressed demands in the West for more representation by creating a powerful Senate with equal clout for each province.
The defeat of the package in Quebec and five other provinces ushers in a new period of the political uncertainty that is a defining national characteristic of Canada.


...and Paddling the Coast by Kayak
ESCORTED by squadrons of sea gulls and brown pelicans, we paddled our kayaks through the cobalt blue Costa Rican waters toward our beachside camp nestled at the base of the distant hills, a jagged silhouette shrouded in the sunset's peachy haze.
Our group of seven kayaked into the hook-shaped bay on the isolated southern tip of Costa Rica's Nicoya Peninsula, along the Pacific coast, after a four-hour trip to nearby Organos Beach.


POSTINGS: A Day of Workshops; Co-op and Condo Answers
Want to know how different sections of the Internal Revenue Code affect your co-op or condominium apartment?
Do you suspect that some neighbors are indulging in illegal activities, but don't know how to handle the problem?
Do you wonder about your building's refinancing and insurance options?
Those questions and more will be tackled in a series of 80 overlapping workshops at the Council of New York Cooperatives' 12th Annual Cooperative Housing Conference at Hunter College, on 68th Street and Lexington Avenue, on Sunday, Nov. 15.


Women's Health Today Is Focus for Hadassah
WOMEN'S health issues, as seen from both an American and Israeli perspective, will be the focus of Mediscope, a free two-day symposium to be held here Wednesday and Thursday under the auspices of the Westchester Region of Hadassah.
The symposium, which will commemorate the 80th anniversary of the worldwide women's Zionist organization, will be led by one of Israel's chief public-health specialists, Dr.
Leon Epstein, director of the department of social medicine and head of the School of Public Health at the Hadassah-Hebrew University Medical Center in Jerusalem.


A Night Of Art . . .
The Dia Center for the Arts in Chelsea held a fund-raising dinner, Oct. 28.


'All My Sons' Revived at the Emelin
WITH a rippingly melodramatic production of Arthur Miller's first success, "All My Sons," the Emelin Theater is making a cogent case for the viability of live theater, firsthand.
Undisguised by the technological trappings of preferred electronically manipulated modern entertainments, Clinton J. Atkinson's staging has immediacy and impact.
And it appears to operate on a perfectly apt assumption.
The universality and timelessness of Mr.
Miller's morality tale, with its theme of collective responsibility, is self-evident.
Thus, the director has opted for attending to characterization and propelling the action.


On Sunday; Fever Pitch: Democracy At Work
FROM the Roman Catholic chapel in the Bergen Mall in Paramus, N.J., to O'Malley's Pub in Queens, from the bathrooms at Star Multicare Services in downtown (Democratic) Brooklyn, to the counter at the Sweet Shop in (Republican) Oyster Bay, L.I., there is a fever about this election, a mix of fear, excitement and tension unmatched in years.
"I hear it from the guy in the urinal next to me, in the subway, in deli lines," says Stephen Sternbach, president of Star Multicare.
"Even my 6-year-old, there's so much bombardment on TV, he says, 'Dad, who's best for us?' "


Vote on the Issues, and May the Best Man Win; Not Wasted at All
To the Editor:
Our purpose in writing is to dispel the constant liberal media propaganda that a vote for Ross Perot is a wasted vote.
We don't believe it is.
We think there are a lot of people like us who are fed up with the constant hollow rhetoric of George Bush and Bill Clinton, the two professional politicians in this campaign.


Azinger Is Steady As Others Stumble
On a mission to salvage an otherwise mediocre season, Paul Azinger played unspectacular but solid golf today while others slipped, and wound up with a four-shot lead heading into the final round of the Tour Championship.
Azinger fired a controlled two-under-par 69 over Pinehurst No. 2 for a three-round total of nine-under-par 206.
It put him three strokes ahead of John Huston, and five up on Dan Forsman.
Four other golfers are tied at 212.


Some Chores to Do Before Winter Sets In
With those cherished extra hours of light now gone, the timetable for getting things done is reduced.
Signals are everywhere.
The plant kingdom is winding down.
Deciduous trees have completed their cycle.
The annual foliage display was fantastic this year.
But the leaves are falling and the old get-out-the-rakes-and-blowers ritual has begun.
Even the conifers have completed their cycle and old needles are dropping off at rapid rates.
Plants are on their own, at last, as nature intended.


TV's Midterm Grade: A 'D' for Effort
Young people can think deeply about their wardrobes and the future as long as they're gorgeous and live near a bikini beach.
Blacks are great for a laugh but tend to become invisible after 9 P.M., when things are liable to get serious.
Couples, married or not, must have a repertory of one-liner put-downs to keep each other entertained.
And older folk, if seen at all, make convenient bashing targets.
Thus has network television, armed with numerous audience-research studies, looked at the nation, calculated carefully and brought forth a 1992-93 season that, for the most part, verges on the scandalous.
Creativity and social responsibility have gone into a joint nose dive as the networks further pare budgets and intensify their focus on younger segments of the audience.
That process, encouraged by advertisers, continues to emphasize divisions between generations.
The upshot: a season of clones, crass exploitations and uninspired diversions.


THE MOST HAPPY COLLEGE PRESIDENT
Leon Botstein is every bit as inspiring in person as he is in the pages of your magazine ("The Most Happy College President," by Anthony DePalma, Oct. 4).
In 1986, I had fallen perilously behind in my senior project and was discussing the prospects for my graduation with a friend who, as it happened, was living in the president's house as a caretaker for his daughter, Clara.


Passport Checks Dropped by 8
United States citizens traveling among European Community countries will not need to show their passports at most borders after Jan. 1.
Eight of the 12 member countries have agreed to end passport and customs checks on their borders for people traveling between them.
They are Belgium, France, Germany, Italy, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Portugal and Spain.
Americans and other travelers will have to show their passports only when arriving in one of these countries from a country other than one of the eight.
None of the European Community nations require visas for United States citizens.


Election Day
Tuesday is Election Day.
Besides the Presidential candidates, voters in New York, New Jersey and Connecticut will elect members of their Congressional delegations.
Voters in New York and Connecticut will also select members of their State Legislatures, and there are ballot questions in all three states.
There are also municipal elections in many communities.
Polls are open from 6 A.M. to 9 P.M. in New York City, Nassau, Suffolk, Westchester, Rockland, Orange, Olster and Erie Counties, and from noon to 9 P.M. elsewhere in New York State.


NEW YORK
By spring, hemlines will be a moot point.
American designers show their spring '93 collections this week, and pants are the new priority.
Saucy or soft, and anything but man-tailored, these looks epitomize the romantic, somewhat nostalgic feeling of next season's fashion.


ABOUT-FACE
Michael Norman's article "About-Face" (About Men, Oct. 11) is right on.
Vietnam was a moral crisis for America -- and most of our young men failed it.
A few genuinely opposed the war and either served in noncombat positions or went to jail -- an honorable course of action.
But most of the little boys put their fear, their interests and their ambitions ahead of their duty to their country.
Some ran away to Canada; many ran to the National Guard, as did Dan Quayle; some pulled every string they could get their hands on, like Bill Clinton.


Vancouver Hotels Reduce Rates
Thirty-one hotels throughout Vancouver, British Columbia, are offering discounts of up to 50 percent, lowering daily room rates to between $60 and $95 (in United States dollars), based on a minimum stay of two nights.
Several restaurants are serving two entrees for the price of one and attractions are giving two-for-one admissions in a discount program that began last month and continues through next May 31.
Some of the least expensive downtown hotels include the Quality Inn ($60) and the Hotel Georgia ($72).
The Westin Bayshore Hotel on English Bay overlooks a marina (ask for a water view); rooms start at $75.
At the Lonsdale Quay Hotel, above a farmers' market, rates are from $92.
At the top end of the prices is the Waterfront Centre Hotel, part of the Waterfront Convention Center, with rates starting at $95.


Camden Citizens Squads Defuse Arson Fires on 'Mischief Night'
A heavy police presence, swarms of civilian patrols and a dusk-to-dawn curfew combined on Friday night in Camden, N.J., to prevent a recurrence of a Halloween-eve arson spree that plagued the city in 1991.
"It went tremendously," the Camden County Prosecutor, Edward F. Borden Jr., said yesterday about the all-night surveillance plan.
"It was quieter than the average Friday night. It was just great."


Behind U.S. Pop Stamps, a Citizens' Group
Somewhere in a hidden corner of this town, an official cadre is making top-secret decisions on delicate Federal matters.
They are not debating national security or fiscal management.
They are thinking more along the lines of: "Is a postage stamp shaped like a pretzel with beer-flavored glue a good idea?"
They are the Citizens' Stamp Advisory Committee, a diverse dozen or so Americans -- business executives, stamp collectors, actors -- who advise the Postal Service on such matters as the esthetics of a skinny Elvis over a fat one on a postage stamp.


SURFACING
CHILDREN --
Decaf cappuccino for toddlers:
A way to get them to drink milk.  MUSIC --
Mail-order songs:
An original keyboard composition that reflects your personality.
For $80, from Sound Feelings Records of Newhall, Calif.
HOME --
Polo silverware:
Ralph Lauren's new cutlery, with handles that resemble a Rolex wristband.  POLITICS --
The designer campaign button:
Roy Lichtenstein's limited edition.  THE OFFICE --
Post-Its on faxes:
Eliminates the need for cover sheets.


OCT. 25-31: In Clinton's Backyard; After Dividing a State, Dioxin-Laced Waste Burns
Gov.
Bill Clinton gave final approval last week to one of the most politically sensitive environmental projects he has faced: the incineration of the largest concentration of dioxin-contaminated wastes ever undertaken in the country.


Chatter on CBS Too Much to Take
To the Sports Editor:
How dare CBS interview the president of the National League in the middle of Game 6?
I can understand giving him a cameo appearance but for Jim Grey to badger him on what he wanted to do about the situation with the San Francisco Giants moving, while the man was watching a baseball game is just plain ridiculous.
This is just another example of the poor coverage that CBS has devoted to the playoffs.
Tim McCarver and and his colleagues seemed to ramble on over topics not related to baseball in the slightest.


A Winter Dinner, Market Fresh
As the temperature drops outdoors, Danny Meyer's kitchen radiates warmth.
Spacious, without walls, it occupies part of a converted loft high above lower Manhattan, with a panoramic view of water towers, church steeples and, looming above it all, the World Trade Center.
Winter sun streams through the enormous windows, highlighting the hardwood floors and the antique farm table a few steps away.
Duck stew with pancetta, black olives, anchovies, carrots and red wine is simmering on the stove.
A lusty aroma wafts through the apartment, an antidote to the biting wind outside.
"We put it on the fire for a few hours and forget about it, and it just keeps getting better and better," says Danny Meyer, the man behind the duck stew and the owner of the Union Square Cafe, a 7-year-old, three-star restaurant that is one of the city's most popular.


Reveille


Hartford's Cityscape Keeps Artist Inspired
FOR three decades Richard Welling has been sketching the buildings of downtown Hartford, the old ones that have come down and the new ones that have gone up.
In one respect he is the darling of the business establishment.
A great many of his intricate line drawings are commissioned works that hang in boardrooms and banks and lawyers' offices throughout downtown.
When the city's biggest hotel, the Hartford Sheraton, opened a decade and a half ago, each of its rooms contained not one but two Wellings.
The drawings have provided his living.
His prices start at $500 for the original drawing and $200 for limited-edition copies.


New Faces in Congress
Although incumbents are favored to win in most Congressional races in New York, New Jersey and Connecticut, the elections Tuesday are certain to produce change in the region's Congressional delegation.
The shifts will be the most pronounced in New York, which will have at least 10 new face on Capitol Hill next year.
Article, page 57.


'A Day Away From Tallulah . . .'
To the Editor:
Wilfrid Sheed has it wrong.
The quotation is, "A day away from Tallulah is like a month in the country." It has been variously ascribed to George S. Kaufman, Dorothy Parker and Alexander Woollcott, depending on which account of the Algonquin Round Table one reads.
LARRY VINICK New York


Lincoln Center Needs Jazz More Than Jazz Needs High Prices
To the Editor:
Lincoln Center should be applauded for creating a first-class jazz repertory orchestra under Wynton Marsalis.
But "Jazzing Up Lincoln Center" (editorial, Oct. 19) puts a peculiar spin on this development.
Jazz is not "the only musical art form to which the United States can lay exclusive claim." It is but one of the important musical traditions this country has spawned, with ragtime, rock, rap, the blues, gospel, country and western, bluegrass, Sacred Harp singing and many others.


Leading Customers Around by Their Noses
SERENITY in a bottle. Sound too good to be true?
You can have it, for $25 a half ounce, at the Fragrance Shoppes, in the East Village and the Park Slope section of Brooklyn.
For those who prefer not to smell like Donna Karan's husband's neck, these New Age apothecaries blend oils from aromatic plants like vanilla, lavender, mandarin, myrrh, Bulgarian rose and ylang-ylang into luscious combinations that can make you swoon on contact.


This Week's Numbers
Consensus
Last Period
Estimates
(I.D.E.A. Inc.)
Monday
Oct. construction spending, percent change
-0.8
0.6
Oct. purchasing managers index
49
50
Tuesday
Oct. leading indicators, percent change
0.2
0.1
Oct. productivity, percent change
2.3
2.4
Wednesday
Oct. factory orders, percent change
-1.9
1.0
Late Oct. car sales, annual rate in millions
6.4
6
Thursday
Late Oct. jobless claims, thousands
375
375
Friday
Oct. unemployment, in percent
7.5
7.6
Oct. wholesale trade, percent change
-0.6
0.3
Oct. change in consumer credit, in billions
-$0.9
-$0.3
Tuesday: Election day *
Treasury announces quarterly debt refunding  Wednesday: Federal Reserve releases its beige book on economic conditions


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Voters; A Handful of Midwest Fence-Sitters Climb Down to Say, 'Oh, O.K., Him'
They watched the debates and the "info-mercials," heard the zingers and sound bites and have had enough of Iraqgate, family values and the character question.
For undecided voters looking for a prince but finding they must settle for a politician, the choice has come down to a patrician President whom they see as out of touch, a smooth-talking Governor who they fear is promising more than he can deliver, and a likable but somewhat paranoid businessman who they think could be a dictator.


Dany Suslow, Lee Papell
Mr. and Mrs.
Lawrence Suslow of Armonk, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter Dany Elizabeth Suslow to Dr.
Lee Adam Papell, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Nathan Papell of Eastchester, N.Y.
A March wedding is planned.
Ms.
Suslow, 29 years old, is the director of marketing at the Pratt Institute in Brooklyn.
She graduated from New York University.
Her father is a lawyer and real-estate consultant in Armonk.


The Apprentices' Youthful Tale
CHRISTOPHER BARTO was "extremely bored" with the academic program at Hughesville High School, near Williamsport, Pa., after his sophomore year.
Most of the teaching and reading, he said, involved "just letters and numbers; a lot of things not related to the real world."
So he decided to do something other than slog his way through the remaining two years or drop out.
When a guidance counselor described a new program designed to combine schooling with a factory job, he decided, in his words, "to go for it."


Bucking Trends, Dodd Uses Incumbency to Hold His Edge
After spending 18 years in Congress making his name known to Connecticut voters, Senator Christopher J. Dodd began working a few weeks ago on the name recognition of his Republican opponent, Brook Johnson, a businessman new to politics.
Mr.
Johnson, who continues to trail, is not likely to thank Mr.
Dodd for his help.
In a Senate race that reveals the perils of trying a Ross Perot-style campaign at the state level, Mr.
Johnson is now known to voters, but in many cases through Mr.
Dodd's commercials, not his own.


Correction
Because of an editing error, a letter published on Oct. 18 about an article that appeared Sept. 27 on movies and the Hollywood blacklist described the letter writer's own history incorrectly.
Russell Fraser, a professor at the University of Michigan, wrote of his experience with the loyalty oath at the University of California at Los Angeles.
Mr.
Fraser did not sign the oath, and did not write that he had done so.


An Acting Career That Began as a Lark
This story suggests that miraculous new beginnings are indeed possible, that old dogs can learn new tricks.
"It's some kind of fairy tale," said Howard Franklin, the director of the new film "The Public Eye."
The old dog is Jerry Adler, who for years was one of those behind-the-scenes people who helped make Broadway happen.
He was stage manager, director or producer of 53 Broadway shows.
His specialty was keeping some bounce in a production -- including such classics as the original "My Fair Lady" -- when years of performances threatened to grind it down.


What Is Public Relations?
To the Editor:
Those of us who have toiled in the indulgent (perhaps "metaphorical" is a better word) craft of public relations are accustomed to the news me dia's calumny.
What we aren't used to is the random ambivalence portrayed in a single issue of The Book Review (Sept. 27).
Please consider:


Marjorie Schorr, Joseph Gurvets
Norman and Thelma Schorr of New York have announced the engagement of their daughter Marjorie J. Schorr to Joseph Gurvets, the son of Abram and Tatyana Gurvets, also of New York.
A February 1993 wedding is planned.
Ms.
Schorr is a vice president at Citibank in Long Island City, Queens.
She graduated magna cum laude from Amherst College and received an M.B.A. from the University of Pennsylvania.
Her father is a principal in the New York public relations firm of Schorr, Howard &amp; Megill.
Her mother is a health-care and editorial publishing consultant in New York.


At Work; Guiding Lights From Corporations
Victor Parker may be only 10 years old, but he is nobody's fool.
He sits in a swivel chair, a darkening Manhattan out the window behind him, doing what God made swivel chairs to do.
Each time one of his legs clunks into the desk, he pauses and offers another harsh word for the Presidential candidates.
"I wouldn't vote for anyone," he said.
Spin.
Clunk.
"You can't trust them." Spin.
Clunk.
"They all lie." Spin.
Clunk.
"I watched the debates." Spin.
Clunk.
"On my own." Spin.
Clunk.
"The Vice Presidents . . ." Snort.
Spin.
Clunk.
"Just a lot of arguing."
Victor's assessment of the race might earn approval from those who will drag their feet to the polls on Tuesday, but it gets a look of civic concern from the woman sitting next to him.
Regina Gordon is one of about 80 volunteers in the "American Dream" project at Neuberger &amp; Berman, the New York investment management house.
Victor, a fifth-grader at P.S. 199 on the West Side, is one of the students who recently began arriving by van, subway and bus for the fourth year of weekly tutoring-talk sessions at Neuberger &amp; Berman's snazzy quarters on the eastern edge of Midtown Manhattan.


A Wealth of Riches for Concertgoers
CONCERTS arrive next weekend in such bewildering profusion that choices will be difficult, especially since they are more or less equally divided among orchestral, vocal and chamber music attractions.
Getting an early start, with 8 P.M.
Friday concerts, are the New World Consort, at its Wesleyan University home base, and the Kirov Orchestra from St.
Petersburg, at the Jorgensen Auditorium of the University of Connecticut.
The Kirov's program includes Tchaikovsky's "Sleeping Beauty" Suite, Rachmaninoff's Symphony No. 2, and with the guest pianist Vladimir Feltsman, Tchaikovsky's B-Flat Minor Concerto (486-422).


Time to Reset the Clock in Times Square
There's a place for us.
A place that stands for popular culture and its contribution to the city and the world.
Times Square is a raucous, commercial monument to the idea that vernacular art has played as vital a role as government in the making of modern democracy.
It is where the Popular and the Cultural converge, where crowds cross paths with icons: pop songs, pop drinks, chorus lines, headlines, hemlines, posters, cartoons, paperbacks, magazine covers, billboards, blue jeans, lipsticks, double features.
Even in its present state of disrepair, the mix remains a lure.
People still show up to bask in Times Square's luminous collage of stage, screen and neon.
Though the lights have dimmed, public anticipation has not died.
Today, this self-styled crossroads of the world stands at a crossroads itself.
The suspension, last summer, of plans for Times Square Center, the complex of four large office towers designed by Philip Johnson and John Burgee, has again opened up public debate on the future of Times Square.
The millennium may come and go before market conditions permit development of the project's dormant sites.
But the first steps toward the future will be taken within the next few weeks with an interim plan to restore restaurants, shops and theaters on 42d Street between Seventh and Eighth Avenues.
It's not too soon to think through the prospects.


Giants vs. Redskins: Expect Ups and Downs
Two seasons after the Giants won the Super Bowl, they are playing erratically and often seem to be flailing.
One season after the Redskins won the Super Bowl, they are playing erratically, but are finding ways to win games.
So on Sunday night, when these two old division rivals meet at sold-out RFK Stadium, the Redskins will be 10 1/2-point favorites.
The Redskins have a 5-2 record after three straight victories over the Denver Broncos by 31 points, the Philadelphia Eagles by 4 and the Minnesota Vikings by 2.
The Giants' record is 3-4.


NOTES
Anna Wintour, editor in chief of Vogue, is scheduled to appear as a celebrity chef at the March of Dimes annual "Gourmet Gala" at the Plaza Hotel tomorrow night, but she said she is almost entirely lacking in culinary skill.
"I'm not planning to cook
anything
," she said. "It's my husband who's a wonderful cook.
I think he's going to do Irish stew.
I just do the dishes."
At the party on Tuesday for his new Off Broadway show, "Spic-o-Rama," John Leguizamo showed up at the Coffee Shop on Union Square, ensconced himself in a deeply recessed booth and refused to give interviews.
His girlfriend, Samantha Mathis, an actress who has appeared in the films "Pump Up the Volume" and "This Is My Life," was more forthcoming.


From Waterloo to Watermelon
THE EMPEROR'S LAST ISLAND
A Journey to St. Helena. By Julia Blackburn.  277 pp. New York:  Pantheon Books. $22.


Not in the O.S.S.
To the Editor:
In my essay "Tinker, Tailor, Poet, Spy: Tales of Literary Espionage" (Oct. 4), I erroneously included Louis Martz and Donald Gallup in the group of writers and academics who were attached to the London branch of the Office of Strategic Services during World War II.
I sincerely regret the error, and apologize to these two distinguished scholars.
ELIOT WEINBERGER New York


Things to Think About on Election Day
To the Editor:
If Mr.
Forstmann really wants improvement "from the bottom up," he would press for pump priming rather than indexation.
By way of example, let the Government give 10 million poor people $1,000 each.
Being poor, they would spend the money immediately.
This would pump $10 billion into the economy almost overnight, creating demand that would stimulate business to expand and hire more people, who would spend more money.


Syracuse Gets a Victory And It's Just 1 in 1,000
Syracuse University this afternoon became the fourth college team to play 1,000 football games and celebrated the milestone by shellacking Pittsburgh 41-10.
Qadry Ismail scored two touchdowns and returned a kickoff 75 yards to set up a third as the Orangemen made short work of what for the last three years had been a hotly contested series.


Data Update
*4*VALUE OF CONSTRUCTION CONTRACTS
*4*(Residential in millions of dollars)
Sept. 92
Sept. 91
Change
New York
352.2
349.6
+ 1%
New Jersey
139.6
111.6
+25%
Connecticut
85.3
95.8
-11%
*4*Source: F.W. Dodge Division, McGraw-Hill Information
*4*MORTGAGE INTEREST RATES (Averages)
Last Week
Previous Week
Year Ago
New York
Conventional (30-yr)
8.49
8.21
9.13
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.39
5.23
6.71
New Jersey
Conventional (30-yr)
8.31
8.07
8.98
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.19
5.09
6.59
Connecticut
Conventional (30-yr)
8.38
8.08
8.98
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.01
4.95
6.64
Co-ops (N.Y.)
Conventional (30-yr)
8.60
8.33
9.30
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.87
5.74
7.21
*4*Indexes for Adjustable-Rate Mortgages*
1-yr. Treasury security
3.48
3.26
5.39
National Mortgage Contract Rate
7.58
7.58
8.93
*Rates on most adjustable mortgages are set 1 to 3 percentage points above these indexes. (Source: HSH Associates)


Poor Region in Russia Lays Claim to Its Diamonds
Until this year, the diamonds mined here at the giant Peace pit, dug a quarter-mile deep into the harsh Siberian landscape, have been more a source of misery than of wealth for the residents of Yakutia, the largest and arguably the richest of Russia's autonomous regions.
Yakutia's diamonds, which account for 99 percent of Russia's production and one-fourth of the world's, were discovered here in 1957.
But Mirny, the hub of the diamond industry, started to pave its roads only five years ago, and still has 40 percent of them to go.
Despite winter temperatures of 40 degrees below zero, many residents still live in wooden huts where, as one inhabitant put it, all the facilities are outside except the beds, and the only running water comes in spring when the snow melts.


This Bird Tastes Like It Sounds
Graduate students are the gruntworkers of science, the ones who do the irksome things that their supervisors would rather not.
But it was while dutifully freeing unwanted birds from an experimental net in the New Guinean jungle that John Dumbacher, a graduate student at the University of Chicago, made a discovery that would clinch his career and astonish biologists everywhere.
Sucking his cut fingers, he realized he had found the first example of a poisonous bird, a flashy orange and black creature called a hooded pitohui (PIT-a-hooey) that harbors in its feathers and skin a neurotoxin hundreds of times more potent than strychnine.


Simulating Life
"SIMLIFE": $69.95 list price, Maxis, 2 Theatre Square, Suite 230, Orinda, Calif. 94563-3346; telephone (510) 254-9700, fax (510) 253-3736.
Requires: 2.5 megabytes of system memory or 3 megabytes under System 7, and a hard drive.
The software is available for Macintosh computers.
A version for DOS computers will follow in late 1992 or early 1993, Maxis officials say.


Helen M. Healey, Mark Robert Rice
Helen Marie Healey, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James T. Healey of West Hartford, Conn., was married there yesterday to Mark Robert Rice, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
James R. Rice of Old Lyme, Conn.
The Rev.
William Hilliard performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Thomas the Apostle Church.
Mrs.
Rice, 27 years old, is the director of special events at the School of American Ballet in New York.
She graduated from Yale University.
Her father is a lawyer in Hartford.
Her mother, Louise T. Healey, was a preschool teacher at St.
Joseph's College School for Young Children in West Hartford.


No Headline
One after another they came marching through the city, including Presidential candidates, and talked about urban aid packages.
All of that is lost.
What we've seen is a flagrant disregard for the lives of people in the inner city. -- DENISE G. FAIRCHILD, a community organizer in Los Angeles.  [ 20:2. ]


Gravesend
To the Editor:
Lady Deborah Moody may have founded Gravesend in 1643, as you indicated in your article on that Brooklyn community on Oct. 18.
But she was not the only woman to have established a community in New York State by that date.


Elizabeth Brous, Charles Guevara
Elizabeth Brous, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Philip Brous of Short Hills, N.J., was married last evening in New York to Charles Gregory Guevara, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Carlos Guevara-Scott of Fairfax, Va.
Rabbi Barry H. Greene performed the ceremony at the St.
Regis Hotel.
Mrs.
Guevara, 27 years old, is an associate beauty editor at Vogue magazine in New York.
She and her husband graduated from Duke University.
Her father, who retired as the president of Miller-Wohl Inc. in Secaucus, N.J., an operator of women's clothing stores, is an adjunct professor of retailing at Columbia University.


In the Region: Connecticut; Casino Awakens Sluggish Hotel Industry
HOTEL development in Connecticut has ground to a halt, except along a 10-mile stretch of Route 2 in the southeastern part of the state, where almost a dozen hotels have been proposed.
Long-unwanted tracts in New London County are being eyed by national chains, Sheraton among them.
The owner of one office condominium has received approval to convert it to a hotel and one town in the corridor has been approached about selling a middle school for conversion to a hotel.


Shank of the Meal
Like many things that live close to the earth, the shank is underrated, sometimes scorned, often diminished.
Traditional manuals of haute cuisine relegated the meat -- beef, veal or lamb -- from the lower hind and foreleg to the stockpot.
Because it is so dense, and the bone that it clings to so rich with marrow, shank meat yields a hearty broth, often so thick that it doesn't require much additional gelatin to turn it into aspic, or additional thickening to make a sauce.
When shanks were served for dinner, it was a peasant meal.
The Italians fashioned osso buco.
The French braised the shank with Provencal herbs, or used it to make headcheese or other terrines.
The Germans marinated shanks in vinegar and broiled them with sauerkraut -- a dish, according to Horst Scharfenberg's "Cuisines of Germany," that "you'd be willing to sell your birthright for."


Tal Memorial Tourney Produces Tal-ish Games
THE 64 players in the Mikhail Tal Memorial Tournament in Moscow in early September had their work cut out for them: how to properly honor the late world champion, the Wizard of Riga, who left a legacy of such brilliant, imaginative games?
They did their best and seemed to have been inspired to produce a greater number of incisive attacks than usual.


'A Day Away From Tallulah . . .'
To the Editor:
Wilfrid Sheed totally bollixed the quotation about Tallulah Bankhead in his review of "Marlene Dietrich," by Steven Bach (Oct. 4).
It wasn't a day
with
Tallulah that was likened to a month in the country, it was a day
away from
her.


Science Fiction
THE BROKEN LAND (Spectra/Bantam, cloth, $22.50; paper, $11), by Ian McDonald, raises some interesting questions about the uses of science fiction.
Mr.
McDonald, who lives in Northern Ireland, writes about a horrific future that has no direct links to our own time but that is clearly intended as an indictment of all creeds, both religious and political, that set people against one another.
In the "broken land" of the title, Proclaimers and Confessors persecute each other for adhering to doctrines that neither the persecutors nor the victims fully understand.
The economy of the land is based on a biotechnology that molds quasi-living "plasm" into ingenious devices that function pretty much as metal and plastic machines once did.
Old people who die, at least among the Confessors, are gradually assimilated into a kind of vegetative consciousness in what are known as Ancestor Groves.
But although the inhabitants of this land have learned to manipulate DNA "at a molecular level," they have made no progress whatever in understanding one another.
Police actions and pogroms, concentration camps and refugees, corrupt officials and coldhearted rebels are daily facts of life in a comfortless world that we view through the eyes of the indomitable Mathembe, a young girl who never speaks.


Alarms Raised Over 'Rescue 911'
CHILD Number One is Joseph, age 4.
His mother was going into shock from multiple bee stings, and told Joseph to go into the house "and get a cold facecloth." Fortunately for mom, Joseph was smarter than that.
"Instead I went in and called Rescue 911," Joseph said on camera to 20 million viewers of "Rescue 911," a weekly television program that recreates real emergencies.
The paramedics arrived in time to administer a shot of epinephrine.
Joseph's mom said her "hero" learned it all from the show.
Another life saved.
Child Number Two is Matt, also 4.
His mother reluctantly let him watch "Rescue 911" even though she got a little jittery over an episode in which a boy Matt's size set himself afire while playing with matches and gasoline.
Is it good for Matt to watch this program because it is educational, or bad because it can scare him?
During a recent episode, after a teen-age girl was pinned under a pickup truck that had crashed, Matt started crying and asked that his favorite show be turned off.
Another scared child.


Alice Ridgway And Kevin Noll
Alice Emily Ridgway, a daughter of Dr.
Walter S. Ridgway of Darien, Conn., and Josephine Ridgway of New Canaan, Conn., was married yesterday to Kevin Eugene Noll, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
William E. Noll of Harriman, N.Y.
Patricia Brooks, a justice of the peace in New Canaan, performed the ceremony at her home.


Data Bank/November 1, 1992


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Independent; Perot Assails the President On Foreign and U.S. Issues
Ross Perot kicked off the only extensive trip of his campaign today with a blistering critique of President Bush, charging him with ignoring the savings and loan crisis, permitting the rise of Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega and propping up President Saddam Hussein in Iraq.
Mr.
Perot had harsh words for Gov.
Bill Clinton as well, ridiculing the notion that his leadership in Arkansas had prepared him for the White House.
But he made Mr.
Bush his primary target.
And while Mr.
Perot continued to assert that he would defy the polls and win the election Tuesday, he seemed equally interested in making sure that Mr.
Bush did not.
Among the concerns of the Clinton campaign is that Mr.
Perot will siphon off enough of the "change vote" to allow Mr.
Bush to win a narrow victory.


Christine M. Fee, Bruce D. Kaskey
Christine Margaret Fee, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Frank J. Fee 3d of Scarsdale, N.Y., was married there yesterday to Bruce David Kaskey, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Vernon C. Kaskey of Savannah, Ga.
Msgr.
Edward M. Connors performed the ceremony at the Immaculate Heart of Mary Church.
Mrs.
Kaskey, 25 years old, is a sales manager for the Nestle Food Company in Buffalo.
She graduated from Boston College.
Her father is the president of the Reliable Automatic Sprinkler Company in Mount Vernon, N.Y.
Her mother, Barbara Fee, is a real estate broker at Cleveland Van Wert Inc. in Scarsdale.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
HOW TO GET A DATE WITH A VAMPIRE (And What to Do With Him Once You've Got Him.) By Kiki Olson.
Contemporary Books, paper, $6.95.


Commercial Property: I.B.M. Real Estate; A Beleaguered Giant Seeks Out Ways to Cut Costs
AS far back as anyone can remember, divisions of the International Business Machines Corporation that occupied space in I.B.M.-owned buildings have been charged a share of depreciation, nothing more.
Come January, they will be paying fair-market rent.
There is a sweetener, though.
I.B.M.'s real estate people will help them -- or any I.B.M. division in leased space -- figure out how to survive in less space and will assume the lease for any space they turn back.


Hillsdale Journal; An Uproar Over Police Pay Increases and Garbage Trucks
STARTLED by the increasing rumble of 18-wheel garbage trucks through town, alarmed by a proposal to close the police station evenings and weekends, 150 of this Bergen County community's residents packed the Borough Hall a few weeks ago.
There they traded barbs over a yearlong string of decisions by the Borough Council and the Mayor, including a legal challenge to a three-year, 25 percent pay increase for the borough's police, a sudden shutdown of Hillsdale's municipal garbage-hauling operation and an agreement with the owners of a garbage-transfer station whose operations the Council had previously pledged to curtail.


13 Indicted In U.S. Drive Against Mob
In a double-barreled attack on the Lucchese crime family, Federal authorities have announced two indictments naming 13 defendants in racketeering charges that included a dozen murders, extensive extortion and labor corruption.
One indictment charged the reputed Lucchese underboss, Anthony Casso, and others with 11 murders.
Most of the victims were identified as suspected informers or rivals for power in the crime family.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Senate Races; Late Surge by Republicans Dims Democrats' Hope for Senate Gains
Three weeks ago, Democrats were confident that they were rolling toward a sweeping victory in Senate races across the country, giving them a filibuster-proof 60-vote majority needed to pass strong gun-control legislation and codify abortion rights.
But in a twist of fortunes even more marked than that in the Presidential race, Republican Senate candidates have made steady gains in the last 10 days, producing tight races in 11 of the 34 seats contested on Nov. 3.
They have advanced most markedly in California, Illinois, Pennsylvania, New York, Washington and Wisconsin, all states where Republicans were seen as sure losers only a few weeks ago.


'Death of a Salesman': Power Undimmed
AFTER the miscellaneous theater companies that meant to set up residence at the William Carlos Williams Center for the Arts and failed, a new group, hopefully calling itself the Williams Center Repertory Theater, has turned up.
And this time there's no reason to disbelieve intentions.
Last weekend's gripping opening night of "Death of a Salesman" signals promise and intelligence.
Such encumbrances as a make-do look, one unfortunate performance and a few avoidable technical gaffes were surmounted by a perceptive and passionate grasp of a contemporary classic.


Mambo Queen's Cuisine
SHE'S BEEN COM- pared to Ella Fitzgerald for her scat-style phrasing, and to Aretha Franklin for her soulful delivery.
But when the Cuban salsa singer Celia Cruz is most herself, there is no comparison.
In a field dominated by kings, Cruz is the indisputable queen -- and has held the title, Queen of Latin Music, for over 40 years.
With her throaty alto rasp, she trades Afro-Cuban rhythms with pop tunes, salsa with soulful ballads, before a largely Spanish-speaking audience around the world.
"Salsa means sauce," says Cruz.
"When you put sauce on meat loaf, or steak, the food tastes better. Salsa is the flavor of my music."


Races for the House
NEW YORK:
Seats in 102d Congress: 34
After redistricting: 31
Incumbents:
retiring: 8
died: 1
defeated in primary: 1
Current: 20 Democrats and 14 Republicans.
Prospects: 12 of the seats are considered safe for the Democrats, 6 as safe for the Republicans.
Democrats are favored in 4, Republicans in 5; 3 are leaning Democratic, and in 1 there is no clear favorite.
Minority representation: one new seat intended for a Hispanic. NEW JERSEY:
Seats in 102d Congress: 14
After redistricting: 13
Incumbents retiring: 4
Current: 8 Democrats, 6 Republicans.
Prospects: 2 safe Democratic seats, 4 safe Republican seats, 3 Democrats favored, 1 Republican favored, 1 leaning Republican, 1 leaning Democratic, 1 no clear favorite.
Minority representation: first seat intended for a Hispanic. CONNECTICUT:
Seats in 102d Congress: 6
After redistricting: 6
Incumbents retiring: None
Current: 3 Democrats, 3 Republicans.
Prospects: 2 safe Democratic seats, 2 safe Republican seats, 1 Democrat favored, 1 Republican favored.
Minority representation: could lose only black representative.
(Source: Congressional Quarterly)


Gem Twist Faces Old Test With New Rider
Litigation cost him his spot on the Olympic team, and pilot error recently cost him the companionship of his longtime rider, Greg Best, but Gem Twist seems disinclined to let any amount of human intervention prevent him from making horse history on Sunday.
No other equine athlete in the often perilous sport of show jumping has achieved what Gem Twist, a New Jersey-born thoroughbred, is poised to accomplish this week at the National Horse Show.
If he clears just one last array of obstacles, Gem Twist will become the first horse ever to win the American Grandprix Association's horse-of-the-year title for a third year.


Wall Street; When a C.E.O.'s Pain Is a Gain
The chief executive who gets pushed out may survive that distasteful facet of his dressing down without badly hurt feelings.
But standing by while the stock rallies on rumors that you're on the way out?
Now you're talking humiliation.


Not the Same Republican Party
The very interesting and informative "Jerseyana" article on Oct. 11 refers to "Republican Party" opposition to voting by women and blacks in the 1790's.
Isn't it misleading not to make clear that this was not the present-day Republican Party, but was indeed the early present-day Democratic Party?


Miss Kenneally, John F. Neumann
Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph Redding of Southampton, L.I., have announced the engagement of her daughter Danielle Samain Kenneally to John Flanagan Neumann, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard Neumann of Sag Harbor, L.I.
A May wedding is planned.
Miss Kenneally, 26 years old, is the merchandising projects manager of Seventeen magazine in New York.
She graduated from the University of Richmond.
Her father, Dr.
John Kenneally, is a professor of English at Southampton College.
Her mother, Christina Redding, is the president of Creative Change, a corporate consulting company in Southampton, and her stepfather is the senior partner of H. B. Maynard &amp; Company, a management consulting company in Pittsburgh.


Cracking Down on Cabs at Airport
MIKE MILNE looked like just another frazzled traveler on a recent Friday night, seeking a cab in the rain outside the Continental Airlines terminal at Newark International Airport.
Several empty cabs whizzed past him.
Then a yellow cab with New York plates stopped abruptly. "Where to?" the driver asked.


Scientists Fluff the Answer to a Billion-Dollar Question
THE director of the National Institutes of Health, Dr.
Bernadine Healy, posed a thought-provoking question to American scientists last summer: what would you do if you had a billion dollars for biomedical research?
Some answers have now trickled in, and they may or may not be surprising depending on whether one believes that scientists are more visionary and altruistic than the population as a whole.


Technology; Computer Viruses: Just Uncommon Colds After All?
A computer virus called Michelangelo caused a sensation when warnings erupted that on March 6 it would destroy computer files around the globe.
Some alarmists suggested that the virus had reached epidemic proportions in desktop computers and would affect hundreds of thousands, even millions, of systems.
When the day arrived, Michelangelo wielded a far shorter brush.
Reports of damage were merely in the hundreds.


Lois K. Calhoun, James Dwinell 4th
Lois Kieffer Calhoun, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert B. Calhoun Jr. of Greenwich, Conn., was married there yesterday to James Fisher Dwinell 4th, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Dwinell 3d of Wayland, Mass.
The Rev.
Neely P. Towe performed the ceremony at the Stanwich Congregational Church.
Mrs.
Dwinell, 22 years old, is a sales analyst at Revlon Inc. in New York.
She graduated from Wheaton College.
Her father is the senior partner at the Clipper Group, a private investment firm in New York.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
Sipping Sweetly
THEY sniffed, they sipped, they smiled. "Nice aroma," Gordon Crane said.


Videodisk Appeal: Sharper Images
A recent tally by the Electronics Industry Association shows videodisk players to be just about the hottest hardware in home entertainment.
In the first nine months of 1992 their sales spurted a surprising 23 percent ahead of those in the same period last year -- a notable jump in an otherwise becalmed trade.
On second thought, maybe that's not surprising.
Merchants have long known that quality sells even when nothing else does.
And quality is what videodisks offer.
They provide a picture so superior to videotape that the difference is apparent at first glance.


Simple Assertion, Complicated Realities
The race between State Attorney General Robert Abrams and Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato held the prospect of offering voters a choice between two starkly different visions of government.
But the race has often turned on character attacks and half-stated truths, . and its most symbolic interchange may have been the one in which an exasperated Mr.
Abrams labeled Mr.
D'Amato a "fascist," and Mr.
D'Amato responded with tears and commercials featuring an image of Benito Mussolini.
A narrator in one ad said Mr.
Abrams's reputation had been "stained and dishonored forever."


China Orders Expulsion of Hong Kong Journalist
The Government said today it had ordered the expulsion from China of a Hong Kong journalist who has been detained for a week on charges that she offered bribes for secret documents.
The journalist, Leung Wai-min, a 32-year-old reporter for The Hong Kong Express newspaper, was detained in the early hours of Oct. 25 and kept incommunicado.
She was not allowed visits from her husband or editor or from British Embassy officials.


Lesley Rosenthal, Michael Buchheim
Dr.
Lesley Robin Rosenthal, the daughter of Seymour Rosenthal of Old Westbury, L.I., and Cricket Richmond of Boca Raton, Fla., was married last evening to Michael Charles Buchheim, a son of Simon Buchheim of Coconut Creek, Fla., and the late Tess Buchheim.
Rabbi Jerome Davidson officiated at the Glen Oaks Country Club in Old Westbury.
Dr.
Rosenthal-Buchheim, 33 years old, graduated from the C. W. Post Center of Long Island University and received a D.D.S. from New York University.
She is a dentist in New York.
Her father is president of Sy Rosenthal &amp; Company, a commercial real estate concern based in New York.
Her mother is a clothing and gift designer in Boca Raton.
The bride's maternal grandfather, Nathan Goldman, is a founder and past president of the Sonnenblick-Goldman Corporation, a mortgage-financing firm based in New York.


IN SHORT: FICTION
FOLEY'S LUCK Stories. By Tom Chiarella. Knopf, $20.


Rangers Find the Blahs Follow Them to Forum
Fifty seconds into the first period of action at the Forum this evening, Mark Hardy took a deflected slap shot in the left cheekbone and left the ice with an ugly welt and a dazed look on his face.
He would not be the only Ranger to walk away looking a tad bit confused.
Two days after losing, miserably, to the Quebec Nordiques at the Garden, the Rangers were overmatched and outplayed by the Canadiens, falling 4-3.
Only a late third-period goal by Darren Turcotte made the game look close.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Republicans -- As Presidential Race Nears End, the Attacks Continue; Bush Calls Rival Untrustworthy and Untried
Taking a strategic turn in his campaign's final hours, President Bush today used an attack on his honesty by Gov.
Bill Clinton as occasion to mount his sharpest assault yet on his rival's fitness for office.
Before 11,000 backers huddled under dreary skies here, the President denounced Mr.
Clinton for accusing him of repeatedly lying about his knowledge of the 1986 Iran arms-for-hostages affair.


The Answers
1.
The answer is either 3 or 5.
Some geographers believe there are five separate oceans: the Atlantic, Pacific, Indian, Arctic and Antarctic.
But others see the Arctic Ocean as an extension of the Atlantic Ocean and the Antarctic as an extension of the Atlantic, Pacific and Indian Oceans.
2. b.
3. Six feet.
4.
Located in the Western Pacific near the island of Guam, the Marianas Trench is the deepest part of the ocean.
It runs to a depth of about 36,000 feet, more than a mile deeper than the height of Mount Everest (29,028 feet), the world's highest mountain.
5.
Rainwater comes from clouds that form by evaporation of ocean water, during which the salt remains in the ocean.
6.
The submerged edges of a continent, which slope gradually deeper into the water until they drop off toward the ocean bottom.
7.
Currents flow clockwise in the Northern Hemisphere and counterclockwise in the Southern Hemisphere.
8.
The Nile, 4,180 miles long, is the longest river in the world.
The Amazon is 3,912 miles long, the Mississippi 2,348 miles long.
9. Lake Superior, Lake Michigan, Lake Huron, Lake Erie, Lake Ontario.
10.
Irrawaddy River, Myanmar; Fraser River, British Columbia; Magdalena River, Colombia; Burdekin River, Queensland, Australia; Mekong River, Southeast Asia.
11.
Because water, unlike most liquids, expands on freezing, making ice less dense and therefore lighter than water.
12.
False.
Angel Falls in Southeast Venezuela, discovered in 1935, is by far the highest waterfall, at 3,212 feet.
13. It is the average level of a sea's surface between high and low tides.
14. Neap tides.
15. c.
16.
The Dead Sea is saltiest, with a saline content of approximately 28 percent, compared with the Atlantic's 3.5 percent and the Great Salt Lake's 12 to 24 percent, depending on seasonal snow runoff.
17.
All but the Bering Sea are lakes.
Even though most lakes are fresh water, the Caspian and Dead Seas are technically lakes because they are inland, do not contain salts from the open sea and have no outlet.
18. c.
Salt water and inland seas and saline lakes constitute 97.2 percent of all the water on earth.
19.
It is a natural lake.
The others were rivers that were dammed for hydroelectric projects.


Carribean Resorts: The High Points
PEOPLE in the Caribbean, a region very vulnerable to problems that affect tourism, think they deserve a break.
The last winter that was termed good for the volume of North American visitors was 1988-89.
Since then tourism has been hurt by Hurricane Hugo, the Persian Gulf war and the North American recession.
In the first four months of 1992, visitors increased by 4 percent over last year, according to figures supplied by the islands, with the rise coming largely from Canadians and Europeans.
The number of visitors from the United States remained flat.
Furthermore, the figures were not enough to overcome the 9 percent drop in the first four months of 1991, during the gulf war.
With a few exceptions, the lodging industry has resisted raising rates in view of the recession.


Easier Ups and Downs: Caring for Garage Doors
Garage doors need simple maintenance once or twice a year to keep operating smoothly.
Performing maintenance in the fall helps insure that the door will not be a nuisance in the winter.
Start by lubricating the hinges.
Squirt a few drops of lightweight household oil on the spindles or spray them with a small amount of silicone or Teflon lubricant.
When lubricating the hinges on the sides of the door, avoid putting oil or spray on the rollers in the tracks.
They should remain dry so that they do not accumulate dirt.


Bookshelf
Additional titles of interest:
THE FORTUNE-TELLERS.
By Lloyd Alexander.
Illustrated by Trina Schart Hyman.
Dutton. $15. (Ages 5 to 8) The handsome young man asks the fortuneteller about his future, absorbs the simple replies, takes the fortuneteller's place when he absconds -- and lives happily ever after.
The illustrations place the story in Cameroon but it has a universal ebullience.


Colombia Pilots Report Brushes With U.S. Planes
Airline pilots flying over central Colombia say they are sighting more than dormant volcanoes and coffee plots on Andean slopes.
They complain of uncomfortably close encounters with "ghost planes" bearing United States military markings.
"Our airplane started to shake, and the noise of the engines of the Hercules airplane could be felt," Alvaro Jaramillo Buitrago, president of Avianca, Colombia's largest airline, wrote recently to air safety authorities here.
"We can only attribute to luck that the two aircraft did not collide."


LATIN BISHOPS SET NO NEW DIRECTIONS
Latin America's Roman Catholic bishops reaffirmed last week that the needs of the region's poor should continue to have first call on the attention of the church.
But unlike previous gatherings of this scope, the latest meeting of the Latin American Episcopal Conference proved to be primarily a holding action on church policy.
On Wednesday, the 300 bishops ended more than two weeks of deliberations at the conference in Santo Domingo in the Dominican Republic without endorsing any major new directions in church policy or practice.
Their sessions often bogged down in procedural difficulties and a tug-of-war between bishops urging change for the Latin American church and Vatican officials who are allied with conservative church leaders.


Carol Crutchfield, John Cook Jansing
Carol Jane Crutchfield, a daughter of Jane C. Clark of Tallahassee, Fla., and the late Leo Crutchfield, was married yesterday to John Cook Jansing, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John C. Jansing of Hobe Sound, Fla.
The Rev.
Dr.
Charles Fulton performed the Baptist ceremony at Pebble Hill Plantation, a historic mansion in Thomasville, Ga.
Mrs.
Jansing, 28 years old, is the media planner for Calvin Klein Inc. in New York.
She graduated from Florida State University.
Her father was the president of the former Leon Realty in Tallahassee.
The bride is a stepdaughter of Lewis E. Clark of Tallahassee.


Trip Insurance
To the Editor: Betsy Wade's article "In Trip Insurance, Small Print Is No Small Matter" (Oct. 11) brought to light problems faced by the traveler as well as by the travel agent.
Among the cases Ms.
Wade cited was the problem faced by Mr. and Mrs.
Richard Kammerer, long-time clients of my agency, Travel Headquarters of Short Hills, N.J.
When Mr.
Kammerer fell ill, he could not get compensation for the cost of the cruise the couple was not able to take on Pearl Cruises because the trip-cancellation coverage ceased when they began their trip.


New I-70 Stretch Helps Skiers
Skiers and other travelers will be able to reach Aspen, Vail and other ski areas more easily now that the final 12-mile stretch of Interstate 70 has been opened in Colorado.
The four-lane highway through Glenwood Canyon west of Denver opened last month after 12 years of construction.
It replaces a two-lane highway through the canyon and is the final link in Interstate 70's 2,175-mile route from Baltimore to Cove Fort, Utah.
The final stretch is between Glenwood Springs to the west and Gypsum to the east.


SoHo Street Therapy
LIKE many good friends, Caroline Johnson, Amy Alkon and Marlowe Minick give one another a lot of advice.
One night while trying to help their waiter at the Moon Dance Diner in TriBeCa demystify the meaning of life, they found a way to share their collective wisdom with other people.
They became the Advice Ladies and are now a visible and popular part of the SoHo weekend landscape.
On a typical Saturday or Sunday, their modest office -- four chairs and a table at the corner of Broome Street and West Broadway -- is visited by hundreds of people.
Most people just stand by and listen, but many sit down and unburden themselves, sharing problems both serious and silly.


BEST SELLERS: November 1, 1992
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
2
THE TALE OF THE BODY THIEF, by Anne Rice. (Knopf, $24.) To prove he is still a hero among the living dead, Lestat embarks on a dangerous enterprise; "The Vampire Chronicles," continued.
2
2
3
THE STARS SHINE DOWN, by Sidney Sheldon. (Morrow, $23.) The fortunes of a successful businesswoman are suddenly imperiled by secrets from her past and present relationships. (LP)
3
5
23
WAITING TO EXHALE, by Terry McMillan. (Viking, $22.) The friendships and romances of four black women in Phoenix.
4
3
7
THE SECRET HISTORY, by Donna Tartt. (Knopf, $23.) Close friends at a small college must deal with the consequences of a crime they committed.
5
4
34
THE PELICAN BRIEF, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $22.50.) A woman law student probes the murder of two Supreme Court justices.
6
1
DRIVING FORCE, by Dick Francis. (Putnam, $21.95.) An ex-jockey's horse-transport business is besieged by a series of mysterious deaths.
7 *
6
10
WHERE IS JOE MERCHANT? by Jimmy Buffett. (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, $19.95.) A couple on the trail of a dead rock star who has been sighted.
8
7
3
THE SHADOW RISING, by Robert Jordan. (Tor/ Doherty, $24.95.) Book Four of "The Wheel of Time," a fantasy saga.
9
9
3
SABINE'S NOTEBOOK, by Nick Bantock. (Chronicle Books, $17.95.) Continuing the epistolary romance between two talented people begun in "Griffin &amp; Sabine."
10
1
MOSTLY HARMLESS, by Douglas Adams. (Harmony, $20.) In the fifth volume of the "Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy" series, a survivor tries to cope with new predicaments.
11
10
12
THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $14.95.) A photographer and a lonely farmer's wife in Iowa.
12
8
16
GERALD'S GAME, by Stephen King. (Viking, $23.50.) Twenty-eight hours of horror suffered by a woman handcuffed to a bedpost.
13
12
9
GRIFFIN &amp; SABINE, by Nick Bantock. (Chronicle Books, $16.95.) The romance of an artist and a secret admirer, told through cards and letters.
14
1
BEST DESTINY, by Diane Carey. (Pocket, $20.) Young James T. Kirk's first adventure in space; a new "Star Trek" story.
15
13
3
LEAVING COLD SASSY, by Olive Ann Burns. (Ticknor &amp; Fields, $21.) The story of a marriage that survives many strains; a sequel to the 1984 novel "Cold Sassy Tree."
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
7
THE WAY THINGS OUGHT TO BE, by Rush H. Limbaugh 3d. (Pocket, $22.) Anecdotes and opinions offered by the talk show host.
2
2
4
IT DOESN'T TAKE A HERO, by H. Norman Schwarzkopf with Peter Petre. (Linda Grey/ Bantam, $25.) The autobiography of the general who commanded the allied forces in the gulf war.
3
8
21
EARTH IN THE BALANCE, by Al Gore. (Houghton Mifflin, $22.95.) The Vice-Presidential candidate discusses the environment.
4
3
9
EVERY LIVING THING, by James Herriot. (St. Martin's, $22.95.) Continuing the memoirs of the Yorkshire veterinarian.
5
4
23
THE SILENT PASSAGE, by Gail Sheehy. (Random House, $16.) The psychological and social significance of menopause for today's women.
6
5
6
THE TE OF PIGLET, by Benjamin Hoff. (Dutton, $16.) Aspects of Taoist philosophy explained through the actions of an A. A. Milne character.
7
7
12
WOMEN WHO RUN WITH THE WOLVES, by Clarissa Pinkola Estes. (Ballantine, $20.) A Jungian analyst reinterprets myths and folk tales to enable women to understand their psyches.
8
6
20
TRUMAN, by David McCullough. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $30.) A biography of the 33d President.
9
11
9
YOUNG MEN &amp; FIRE, by Norman Maclean. (University of Chicago, $19.95.) An account of a disastrous fire in a Montana forest in 1949.
10
14
2
I CAN'T BELIEVE I SAID THAT! by Kathie Lee Gifford with Jim Jerome. (Pocket, $22.) The autobiography of the co-host of the television show "Live With Regis and Kathie Lee."
11
10
3
THE SENATOR, by Richard E. Burke with William and Marilyn Hoffer. (St. Martin's, $23.95.) The recollections of a man who served as an aide to Edward M. Kennedy for 10 years.
12 *
1
BANKRUPTCY 1995, by Harry E. Figgie Jr. with Gerald J. Swanson. (Little, Brown, $19.95.) The authors predict the collapse of America under Government debt and suggest ways to cope with it.
13
1
THE CHANGE, by Germaine Greer. (Knopf, $24.) An extensive survey of the physical, psychological and social effects of menopause.
14
13
4
THE CREATORS, by Daniel J. Boorstin. (Random House, $30.) Three thousand years in the history of religion, philosophy, literature and the arts, told through the lives of those who made it.
15
12
18
DIANA: HER TRUE STORY, by Andrew Morton. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $22.) A biography of the Princess of Wales.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
2
16
HARVEY PENICK'S LITTLE RED BOOK, by Harvey Penick with Bud Shrake. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $19.) Anecdotes and tips about playing golf, by a legendary teacher.
2
1
5
ARE YOU THE ONE FOR ME? by Barbara De Angelis. (Delacorte, $21.) How to choose and keep the right partner in love and marriage.
3
47
HOW TO SATISFY A WOMAN EVERY TIME, by Naura Hayden. (Bibli O'Phile/Dutton, $14.95.) Sexual counsel for married couples.
4 *
5
35
A RETURN TO LOVE, by Marianne Williamson. (HarperCollins, $25.) Inspirational advice about ways to replace feelings of fear with feelings of love in daily life.
5 *
4
5
THE AMERICAN HERITAGE DICTIONARY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE. (Houghton Mifflin, $39.95.) The third edition.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,050 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 28,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.
And Bear in Mind
(Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)
CAPITOL GAMES: Clarence Thomas, Anita Hill, and the Story of a Supreme Court Nomination, by Timothy M. Phelps and Helen Winternitz. (Hyperion, $24.95.) Two journalists' comprehensive, insightful view of the Clarence Thomas story; they believe its outcome was determined by the political effectiveness of the Bush Administration and the mistakes of Ms.
Hill's supporters.
DOCTOR CRIMINALE, by Malcolm Bradbury. (Viking, $22.) Mr.
Bradbury's wicked novel casts a cold eye on modern national and intellectual cultures; its title character, an intellectual acrobat and political deceiver, owes something to the late Paul de Man.
DONOVAN'S WIFE, by Tom Wicker. (Morrow, $22.) A funny cautionary novel and a lesson in unethical politics, featuring a no-account Congressman (Donovan) and a disgusted political reporter who carries a torch for the Representative's wife.
I, TITUBA, BLACK WITCH OF SALEM, by Maryse Conde (Caraf Books/University Press of Virginia, $19.95), and TREE OF LIFE, by Maryse Conde. (One World/Ballantine, $18.) These two novels by a native of Guadeloupe, now a professor of French in California, deal with survivors against great odds: in one case, a victim of the 1692 witch trials; in the other, a morally complex patriarch who makes his way from Guadeloupe to California.
THE RASCAL KING: The Life and Times of James Michael Curley, 1874-1958, by Jack Beatty. (William Patrick/Addison-Wesley, $25.) A skillful profile of Boston's grand, colorful, corrupt and effective working-class Irish politician and his environment.
THE JEWS OF GERMANY: A Historical Portrait, by Ruth Gay. (Yale University, $35.) A moving, lively account of a vanished community and the surrounding society, from A.D. 70 to Hitler.


'A Day Away From Tallulah . . .'
To the Editor:
With regard to the Tallulah Bankhead quotation, I believe it was uttered by Tallulah's husband.
He said, "A day away from Tallulah is like a weekend in the country."  RUTH KARSON Lake Worth, Fla.
The Editor replies:
In her autobiography, Tallulah Bankhead wrote: "Howard Dietz once remarked, 'A day away from Tallulah is like a month in the country.' Ever since he's enjoyed the reputation of a great wit."


'I Sent a Times Clipping to Mary Matalin'
To the Editor:
A while ago, I sent a New York Times news clipping to Mary Matalin, Bush campaign deputy, who frequently speaks for Mr.
Bush publicly and travels with him.
Anyhow, I sent her a news item that I think was critical of something that the campaign said, and because I subscribe to The Times and learn a lot from it, I sent her a note with it.


Singles Pioneer Signs Up No. 300,000
EMPLOYING the dictum it takes one to know one, Richard Lowenstein started a tour company exclusively aimed at single people who want to travel.
The company, Singleworld, with headquarters here, marked its 35th anniversary this year by taking its 300,000th single passenger on a cruise this fall.


Malcolm X, in the Eyes Of Different Beholders
"MY whole life has been a chronology of changes," Malcolm X told Alex Haley, his biographer, the year before he was shot to death on Feb. 21, 1965, in the Audubon Ballroom in New York City.
His life with its wholesale leaps of faith and thought has led to continual resurrections and numerous reincarnations as the ideological brawl for his legacy continues.
In his 39 years , Malcolm was constantly evolving, complicating the claims of those who seek to be his spiritual heirs and the interpreters of his philosophy.
That he was many things to many people is reflected in his range of admirers, who include rap artists like Public Enemy, Justice Clarence Thomas of the Supreme Court, and the filmmaker Spike Lee.
Mr.
Lee will reveal his version of the black nationalist's life when his already controversial film "Malcolm X" opens this month.


Unpredictables: Perot, New Jersey and Connecticut
Although Gov.
Bill Clinton appears to be maintaining his overwhelming lead in New York, the strength he showed recently in New Jersey and Connecticut seems less certain in the final days of the Presidential campaign.
And as the spread between Mr.
Clinton and President Bush appears to narrow, the cause of this uncertainty could lie as much with the unpredictable Ross Perot candidacy as with Mr.
Clinton or the President, poll takers and analysts say.


In the Region: Long Island; Recent Sales
Albertson 253,000
48 Evans Avenue  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 36-year-old brick and aluminum ranch; dining room, living room fireplace, finished basement; taxes $4,800.
Copiague 120,000
280 Vespucci Avenue  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 31-year-old Cape Cod; dining room, finished basement, 1-car garage; taxes $3,900.
Lindenhurst 148,900
345 South 2d Street  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 40-year-old Cape Cod; dining room, finished basement, 1-car garage; taxes $3,200.
Mineola 214,500
480 Emory Road  4-bedroom,2-bath, 38-year-old Cape Cod; dining room, fireplace, 1-car garage; taxes $3,800.
New Hyde Park 255,000
9 Magnolia Street  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 48-year-old Cape Cod; dining room, finished basement, fireplace, Florida room; taxes $4,000.
Roslyn Heights 220,000
91 Burnham Avenue  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 60-year-old colonial; dining room, eat-in kitchen, basement; taxes $3,800.
OTHER AREAS Darien, Conn. 405,000
1 Colony Road  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 41-year-old split level; deck, new roof, new fencing, 0.50 acre; taxes $3,311.
South Salem, N.Y. 350,000
Tribrook Drive
4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 6-year-old colonial; family room, fireplace, deck; taxes $7,685.
South River, N.J. 113,000
200 Prospect Street
2-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 35-year-old ranch; full walk-up attic, eat-in-kitchen, full basement; taxes $3,500.


Results Plus
TENNIS Forget and Ivanisevic in Final  Guy Forget and Goran Ivanisevic scored upsets yesterday in the semifinals of the Stockholm Open.
Forget surprised Pete Sampras of the United States, 7-6 (13-11), 7-6 (7-4), to become the first French finalist in the $1.3 million tournament since 1982.
Forget, seeded No. 8, will play fourth-seeded Ivanisevic, who defeated second-seeded Stefan Edberg, 6-4, 7-6 (10-8).
It was the fourth consecutive loss for Edberg against the Croatian this year.
Edberg, a Swede, also lost to him in the finals at Stuttgart and Sydney, and in the quarterfinals at Wimbledon.
Sampras's loss ended his bid to take the No. 1 spot in the ATP Tour ranking.
He is No. 2 behind Jim Courier, who lost in the third round at Stockholm, and would have moved up with a tournament victory.
Sampras failed to break the hot-serving Forget's serve a single time in the match. (AP) BOXING South Korean Keeps Title Moon Sung Kil of South Korea retained his World Boxing Council superflyweight title yesterday with a 12-round split decision victory over Greg Richardson of Youngstown, Ohio, in Seoul.
Richardson landed numerous punches throughout the fight but lacked power and failed to slow Moon's relentless attack.
Richardson was knocked down twice about 50 seconds before the final bell.
Mexican and Japanese judges scored the bout 119-108 and 116-110 for Moon, respectively, while a Venezuelan judge favored Richardson, 115-114.
Moon improved his record to 17-1; Richardson fell to 29-6. (AP) BASEBALL Fielder Leads a U.S.
Rout  Cecil Fielder of Detroit slammed a three-run homer in the first inning and the big-hitting United States all-stars never looked back as they beat an all-Japan team, 9-4, yesterday in Tokyo in the second game of an eight-game series.
The major leaguers have scored 20 runs in winning the first two games, a dramatic turnaround from their last tour here in 1990, when they dropped the first four games.
Fielder's homer off Kintetsu fireballer Hideo Nomo, his second in two games, put the United States ahead, 3-0.
Japan struck back quickly when Koji Akiyama of the Japan Series champion Seibu Lions singled off California's Mark Langston, moved to third on two wild pitches and scored on a grounder by Kintetsu's Hiroo Ishii.
But the American team jumped to a 6-1 lead in the fifth inning. (AP) GOLF One-Shot Lead for Lyle in Spain  Sandy Lyle sank a 75-foot bunker shot for a birdie on the 15th hole and held a one-stroke lead yesterday after three rounds of the Volvo Masters tournament in Sotogrande, Spain.
The Scot finished with a one-over-par 72 and a three-round total of one-over 214.
Second was Christy O'Connor Jr. of Ireland, who shot 71.
Eduardo Romero of Argentina, Tony Johnstone of Zimbabwe and Bernhard Langer of Germany shot 70's.
They were the only players to break par at the 6,920-yard Valderrama Golf Club.
Romero and Johnstone shared third place at 216, while Langer was tied with Scotland's Colin Montgomerie for fifth at 218.
Nick Faldo fell out of contention after his 74 left him with at 226. (AP) Stockton Leads Seniors By 3: Dave Stockton birdied four of the first six holes yesterday y on the way to a seven-under-par 64 for a three-shot lead after two rounds of the $500,000 Kaanapali Classic in Hawaii.
Stockton started the day two shots behind after opening with a 67, but his two-round total of 11-under 131 put him three strokes ahead of Tommy Aaron (67-67), Dale Douglass (68-66) and Mike Hill (69-65).
Stockton, who turns 51 tomorrow, is playing his first full year on the Senior PGA Tour and is looking for his second victory. (AP) RUGBY Championship for the Old Blue Club The Old Blue Rugby Club of Manhattan beat the White Plains Rugby Club yesterday, 26-11, in the Metropolitan New York Rugby Union Championship game at Van Cortlandt Park in the Bronx.
Old Blue broke open a 6-6 tie at halftime with second-half tries (5-point touchdowns) by Jeff Dumpson and Dan Kennedy.
Billy Russell added 16 points on four 3-point penalty kicks and two 2-point conversion kicks.
Old Blue advanced to the 16-team Eastern Rugby Union Championship and will play in a quarterfinal bracket on Nov. 21-22 on Randalls Island in New York.
The Eastern Rugby Union Championship will be played Dec. 5-6 in Columbia, S.C.


K.G.B.'S SUCCESSOR CHARGES SCIENTIST
Russia's Security Ministry, the successor to the K.G.B., announced today that it was filing charges against a scientist who wrote that Russia was continuing to test and produce chemical weapons despite assurances to the contrary.
The case has raised fears in Russia that the Security Ministry is reviving the practices of the K.G.B., and that the precedent could seriously curtail the lively investigative journalism that has developed in recent years, and especially since the disintegration of the Soviet Union.


Artists From the New World in Love With the Old
What's most "American" about American 19th-century art?
The image of the wilderness, many art historians say.
It's certainly pervasive, in Frederic Church's sunset-flooded forests, in Albert Bierstadt's staggering Rockies and in Winslow Homer's pounding Atlantic waves.
No Western artists had ever painted nature quite this way before.
Unpeopled, frighteningly vast, it is shot through with an adamant, wild spirituality.
Yet while many American artists squared off to confront the frontier, others, equally adventurous in their way, set out across the sea to Europe, on a perilous voyage that often took eight weeks to complete.
There, in England, Germany and especially in Italy, they sought things they could not find at home: the pleasures of an alternative way of life, a hands-on contact with the great classical traditions of Western art, and an idealized past in which the young American nation might seek a model.


Mixed Personas
IF the Princess of Wales can be up front about her penchant for soap operas, why shouldn't Blaine Trump admit her devotion to The King?
On Monday night, Mrs.
Trump, Ivana Trump's former sister-in-law, stopped by the Ed Sullivan Theater for a party to celebrate the new Elvis Presley trading cards.
With a karaoke sing-along booth, Jack Daniels-and-Coke cocktails and a set-up in which you could make a video of yourself strumming an electric guitar next to Elvis, it was a theme-park kind of event that was packed with locals and tourists who looked as if they had been too long at the fair.
And it probably sent all the ghosts of "The Ed Sullivan Show" out for the evening.


'Hey, I Could Learn That!'
To the Editor:
Having enjoyed Edward Rothstein's essay "Confessions of a Gould Devotee"  [ Oct. 4 ] , let me make my own confession:


ABOUT-FACE
I want Norman to do an about-face, look back into the horror of Vietnam and tell us exactly why "a young Bill Clinton" might have become a wiser and better President had he "put himself at risk."


In the Region: New Jersey; Recent Sales
East Brunswick 195,000
14 Dorothy Lane
3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 9-year-old split level; European kitchen, skylights, one-car garage; taxes $6,020.
Edison 140,000
18 Cambridge Road
3-bedroom, 2-bath, 38-year-old ranch; family room, new kitchen and bath; taxes $2,366.
Old Bridge 125,000
154 Marlboro Road
3-bedroom, 1-bath, 12-year-old Cape Cod; large country kitchen, c/a, pool; taxes $3,346.
Raritan 211,000
18 Chestnut Trail
4-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 6-year-old colonial; porch, fireplace, full basement; taxes $3,563.
South River 113,000
200 Prospect Street
2-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 35-year-old ranch; full walk-up attic, eat-in-kitchen, full basement; taxes $3,500.
Toms River 91,000
33 Prince Charles Street 2-bedroom, 2-bath, 3-year-old ranch; one-car garage, w/w carpeting, c/a; taxes $1,491.
OTHER AREAS Darien, Conn. 405,000
1 Colony Road  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 41-year-old split level; deck, new roof, new fencing, 0.50 acre; taxes $3,311.
South Salem, N.Y. 350,000
Tribrook Drive
4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 6-year-old colonial; family room, fireplace, eat-in kitchen, deck; taxes $7,685.
Roslyn Heights, L.I. 220,000
91 Burnham Avenue  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 60-year-old colonial; dining room, eat-in kitchen, basement; taxes $3,800.


Sound Bytes; At the Unix Helm, With an Attitude
ROEL PIEPER (pronounced RULE PEEP-er) is an admitted street fighter.
After nearly every bone in his 6-foot, 6-inch body was broken in an Autobahn motorcycle accident -- "I was yogurt," he says -- he clawed back to play basketball for the Dutch national team.
Now president and chief executive of Unix System Laboratories Inc. (USL), of Summit, N.J., he is the point man for establishing Unix, long a mainstay on $60,000 workstation computers, as the computer operating system of choice among businesses.
To do so, Unix must win the desktop personal computers away from Microsoft's forthcoming NT and I.B.M.'s OS/2 systems.
Question: What is your goal?


Valvano Back on Air
JIM VALVANO, the former North Carolina State coach who has been under treatment for cancer, apparently feels well enough to resume his career as a college television analyst.
A spokesman for ESPN said that Valvano was scheduled to provide live commentary on at least six games this season and would also serve as a studio host. (AP)


Speaking Up for Children In Crisis, Near and Far
AFTER traveling to Somalia in late September as a good-will ambassador for Unicef, Audrey Hepburn was at the Plaza Hotel in New York this week and talking of her shock at what she had seen.
"I had seen famine in Ethiopia and in a way in Bangladesh, but I'd seen nothing like this," Miss Hepburn said.
"It's total anarchy. Whatever was not destroyed by the drought was destroyed by fighting. The problem continues because the relief work is impeded."


Spicing Up Fresh Fish and Shellfish
Most fresh fish and even some shellfish are extremely delicate tasting.
Yet this does not preclude using lusty seasonings when preparing them.
The relatively bland flavor of the seafood can serve as the background for more than a mere touch of garlic, hot pepper, curry and the like.
But at the same time, when using flavorings like these, there must be some balance so the sharp spicing does not overwhelm the dish.


New Rochelle in Finals as Site for Unicef
THERE hasn't been this much excitement in town since Thomas Paine, the city's most famous resident, first helped foment a revolution.
At deli counters and in small stores operating on half-deserted Main Street, people talk of "The Little Engine That Could" and of David overcoming Goliath.
They are referring to the possibility that their small city could beat out New York City to become the new home of Unicef.
Thomas Paine was, after all, the first to propose "a general convention of nations acting as a whole," and residents devoutly hope his dream materializes in their hometown.


Manuel Antonio de Varona, 83, Ex-Cuba Premier and Castro Foe
Manuel Antonio de Varona, a former Prime Minister of Cuba and a leading foe of Fidel Castro's Government, died on Thursday at his home in Miami.
He was 83 years old.
He died of cancer, his family said without giving further details.


World Markets; A 'No' on Unity, a 'Yes' From Investors
In another illustration of unpredictability and perverseness, the markets here have just posted one of the best gains of the year during a week in which voters said "no" to a vaunted constitutional agreement aimed at keeping Canada from breaking up.
Not only did stock and bond prices levitate, but the Canadian dollar rose to nearly 81 United States cents after plummeting during the six-week referendum campaign to just above 79 cents, 5 cents below August's level.


When Chefs Celebrate; Sweet Surprise For A Cookbook Author
ALICE WATERS wanted to do something special for Marion Cunningham's 70th birthday.
Not just because she is one of Waters's dearest friends, but because she is America's culinary elder statesman.
The original idea, Waters said, was for a small group "to bring pots to Marion's house, but then we realized there were 120 very close friends who would feel hurt and very left out."


Sports of The Times; Music Stirs The Passing Marathoners
THE great runners pay no attention to the ubiquitous strains of "Rocky" or "Chariots of Fire" or "New York, New York" as they dash through their marathons.
But the plodders with their 10-minute miles have time to taste the coffee, to smell the roses, and most important, to hear the music.
Music is as stimulating as the sea-roar from the crowd on First Avenue, or the glorious pasta-load the night before.
Now the New York Marathon is getting serious.
Fred Lebow has positioned 25 bands along the 26-mile, 385-yard course today, so his running partner, a Norwegian named Grete Waitz, can be serenaded.


The Home Life of the Aztecs
The endlessly fascinating CODEX MENDOZA (University of California, $495) -- 72 painted leaves portraying Aztec conquests, their daily life and society, and their history, much of it drawn from documents predating the Spanish conquest -- was assembled in Mexico in about 1540 for Spain's ruler, the Emperor Charles V. But privateers seized it at sea, and it fell into the hands of the French royal geographer in the 1550's.
It was then owned successively by the English anthologists of discoveries Richard Hakluyt and Samuel Purchas and by the antiquary John Selden before it went in 1659 to the Bodleian Library at Oxford, where it lay unstudied for centuries.
An edition was published in 1938, but most copies of that were burned in the 1940 German blitz of London.
Now Frances F. Berdan of California State University, San Bernardino, and Patricia Rieff Anawalt of the University of California, Los Angeles, have edited the first complete edition, along with commentaries on the codex itself and on the history, geography, science and art of the Aztecs by the editors and six other scholars.
The 900-page, four-volume book, in a three-quarters leather binding and slipcased, is a fine example of book design, printing and production, a noble tribute to the Aztec artist who painted the great codex.
One large section is unique: a birth-to-death account of Aztec life not dominated by kings, warriors and priests but enlivened by children, women and craftsmen.
More than any other surviving Aztec artifact, this book makes you feel you know these people and have seen them smile.


Making a Difference; In for the Long Run at Bally Manufacturing
When Arthur M. Goldberg took the helm of the Bally Manufacturing Corporation in 1990, he was asked if the casino-hotel and fitness-club company was headed into bankruptcy.
Filled with the can-do bravado of a new chief executive, Mr.
Goldberg replied that he didn't even know how to spell the word.
But a closer inspection of Bally's $1.9 billion in debt, frozen credit lines and trickling cash flow almost drove him to a dictionary.


A Whirling Masquerade for Halloween


Deborah J. Hiett, Carmen R. Borgia
Deborah Jean Hiett, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Tee H. Hiett Jr. of Birmingham, Ala., was married yesterday to Carmen Ross Borgia, a son of Mrs.
Ross Borgia of Newark, Ohio, and the late Mr.
Borgia.
The Rev.
H.
Scott Matheney, the Presbyterian chaplain at Columbia University, performed the ceremony at the James Chapel in the Union Theological Seminary in New York.


Costa Rica by River, Road and Trail . . .
BY midnight, we were lost, creeping along a rock-studded dirt road that buckled and twisted through the mountains that plunge down to the Pacific coast of Costa Rica.
We had no choice but to go on, and in the next two hours we fixed a flat tire, forded countless streams and a 75-foot-wide river, made confused forays onto muddy side roads and saw only one other human being, a surly guard at a surprisingly lavish country house.
There were compensations, however.
Even in the dead of night, magnificent birds fluttered up into the glare of the headlights, their bicolor wings forming bull's-eyes against the darkness.
The vehicle spotlighted a coatimundi sloping along the road in leisurely fashion.
A few miles later the lights picked up a striped cat slinking along a fence; we tentatively identified it as a margay.


A Referendum on New York's Debt
On Tuesday, New Yorkers will be asked to authorize $800 million in borrowing to pay for 390 construction projects around the state.
Supporters say this measure would create jobs.
In any case, the proposal proceeds from a sound premise.
The state is starved for infrastructure spending.
The measure is open to question, however, for reasons of procedure.
The list of recommended projects is long, and it was published only 10 days ago.
That leaves too much to judge in too little time.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
INTO THE WOODS
Orienteering is a noncompetitive sport in which individuals learn how to find their way through a wilderness by following a map and compass.
A new orienteering program is available at the Trailside Nature Museum in Cross River every Wednesday through Sunday from 9 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Maps of 35 markers are available at the museum for $1.50 -- the only charge for participating -- and orienteers may come and go as they please, alone or in groups, during those hours.


Q and A
Maintenance Delinquency  Question: When our building was converted to a co-op the sponsor sold apartments to outside investors.
One investor, who owns two rent-controlled apartments, has fallen behind in maintenance payments.
This a finanical hardship for the co-op because the maintenance is more that the rent on the apartments.


Outfitting the Bar
LIKE EVERY- thing else in life, the liquor cabinet requires periodic renewal.
What should be a source of novelty and delight can fall prey to the malign effects of boredom and routine.
The telltale signs?
A suspicious brown tinge to the dry vermouth.
Accumulated dust on the shoulders of the bottles in the back row.
Mysterious liqueurs cemented to the bottom of the cabinet by their own saccharine oozings.
And then there's that gift bottle of melon liqueur glowing radioactively in a far corner.
Imagine the liquor cabinet as a closet full of clothes: The idea is to establish a basic wardrobe to cover most occasions, then enliven it with imaginative (but not lunatic) touches.
The main elements should be a bottle each of gin, vodka, bourbon, Scotch, tequila, light rum, sweet vermouth, dry vermouth, Cointreau, Campari, brandy, Angostura bitters, tonic and soda water.
That should take care of most classic cocktails and a few basic aperitifs.


Gore Visits School Where Bomb Was Found
Four days after a bomb threat canceled a rally here, Senator Al Gore returned today to deliver an unusually emotional and eloquent speech.
While dismissing the bomb episode as a "trivial and isolated" event, he said it symbolized the meaning of this election campaign.
"It is a choice between fear and hope," he told a crowd at Rocky Mountain High School.


Blessed Are the Shoppers
The wisdom along the Via Condotti here is that if you can afford the likes of Armani and Gucci, the shopping is simply divine.
Some would argue, though, that the Via dei Cestari across town is as close to Heaven as you'll get.
Via dei Cestari lies at the center of a small, old area of Rome where, along with the trattorias and the dry cleaners and the hardware stores, a cluster of stores specialize in ecclesiastical wares.


Ms. Mastrobattista and Nicholas Wood
Mary-Jane Mastrobattista, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John Mastrobattista of Farmington, Conn., was married there yesterday to Nicholas John Wood, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
William J. Wood of St.
Asaph, Wales.
The Rev.
William Smith performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Church of St.
Patrick.
Mrs.
Wood, 28 years old, is a consultant on multimedia computing in New York.
She graduated from Tufts University and received an M.B.A. from Harvard University.
Her father is a senior manager at the Chandler Evans Corporation, an aerospace components manufacturer in West Hartford, Conn.
Her mother, Mary-Jane C. Mastrobattista, is a third-grade teacher at the Noah Wallace School in Farmington.


A Look Into History, Through Stamps
TWO recent publications, one with sweep and scholarship and the other a modest booklet focusing on one city, are both excellent examples of How It Should Be Done when writing about stamps.
Both should be of interest to stamp collectors and to armchair historians whose philatelic involvement is slight.
First, the big book: "Sanitary Fairs: A Philatelic and Historical Study of Civil War Benevolences," by Alvin Robert Kantor and Marjorie Sered Kantor (SF Publishing, 3125 Commercial Avenue, Northbrook, Ill. 60062; $75 postpaid).


Massimino Joins High Rollers
There is a knock on the open door of the spacious office of the basketball coach at the University of Nevada-Las Vegas.
The coach hears Brad Booke knocking, and he knows he's coming in, and still, they both smile.
Booke is the assistant general counsel of the university.


National Merit Scholarship Semifinalists From Long Island
The National Merit Scholarship Corporation has announced the names of 15,000 high school seniors who are semifinalists in its 1993 college scholarship competition.
The organization will announce the names of 6,500 scholarship winners in the spring.
Here are the semifinalists from Long Island: Nassau
BALDWIN
John R. Cleary . . . Baldwin H.S.
Elizabeth M. Hawkins . . . Baldwin H.S.
Ian S. Kaplan . . . Baldwin H.S.
BELLMORE
Emily R. Ascher . . . John F. Kennedy H.S.
Tomer J. Begaz . . . W. C. Mepham H.S.
Laurie J. Deiner . . . W. C. Mepham H.S.
Mark A. Sable . . . John F. Kennedy H.S.
Kevin R. Ward . . . W. C. Mepham H.S.
BROOKVILLE
David W. Brown . . . Long Island Lutheran H.S.
Evan M. Fortunato . . . Long Island Lutheran H.S.
CEDARHURST
Kerri L. Bauchner . . . Lawrence H.S.
Daniel E. Berner . . . Hebrew Academy of the Five Towns and Rocakway H.S.
Daniel S. Davis . . . Lawrence H.S.
Ari Gruen . . . Hebrew Academy of the Five Towns and Rockaway H.S.
Seema Reddy . . . Lawrence H.S.
Michael J. Sun . . . Lawrence H.S.
Galia Wyszkowski . . . Hebrew Academy of the Five Towns and Rocakway H.S.
FARMINGDALE
Scott A. Falk . . . Farmingdale H.S.
FRANKLIN SQAURE
Marc E. Richmond . . . Valley Stream North H.S.
FREEPORT
Brian P. Dunkle . . . Freeport H.S.
Nabyl Tejani . . . Freeport H.S.
GARDEN CITY
Eileen Y. Chaudry . . . Garden City H.S.
David M. Frankel . . . Garden City H.S.
Justin V. Maroney . . . Garden City H.S.
Elana T. Silverman . . . Waldorf School
GLEN COVE
Grace Park . . . Glen Cove H.S.
Amy R. Schwartz . . . Glen Cove H.S.
GREAT NECK
Nancy C. Gotta . . . Great Neck South H.S.
Jason M. Gastwirth . . . John Miller-Great Neck North H.S.
Cyrus F. Hirijibehedin . . . Great Neck South H.S.
Nicole E. Joseph . . . John Miller-Great Neck North H.S.
Ilan Mochari . . . Great Neck South H.S.
Karen B. Salzberg . . . Great Neck South H.S.
HEMPSTEAD
Angela M. Hamlin . . . Sacred Heart Academy
HEWLETT
Kevin A. Agatstein . . . George W. Hewlett H.S.
Andrew H. Claster . . . George W. Hewlett H.S.
Jordan A. Gelber . . . George W. Hewlett H.S.
Marc C. Glick . . . George W. Hewlett H.S.
Michael A. Hanin . . . George W. Hewlett H.S.
Jeanhee Kim . . . George W. Hewlett H.S.
Robert S. Merlin . . . George W. Hewlett H.S.
Jonathan D. Schwartz . . . George W. Hewlett H.S.
Joshua S. Trauner . . . George W. Hewlett H.S.
HICKSVILLE
Domenick Freda . . . Hicksville H.S.
JERICHO
Jeffrey R. Burstein . . . Jericho H.S.
Michael A. Haberman . . . Jericho H.S.
Seth Seifman . . . Jericho H.S.
Daniel J. Sorgen . . . Jericho H.S.
LIDO BEACH
Susannah J. Voigt . . . Long Beach H.S.
LOCUST VALLEY
Sheeva Talebian . . . Locust Valley H.S.
Margaret Villiger . . . Friends Academy
MANHASSET
Allison V. Brooks . . . Manhasset H.S.
Nancy Collins . . . Manhasset H.S.
Jessica A. McGivney . . . Manhasset H.S.
John M. Pellettieri . . . Manhasset H.S.
Sunny Wang . . . Manhasset H.S.
S. Yuen Yoon . . . Manhasset H.S.
MASSAPEQUA
Kenan Altunis . . . Massapequa H.S.
Adam F. Blau . . . Massapequa H.S.
Matthew J. Ehrenworth . . . Massapequa H.S.
Gerald A. Lavin . . . Massapequa H.S.
MERRICK
David E. Kearns . . . Sanford H. Calhoun H.S.
David L. Malmud . . . Sanford H. Calhoun H.S.
MINEOLA
Donald P. Angelillo . . . Chaminade H.S.
Michael J. Chapple . . . Chaminade H.S.
Matthew D. Joss . . . Chaminade H.S.
Francisco J. Santos . . . Chaminade H.S.
Peter K. Stris . . . Chaminade H.S.
NEW HYDE PARK
Jason I Altman . . . Herricks H.S.
Rishi K. Goyal . . . Herricks H.S.
Srishti Gupta . . . Herricks H.S.
Kamaal Haque . . . Herricks H.S.
David Hu . . . Herricks H.S.
Nilesh Kalyanaraman . . . Herricks H.S.
Michael S. Kwak . . . Herricks H.S.
Heather A. McHugh . . . Herricks H.S.
Pinky N. Shah . . . Herricks H.S.
Avni H. Thakore . . . Herricks H.S.
Julie V. Vasile . . . Herricks H.S.
OCEANSIDE
Jeff I. Abes . . . Oceanside H.S.
Emily J. Silvernail . . . Oceanside H.S.
OLD WESTBURY
David S. Alpert . . . The Wheatley School
Robert A. Koslow . . . The Wheatley School
Jessica R. Sultan . . . The Wheatley School
PLAINVIEW
Joshua D. Habib . . . Plainview-Old Bethpage-John F. Kennedy H.S.
Mark B. Hoffman . . . Plainview-Old Bethpage-John F. Kennedy H.S.
Jonathan D. Reiss . . . Plainview-Old Bethpage-John F. Kennedy H.S.
PORT WASHINGTON
Seth L. Altman . . . Paul D. Schreiber H.S.
Peter E. Fishman . . . Paul D. Schreiber H.S.
Will T. Goldfarb . . . Paul D. Schreiber H.S.
Andrew H. Kass . . . Paul D. Schreiber H.S.
D. Campbell MacInnes . . . Paul D. Schreiber H.S.
Lawrence M. Marcus . . . Paul D. Schreiber H.S.
Archis A. Parasharami . . . Paul D. Schreiber H.S.
Andrea J. Pinkus . . . Paul D. Schreiber H.S.
Michael A. Polay . . . Paul D. Schreiber H.S.
Jonathan G. Shafter . . . Paul D. Schreiber H.S.
ROCKVILLE CENTRE
Paul B. Glaser . . . South Side H.S.
Alicia A. Ledlie . . . South Side H.S.
Jesse Levine . . . South Side H.S.
Andrew M. Popper . . . South Side H.S.
Lee H. Saladino . . . South Side H.S.
ROSLYN HEIGHTS
R. Scott Balkan . . . Roslyn H.S.
Melissa R. Chernofsky . . . Roslyn H.S.
Aaron P. Davis . . . Roslyn H.S.
Tara J. Elbogen . . . Roslyn H.S.
Dena R. Greenspan . . . Roslyn H.S.
Willis Huang . . . Roslyn H.S.
Matthew R. Leder . . . Roslyn H.S.
Jessica L. Margolis . . . Roslyn H.S.
Ali M. Strocker . . . Roslyn H.S.
Benjamin D. Tanen . . . Roslyn H.S.
SEAFORD
Robert H. Gill . . . Seaford H.S.
SYOSSET
Jennifer L. Bird . . . Syosset H.S.
James P. Byun . . . Syosset H.S.
Alexandra B. Carter . . . Our Lady of Mercy Academy
Yeling Chen . . . Syosset H.S.
Frank A. Ciminello . . . Syosset H.S.
Edward A. Galanek . . . Syosset H.S.
Rolland W. Ho . . . Syosset H.S.
Paul Kim . . . Syosset H.S.
Benjamin C. Kirkup . . . Syosset H.S.
Christopher Ortega . . . Syosset H.S.
Robert E. Persaud . . . Syosset H.S.
Benedict J. Raia . . . Syosset H.S.
Eric A. Serotta . . . Syosset H.S.
Deborah S. Wilkie . . . Syosset H.S.
Alissa J. Wool . . . Syosset H.S.
UNIONDALE
Neil M. Bodoff . . . Hebrew Academy H.S. Nassau County
Menachem E. Creditor . . . Hebrew Academy H.S. Nassau County
WEST HEMPSTEAD
Abbie L. Hattauer . . . West Hempstead H.S.
WESTBURY
Gene Koo . . . . . . W. Tresper Clarke H.S.
Jennifer M. Sokol . . . W. Tresper Clarke H.S.
WOODMERE
Brian W. Kim . . . Woodmere Academy
Rosanna Yuen . . . Woodmere Academy
Suffolk
BOHEMIA
Dina S. Parekh . . . Connetquot H.S.
Seth A. Perlman . . . Connetquot H.S.
John D. Piazza . . . Connetquot H.S.
BRENTWOOD
Sarah Rohling . . . Academy of St. Joseph
BROOKHAVEN
Jonathan S. Barton . . . Bellport H.S.
COMMACK
Christopher M. Dorso . . . Commack H.S.
Adrienne E. Griffin . . . Commack H.S.
Rafaz Hoque . . . Commack H.S.
Laura C. Lee . . . Commack H.S.
Michael J. Sherman . . . Commack H.S.
DIX HILLS
Richard Chiang . . . Half Hollow Hills H.S. East
Jason I. Cohen . . . Half Hollow Hills H.S. West
Jeanne M. Diiorio . . . Half Hollow Hills H.S. East
Aileen Hsueh . . . Half Hollow Hills H.S. East
Sue Y. Kim . . . Half Hollow Hills H.S. East
Laura E. Koetzie . . . Half Hollow Hills H.S. East
Eugene Koh . . . Half Hollow Hills H.S. East
Stephen P. Levin . . . Half Hollow Hills H.S. East
Daniel J. Maurer . . . Half Hollow Hills H.S. East
Scott Schneiderman . . . Half Hollow Hills H.S. West
Melissa Teoh . . . Half Hollow Hills H.S. East
Alice Wang . . . Half Hollow Hills H.S. East
FRESH MEADOWS
Henry J. Kropf . . . St. Francis Preparatory School
Maria D. O'Leary . . . St. Francis Preparatory School
Melanie L. Uy . . . St. Francis Preparatory School
GREENLAWN
Lara M. Karbiner . . . Harborfields H.S.
HAUPPAUGE
Daniel A. Eckstein . . . Hauppauge H.S.
Peter Hoegel . . . Hauppauge H.S.
Jennifer L. Milroy . . . Hauppauge H.S.
John C. Siracusa . . . Hauppauge H.S.
HUNTINGTON
Scott J. Campea . . . Huntington H.S.
Michael D. Masnick . . . Huntington H.S.
Katherine E. Roeder . . . Huntington H.S.
Matthew Schmid . . . Huntington H.S.
Thomas F. Taylor . . . Huntington H.S.
HUNTINGTON STATION
Robert M. Bruns . . . Walt Whitman H.S.
William H. Finger . . . Walt Whitman H.S.
Susan E. Immartino . . . Walt Whitman H.S.
Jessica A. Mordas . . . Walt Whitman H.S.
Julie B. Schnur . . . Walt Whitman H.S.
Jennifer Thom . . . Walt Whitman H.S.
ISLIP
Victor G. Vogel . . . Islip H.S.
LAKE RONKONKOMA
Glenn Cowen . . . Sachem H.S.
Giancarlo DiPerro . . . Sachem H.S.
Robert D. Gauthier . . . Sachem H.S.
Yuli L. Gu . . . Sachem H.S.
Dennis E. Kramer . . . Sachem H.S.
MASTIC BEACH
Monika Jeetu . . . William Floyd H.S.
MIDDLE ISLAND
Sanjeev A. Francis . . . Longwood H.S.
MILLER PLACE
Aron J. Beatty . . . Miller Place H.S.
Benjamin R. Oshrin . . . Miller Place H.S.
NORTHPORT
Joseph S. Chien . . . Northport H.S.
Jason R. Rudy . . . Northport H.S.
PORT JEFFERSON
Nimmi T. Thomas . . . Earl L. Vandermeulen H.S.
RIVERHEAD
Kimberly M. Czajkowski . . . Riverhead H.S.
ROCKY POINT
James E. Hamblin . . . Rocky Point H.S.
Erik Paulson . . . Rocky Point H.S.
SAG HARBOR
Anna Lacina . . . Pierson H.S.
SAYVILLE
Dahlene N. Fusco . . . Sayville H.S.
SELDEN
Robert N. Imberman . . . Newfield H.S.
SETAUKET
Danielle P. Benaviv . . . Ward Melville H.S.
Todd F. Braunstein . . . Ward Melville H.S.
Steve H. Cho . . . Ward Melville H.S.
William T. Delfyett . . . Ward Melville H.S.
Michael D. Emmerich . . . Ward Melville H.S.
Colin E. Freas . . . Ward Melville H.S.
Sara N. Goldhaber . . . Ward Melville H.S.
Krishna F. Jayaram . . . Ward Melville H.S.
Margaret J. Wieland . . . Ward Melville H.S.
SMITHTOWN
Brian P. Cuocci . . . Smithtown H.S. West
SOUTH HUNTINGTON
Scott L. MacMillan . . . St. Anthony H.S.
Lori A. Maiorino . . . St. Anthony H.S.
Maureen T. Murphy . . . St. Anthony H.S.
Tina M. Trnka . . . St. Anthony H.S.
SOUTHOLD
Leah A. Kaplan . . . Southold H.S.
ST. JAMES
Colin S. deSouza . . . Smithtown H.S. East
Andrea E. Deutsch . . . Smithtown H.S. East
Corey J. Gregory . . . Smithtown H.S. East
Michael A. Mischna . . . Smithtown H.S. East
Antoinette Sakaris . . . Smithtown H.S. East
Deborah J. Schwartz . . . Smithtown H.S. East
Michael J. Shurpik . . . Smithtown H.S. East
WEST BABYLON
Joseph F. Chan . . . West Babylon H.S.
WEST ISLIP
Todd P. Cooper . . . West Islip H.S.
Susan Costanzo . . . West Islip H.S.
WESTHAMPTON BEACH
Ethan Grossman . . . Westhampton Beach H.S.


Terri Ann Austin, Peter Clarke Keogh
"I ALWAYS envisioned a Great Gatsby-like, black-tie wedding," said Terri Ann Austin, who grew up on an estate named Panfield in Lloyd Harbor, L.I.
Last Sunday, Ms.
Austin, 24 years old, a community associate in the Brooklyn District Attorney's office, married Peter Clarke Keogh, 28, a securities broker who also grew up on the North Shore, in a wedding that was as Gatsby-like as gin and tonics and croquet.
The ceremony, in Huntington, L.I., took place at St.
Patrick's Church, which was decorated for the occasion like a classical garden.
So many bouquets of lilies and ficus trees surrounded the altar that the altar boys passed in and out of view like sprites in the woods.


John T. Hughes, Intelligence Aide And Photo Analyst, Is Dead at 64
John T. Hughes, a leading interpreter of aerial intelligence photographs who advised four Presidents and reassured the nation in a 1963 broadcast that the Soviet Union had removed its offensive missiles from Cuba, died on Tuesday at Fairfax Hospital in Falls Church, Va.
He was 64 years old and lived in nearby Annandale.
He died of a cerebral hemorrhage, his family said.


Baubles for the Table
These gleaming vessels and utensils dedicated to the art of entertaining are designed to serve a crowd with spectacular effect.
Ranging from whimsical bird- and bee-shaped pieces to new twists in stainless steel, silver and glass, they take a shine to any table.


Spicing Up Fresh Fish and Shellfish
Most fresh fish and even some shellfish are extremely delicate tasting.
Yet this does not preclude using lusty seasonings when preparing them.
The relatively bland flavor of the seafood can serve as the background for more than a mere touch of garlic, hot pepper, curry and the like.
But at the same time, when using flavorings like these, there must be some balance so the sharp spicing does not overwhelm the dish.


Broken Hearts and Other Anatomical Disasters
WHERE IS HERE?
Stories. By Joyce Carol Oates. 193 pp. Hopewell, N.J.: The Ecco Press. $18.95.


END PAPER: Of My Friend Hector And My Achilles Heel
THIS STORY is about prejudice and stupidity. My own.
It begins in 1945 when I was a 7-year-old living on the fifth floor of a tenement walkup on 107th Street between Columbus and Manhattan Avenues in New York City.
The block was almost entirely Irish and Italian, and I believe my family was the only Jewish one around.
One day a Spanish-speaking family moved into one of the four apartments on our landing.
They were the first Puerto Ricans I had met.
They had a son who was about my age named Hector, and the two of us became friends.
We played with toy soldiers and I particularly remember how, using rubber bands and wood from orange cratges, we made toy pistols that shot off little squares we cut from old linoleum.


Some Questioners in Debate Are Still Unsure
Philip Frederick 3d, a self-employed painter who was among the uncommitted voters chosen to question the candidates during the second Presidential debate, has carved a jack o'lantern to resemble independent Ross Perot.
"After the debate, I shook Mr. Perot's hand and I looked him right in the eye, and he looked me right in the eye," the 29-year-old recalled.
"I said, 'Nice job, sir.' And he clasped my hand and said, 'O.K.!' It was great. I was sold."
For the debate, on Oct.15, a polling firm chose Mr.
Frederick and 208 other Richmond residents because they were still undecided in the presidential election.
They questioned the three candidates in the basketball arena of the University of Richmond.
In the two weeks since then, they have been interviewed on network shows, stopped in their grocery stores and invited to speak at campaign rallies.
Like much of the voting public, many debate participants remained hesitant about their choices as Tuesday's election approached.
Of the 16 people interviewed this week, five said they remained undecided.
Five said they had settled on Gov.
Bill Clinton, four on President Bush and two on Mr.
Perot.
Kimberly K. Usry, a 28-year-old who had been laid off from her job as an advertising executive a week before the debate, said her participation made choosing a candidate tougher than if she had watched at home.
"It would have been easier to look at them as a bunch of actors," said Ms.
Usry, who said she was undecided.
"Instead, I saw their facial expressions, the concern in their faces."
Patti F. Billett, a 33-year-old housewife, said meeting the contenders changed the impression she had based solely on television.
She had been trying to decided between Mr.
Perot and Mr.
Clinton.
"I thought Perot looked like a gunslinger -- hands on his hips, his feet spread, motioning like he was shooting the crowd," Mrs.
Billett said.
"I came home and watched the tape, and they mostly just showed his upper body."
Several audience members praised Mr.
Clinton for looking directly at them, roaming easily on the stage and lingering for 45 minutes to autograph their programs.
Harry J. Shaia, a 25-year-old premedical student, said he found Mr.
Bush "grandfatherly, with the wisdom of the years."
Father Kevin J. O'Brien, a member of the Tribunal of the Catholic Diocese of Richmond, said he would make his choice based on the candidates' speeches and advertisements this weekend.
"Like with a jury, your closing remarks indicate what your priorities are," the 39-year-old priest said.


New Jersey Adopts Law On Curfews
Crime, punishment and civil disorder were much on the minds of Trenton lawmakers this week.
The Governor signed a law to help cities keep teen-agers off the streets at night, while the Assembly approved bills to make "stalking" a crime and to prohibit furloughs from prison for most violent offenders.
The curfew law, signed Thursday by Gov.
Jim Florio, would not impose a curfew statewide but would let cities impose them and hold parents as well as children liable if they failed to keep their children under 18 off the streets between 10 P.M. and 6 A.M.


Men's Focus Is on Race, Not Time
Fred Lebow is not only an adept race director, he is also a renowned spin doctor.
So when Lebow says he is looking forward to a close finish today in the New York City Marathon, he is really saying that the men's race is unlikely to impress many stopwatch-watchers beyond the Willis Avenue Bridge.


A Strapping, 1.6 Million-Year-Old Youth
ORIGINS RECONSIDERED
In Search of What Makes Us Human.
By Richard Leakey and Roger Lewin.
Illustrated. 375 pp.
New York: Doubleday. $25.


Semifinalists Named For Merit Scholarships
The National Merit Scholarship Corporation has announced the names of 15,000 high school seniors who are semifinalists in its 1993 college scholarship competition.
The private, nonprofit organization will announce the names of the 6,500 scholarship winners in the spring.
Here are the semifinalists from Fairfield, Hartford, Litchfield and New Haven Counties:
Fairfield County
BETHEL
Mark R. Moseley . . . Bethel H.S.
Ian K. Quigley . . . Bethel H.S. BROOKFIELD
Jessica J. Hanselman . . . Brookfield H.S.
Vivek H. Maru . . . Brookfield H.S.
DANBURY
Rusell J. Castonguay . . . Danbury H.S.
Joyce P. Lagas . . . Danbury H.S.
Timothy A. Schulz . . . Immaculate H.S.
Michael C. Tucker . . . Danbury H.S.
FAIRFIELD
Eli Boritz . . . Fairfield H.S.
Michael D. Giordano . . . Fairfield Prep.
Michael G. Johnson . . . Fairfield H.S.
Sean P. Sheridan . . . Fairfield H.S.
Christian E. Sweitzer . . . Fairfield Prep.
GREENS FARMS
John B. Sibley, Greens Farms Academy.
GREENWICH
Jonathan L. Curreri . . . Greenwich H.S.-Folsom
Trevor C. Dinmore . . . Greenwick H.S.-Sheldon
Eric L. Gravengaard . . . Greenwich H.S.-Folsom
Elizabeth K. Hagmann . . . Greenwich H.S.-Sheldon
Emily C. Hoffman . . . Greenwich H.S.-Clark
Jennifer E. Mager . . . Greenwich H.S.-Sheldon
Robert S. Murata . . . Greenwich H.S.-Clark
Eric D. Searls . . . Greenwich H.S.-Bella
MONROE
David P. VanVessem . . . Masuk H.S.
NEW CANAAN
Dirk R. Hobman . . . New Canaan H.S.
Michael I. Hsu . . . New Canaan H.S.
Daniel D. Lee . . . New Canaan H.S.
Tim S. Ogilvie . . . New Canaan H.S.
Michael T. Pureka . . . New Canaan H.S.
NEW FAIRFIELD
Brian D. Vance . . . New Fairfield H.S.
RIDGEFIELD
Chad W. Sclove . . . Ridgefield H.S.
Daniel R. Trutt . . . Ridgefield H.S.
Andrew Zornoza . . . Ridgefield H.S.
SHELTON
Jennifer M. Jagodnik . . . Shelton H.S.
STAMFORD
Irrys Almagor . . . Westhill H.S.
Dana E. Balter . . . Westhill H.S.
Moon Duchin . . . Stamford H.S.
Christopher J. Grosso . . . Westhill H.S.
Kenneth M. Gunn . . . Stamford H.S.
Iffat Islam . . . Stamford H.S.
Nadia Kalman . . . Stamford H.S.
STRATFORD
Christopher R. Andrade . . . Frank S. Bunnell H.S.
TRUMBULL
Jeffrey A. Meli . . . Trumbull H.S.
WESTON
Andrew Z. Michaelson . . . Weston H.S.
WESTPORT
Katherine S. Canning . . . Staples H.S.
Todd J. Green . . . Staples H.S.
Heather E. Rosen . . . Staples H.S.
Michael E. Walsh . . . Staples H.S.
WEST REDDING
Mary C. Greenfield . . . Joel Barlow H.S.
WILTON
William T. Adams . . . Wilton H.S.
Jonathan A. Conta . . . Wilton H.S.
Nicole R. Cooper . . . Wilton H.S.
Kathleen Craw . . . Wilton H.S.
Kristin P. Jarosh . . . Wilton H.S.
Kyle Kaufman . . . Wilton H.S.
Geoffrey K. Krummel . . . Wilton H.S.
Matthew W. Lesh . . . Wilton H.S.
Andrea R. Sachs . . . Wilton H.S. Hartford County
AVON
Thomas J. Fote . . . Avon H.S.
Amity L. Zeh . . . Avon H.S.
BLOOMFIELD
Nathan P. Graf . . . Bloomfield H.S.
BRISTOL
David R. Fijol . . . St. Paul's Catholic H.S.
BURLINGTON
Tara B. Schenkel . . . Lewis Mills H.S.
COLLINSVILLE
Caitlin M. Shaw . . . Canton H.S.
Christopher C. Stratton . . . Canton H.S.
Charles C. Wall . . . Canton H.S.
EAST GRANBY
Barbara J. Wohlsen . . . East Granby H.S.
FARMINGTON
Ellen C. Goodridge . . . Farmington H.S.
Daniel Mantell . . . Farmington H.S.
GLASTONBURY
Ji E. Choi . . . Glastonbury H.S.
Thomas J. Hine . . . Glastonbury H.S.
Yvonne Y. Law . . . Glastonbury H.S.
Edward P. Lionberger . . . Glastonbury H.S.
Melissa R. Mooza . . . Glastonbury H.S.
Stephanie A. Mulazzi . . . Glastonbury H.S.
Sarah H. Rosenberg . . . Glastonbury H.S.
Rebecca R. Sawyer . . . Glastonbury H.S.
Gwendolyn M. Wilmes . . . Glastonbury H.S.
GRANBY
Laurie E. Boyden . . . Granby Memorial H.S.
MANCHESTER
E. Forrest Carpenter . . . East Catholic H.S.
Peter H. Choi . . . Manchester H.S.
PLAINVILLE
Peter P. Kidwell . . . Plainville H.S.
SIMSBURY
Rebecca E. Asmar . . . Simsbury H.S.
John L. Girgenti . . . Simsbury H.S.
James P. Lettieri . . . Simsbury H.S.
Graham L. Mather . . . Simsbury H.S.
Gregory C. McGee . . . Simsbury H.S.
Elisabeth L. Nevins . . . Simsbury H.S.
Ritu Pati . . . Simsbury H.S.
Jeffrey E. Prowda . . . Simsbury H.S.
Adam M. Shane . . . Simsbury H.S.
Evan R. Thompson . . . Simsbury H.S.
Jennifer M. Wang . . . Simsbury H.S.
Liesajean Wierschke . . . Simsbury H.S.
Rebecca E. Wolfe . . . Simsbury H.S.
SOUTHINGTON
Craig A. Starses . . . Southington H.S.
SOUTH WINDSOR
Todd E. Arkava . . . South Windsor H.S.
Douglas J. Cohen . . . South Windsor H.S.
SUFFIELD
Joshua F. Adams . . . Suffield Academy
Gary L. Klesczewski . . . Suffield H.S.
Colleen F. Stack . . . Suffield H.S.
Marnie L. Zien . . . Suffield H.S.
WEST HARTFORD
Grace S. Cheng . . . William Hall H.S.
Jeffrey D. Cohen . . . William Hall H.S.
Katherine B. Eyes . . . Conard H.S.
Naomi S. Korn . . . William Hall H.S.
Timothy S. Lishnak . . . Conard H.S.
Austin B. Lynch . . . William Hall H.S.
Todd G. MacDermid . . . Kingswood-Oxford School
Andrea S. Rackowski . . . Conard H.S.
David M. Ratzan . . . William Hall H.S.
Michael H. Schur . . . William Hall H.S.
Daniel Schwan . . . William Hall H.S.
Rebecca L. Slitt . . . William Hall H.S.
Jennifer A. Tracy . . . Northwest Catholic H.S.
Rathanavuth Yinpho . . . William Hall H.S.
WETHERSFIELD
Timothy R. St. Onge . . . Wethersfield H.S.
Mark R. Stewart . . . Wethersfield H.S.
WINDSOR
Henry Brondshpits . . . Loomis-Chaffee School
Bethany M. Buck . . . Loomis-Chaffee School
Jason C. Cody . . . Windsor H.S.
Peter M. Mancoll . . . Loomis-Chaffee School
WINDSOR LOCKS
Carri A. Gerner . . . Windsor Locks H.S.
Sumi D. Loundon . . . Windsor Locks H.S. Litchfield County
KENT
Jagdeesh Basavaiah . . . Kent School
Nyani-Iisha F. Martin . . . Kent School
LAKEVILLE
Walton A. Green . . . Hotchkiss School
Joseph J. Hsie . . . Hotchkiss School
Yule T. Hyun . . . Hotchkiss School
Robert S. Lee . . . Hotchkiss School
Julian D. Mortenson . . . Hotchkiss School
Ian R. Nesbitt . . . Hotchkiss School
John Mark Piampiano . . . Hotchkiss School
Jacob L. Sacks . . . Hotchkiss School
Kristin A. Sherwood . . . Hotchkiss School
NEW MILFORD
Timothy M. Papp . . . New Milford H.S.
Kenneth A. Sansone . . . New Milford H.S.
TORRINGTON
Megan U. Hazen . . . Torrington H.S.
WASHINGTON
Robert C. Hill . . . Shepaug Valley H.S.
Justin R. Sauer . . . Shepaug Valley H.S.
WATERTOWN
Jack M. Langsdorf . . . Taft School
WINSTED
Seth Lovell . . . Gilbert School New Haven County
CHESHIRE
Rebecca N. Anderson . . . Cheshire H.S.
Douglas W. Barrett . . . Cheshire H.S.
Leslie T. Wang . . . Cheshire H.S.
HAMDEN
Katherine J. Howe . . . Hamden H.S.
Jennifer P. Langin . . . Hamden Hall Country Day School
MADISON
Klara L. O'Neill . . . Daniel Hand H.S.
NEW HAVEN
Rachel E. Batsford . . . Wilbur L. Cross H.S.
David S. Canny . . . Hopkins School
Joseph R. Evenson . . . Hopkins School
Rachel B. Garelick . . . Hopkins School
Matthew E. Holford . . . Hopkins School
Aaron S. Jafferis . . . James Hillhous H.S.
Rachel C. Levy . . . Hopkins School
Mahau Ma . . . Hopkins School
Jacob N. Mohlman . . . Wilbur L. Cross H.S.
Sasha M. Samberg-Champion . . . Wilbur L. Cross H.S.
John L. Schwab . . . Hopkins School
Nancy A. Sims . . . Wilbur L. Cross H.S.
Adir G. Waldman . . . Hopkins School
David M. Waxman . . . Hopkins School
Yucking Woo . . . Hopkins School
NORTH HAVEN
Robert E. Prestegard . . . North Haven H.S.
WALLINGFORD
Masion G. Barry . . . Choate Rosemary Hall
John C. Caine . . . Choate Rosemary Hall
D. Keywon Chang . . . Choate Rosemary Hall
Elizabeth K. Cresman . . . Choate Rosemary Hall
John A. Edwards . . . Choate Rosemary Hall
Steve B. Hauser . . . Choate Rosemary Hall
Joshua P. Rising . . . Choate Rosemary Hall
Thor L. Simon . . . Choate Rosemary Hall
Michael B. Skerker . . . Choate Rosemary Hall
Sara E. Wright . . . Choate Rosemary Hall
WATERBURY
Van Dyke Billings . . . St. Margaret's-McTernan School
William A. Roosa . . . Holy Cross H.S.
WOLCOTT
Jason F. Iorio . . . Wolcott H.S.
WOODBRIDGE
John Evanson . . . Amity Regional H.S.
Jin Y. Hwang . . . Amity Regional H.S.
Joshua A. Tournas . . . Amity Regional H.S.


OCT. 25-31: 44-Year-Old Spy Case; Russians Say Archives Clear Alger Hiss's Name
For 44 years, Alger Hiss has tried to clear himself of charges that he spied for the Soviet Union as a high-ranking State Department official in the 1930's.
The accusations, made by a former Communist named Whittaker Chambers, transfixed the nation, helped launch former President Richard M. Nixon's career and eventually led to Mr.
Hiss's imprisonment.
As the years passed and Mr.
Hiss aged, vindication seemed increasingly unlikely.
But at Mr.
Hiss's request, Russian officials recently combed through the archives of the former Soviet Union, and say there is nothing incriminating there.


Fall Cleanup Day Draws Hundreds to Playland
DESPITE the threat of rain, 758 cars pulled into the parking lot at Playland Amusement Park here on Oct. 24.
With the park rides closed for the winter, those drivers were there not for entertainment but to get rid of potentially hazardous household chemicals.
Over a seven-hour period on that Saturday, county residents disposed of 4,000 pounds of car batteries, 450 gallons of used motor oil, two Dumpsters full of old tires and 386 drums of household hazardous waste like pesticides and detergents.
For the 13th time since 1985, the county's Department of Health and the Department of Environmental Facilities sponsored Household Chemical Cleanup Day.
During these events, the county contracts with outside waste-removal firms to dispose of the material collected.
The cost of the project is borne by Refuge Disposal District No. 1, which covers all Westchester municipalities except seven in the northern part of the county.


Survey Cited to Assail Bush on Overseas Jobs
A Democratic Congressman made public yesterday a study of an American foreign aid program, saying it demonstrated how financing provided by the Reagan and Bush Administrations was used to subsidize the movement of manufacturing jobs to Central America from the United States.
The survey, by the Price Waterhouse accounting concern, was of 25 companies, foreign as well as American, that opened plants in Costa Rica from 1986 to 1990.
It found that 20 of the concerns had decided to do so as a result of efforts by a Costa Rican trade group that receives funds from the Agency for International Development.


Races to Watch
The Democrats hold a 95-55 lead in the state Assembly, and new district lines drawn this year should bring a few more seats.
But the total will probably fall short of the 100 seats they would need to overturn a Gubernatorial veto on their own.


Things to Think About on Election Day
To the Editor:
In "The Beauty of Indexing Capital Gains" (Viewpoints, Oct. 25), Theodore J. Forstmann, national co-chairman of the Bush-Quayle re-election campaign, reveals the Republicans' true economic agenda: to feather the nests of the wealthiest Americans.
How else can you explain his clarion call to save America by indexing capital gains retroactively?


Renee Thalheimer and Scott Vasey
Renee Barbara Thalheimer, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Gunther Thalheimer of Huntingdon Valley, Pa., was married in Philadelphia yesterday to Scott Frederick Vasey, a son of Roger M. Vasey of Greenwich, Conn., and Joy Cleveland of Deerfield, Ill.
The Rev.
John T. Schweitzer performed the ceremony at the Immanuel Evangelical Lutheran Church.
Mrs.
Thalheimer, who is 25 years old, is an associate planner at Chase Manhattan Bank in New York.
She graduated cum laude from Georgetown University.
Her father, who is retired, was a managing partner in the Philadelphia engineering and architectural firm of Yule, Jordan Associates.


A.P. Indy Carves His Initials on the Classic
On a clamorous day at the races when Paseana won, Sky Classic lost and Arazi practically disappeared, the 3-year-old colt A.P.
Indy outran a field of international stars and won the Breeders' Cup Classic by two lengths over Pleasant Tap and probably also won the race for Horse of the Year.
A.P.
Indy, the regally bred son of Seattle Slew and grandson of Secretariat, ran the mile and a quarter at Gulfstream Park in a snappy 2:001/5 as he won the $3 million Classic, the richest race in the world.
And he provided the dramatic high on America's premier day of racing, a day in which the largest and best contingent of horses from Europe to ever compete in the cup won none of the seven races.


A la Carte; Texas Atmosphere Deep in the Heart of Riverhead
RESTAURANTS that combine country cooking and country music at small-town prices are old hat in rural Texas or Georgia.
But the Osborne Inn at 673 Osborne Avenue in Riverhead (727-2330) is anything but typical for Long Island.
On a recent Saturday night, a woman in a straw hat stood outside rolling her own, the parking lot had more than its share of pickup trucks and the plaintive lyrics of the country-and-western hit "My Achey Breaky Heart" filled the air.


El Salvador, Where Truth Not Only Hurts; It May Not Heal
THE trucks arrive on a leafy street in a neighborhood that hid from most of El Salvador's civil war behind walls imbedded with spikes and broken glass.
They pull up outside a place called the Truth Commission, and peasants clamber down as if coming to a Sunday market.
But now they bring their stories: of whole families shot by the Salvadoran Army, of young men abducted in the night and found in pieces in the morning, of children maimed by guerrilla mines.
After 12 years of a conflict that clouded its barbarity in cold war politics and elaborate lies, Salvadorans tuning in the Spanish-dubbed sitcoms on television today hear commercials exhorting them to come forward and testify to the abuses they suffered.
Under the peace agreements signed by the Government and the rebels in January, the Truth Commission's three members will document the major cases in a report; they may also suggest criminal prosecutions.
But few people believe that even if charges are pursued anyone will end up in jail.
Rather than justice, Salvadorans may have to settle for a measure of truth.
Big Atrocity, Big Lie
In peasant shacks and the privacy of middle-class homes, that strikes some people as a horrible price for the end of a war that took an estimated 75,000 lives in a country of 5.4 million.
But the war, initially fueled by unbridled Government violence in the early 1980's, ended with a criminal justice system of almost feudal quality and the courts still firmly in the hands of the political right.
Despite sometimes intense American pressure for justice in major human rights cases, only one senior officer has ever been convicted.


. . . And One for an Art Leader
The American Federation of Arts honored J. Carter Brown, Oct. 27.


McSorley Suspended
Defenseman MARTY McSORLEY of the Los Angeles Kings was suspended for six days without pay yesterday for cross-checking forward Boston Bruin forward DARREN BANKS on Oct. 29.
McSorley, who will lose $14,130 in salary, was also fined $500 by the league.
The suspension will be served on nongame days and nontravel days beginning Nov. 7.
The Kings were also fined $14,130.


Japanese Blend


Burke's Statistics Are Deceiving
To the Sports Editor:
In the article about the former Devils goaltender Sean Burke ("Burke Says Boo-Birds Will Return to Roost," The Times, Oct. 21), Alex Yannis wrote that Burke "might have to fight to keep his current job," and that he "posted an atrocious goals against average of 5.05. As a result the Whalers entered the game with only one victory in their first six games." But Burke was the only bright spot on the Whalers in the first two games when he faced 87 shots and gave up only seven goals.
That is a .919 save percentage.
Then he played against two teams with much more talent than the Whalers, the Rangers and the Penguins.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Democrats -- As Presidential Race Nears End, the Attacks Continue; Clinton Charges Bush Appeals to Prejudice
In a last-minute visit to one of the most closely contested regions, Gov.
Bill Clinton today challenged President Bush's hold on the South by accusing him of appealing to regional prejudice with a message that changes as the President moves around the country.
"In one state he says I'm too liberal," Mr.
Clinton said at a rally in Decatur, Ga.
"In another state he says I'm a backwater redneck."


Easier Ups and Downs: Caring for Garage Doors
Garage doors need simple maintenance once or twice a year to keep operating smoothly.
Performing maintenance in the fall helps insure that the door will not be a nuisance in the winter.
Start by lubricating the hinges.
Squirt a few drops of lightweight household oil on the spindles or spray them with a small amount of silicone or Teflon lubricant.
When lubricating the hinges on the sides of the door, avoid putting oil or spray on the rollers in the tracks.
They should remain dry so that they do not accumulate dirt.


An Adult's View Of Children's Maturing
After reading "The Amy Fisher Case: Parable or Aberration"  [ Oct. 18 ]  I, living in Great Neck, was most interested in what Jamie Hott, a senior in South Senior School, had to say.
Carrying a beeper to keep in touch with one's children may seem far-fetched, but isn't it a sad commentary on the barometer of family life?
Amy Fisher, like others, hopefully grew from childhood into adulthood.
I know that this transition is crucial, because once they've "flown the coop," children will come back only if they want to.
Love and mutual commitments will bring them back to the dinner table.


Raceway Noise And Jet Noise
I read the Oct. 11 letter to the New Jersey editor from a woman in Manalapan township who lives near a race track, has a problem with the noise and was told to keep her windows closed as a way of "solving" her problem.
There are similarities with a jet noise problem that has plagued certain New Jersey communities for five years.


Unstandard Rep


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Overview; Polls Say Clinton Keeps Lead Despite Furious G.O.P. Fire
Gov.
Bill Clinton and President Bush battled through a final weekend of campaigning with the latest New York Times/CBS News Poll showing that their furious weeklong crossfire had left Mr.
Clinton still holding a lead.
The new poll, conducted Tuesday through Friday, also showed that Ross Perot remained a distant third, and that about a third of his supporters said it was possible they would change their minds before Election Day.


National Merit Scholarship Semifinalists Are Announced
The National Merit Scholarship Corporation has announced the names of 15,000 high school seniors who are semifinalists in its 1993 college scholarship competition.
The private, nonprofit organization will announce the names of 6,500 scholarship winners in the spring.
Here are the semifinalists from northern New Jersey:  Bergen County
ALLENDALE
Craig E. Dorman . . . Northern Highlands Regional H.S.
Chantal V. Kuhn . . . Northern Highlands Regional H.S.
Megan K. Maher . . . Northern Highlands Regional H.S.
Paul A. Melamud . . . Northern Highlands Regional H.S.
Justin M. Shellaway . . . Northern Highlands Regional H.S.
BOGOTA
William V. DeCordova . . . Bogota H.S.
DEMAREST
Kate M. Bohan . . . Academy of Holy Angels
Judy O. Glick . . . Northern Valley Regional H.S.
Julia Kang . . . Academy of Holy Angels
Roger I. Kim . . . Northern Valley Regional H.S.
Jennifer E. Lee . . . Northern Valley Regional H.S.
Megan P. Monaghan . . . Academy of Holy Angels
Evan J. Mulholland . . . Northern Valley Regional H.S.
Sung S. Yang . . . Northern Valley Regional H.S.
DUMONT
Theresa H. Canavan . . . Dumont H.S.
Gaurang B. Desai . . . Dumont H.S.
Misha B. Simmonds . . . Dumont H.S.
EMERSON
Lawrence R. Genen . . . Emerson H.S.
Marlena B. Schachne . . . Emerson H.S.
ENGLEWOOD
Shana M. Ferrell . . . Dwight-Englewood School
Peter M. Hyun . . . Dwight-Englewood School
Sapna Sadarangani . . . Dwight-Englewood School
Benjamin A. Siris . . . Dwight-Englewood School
FAIR LAWN
Jennifer Muehlbauer . . . Fair Lawn H.S.
Alexander Zubatov . . . Fair Lawn H.S.
Samara L. Zwanger . . . Fair Lawn H.S.
FORT LEE
Mari Hagiwara . . . Fort Lee H.S.
Stephen M. Kronfeld . . . Fort Lee H.S.
Steve L. Liao . . . Fort Lee H.S.
GLEN ROCK
Erin L. Koster . . . Glen Rock H.S.
Lauren C. Vanderwerker . . . Glen Rock H.S.
MAHWAH
Rob J. Doran . . . Mahwah H.S.
Joshua P. Taylor . . . Mahwah H.S.
MONTVALE
Seth A. Fischbein . . . Pascack Hills H.S.
Ythan H. Goldberg . . . Pascack Hills H.S.
Heather A. Stern . . . Pascack Hills H.S.
Bryan J. Winn . . . St. Joseph Regional H.S.
NEW MILFORD
Mark P. Sullivan . . . New Milford H.S.
OAKLAND
Fredrik G. Arneborn . . . Indian Hills H.S.
Michael K. Medaska . . . Indian Hills H.S.
Christopher C. Taylor . . . Indian Hills H.S.
Michael A. Zientara . . . Indian Hills H.S.
OLD TAPPAN
Anand S. Joshi . . . Northern Valley Regional H.S.
Laura J. Kaufman . . . Northern Valley Regional H.S.
Grace C. Sheen . . . Northern Valley Regional H.S.
Neilesh S. Soman . . . Northern Valley Regional H.S.
ORADELL
Amir S. Joodi . . . Bergen Catholic H.S.
Richard J. Keating . . . Bergen Catholic H.S.
Valerie L. Smith . . . River Dell Regional H.S.
Lenny Turetsky . . . River Dell Regional H.S.
PARAMUS
James F. Basili . . . Paramus H.S.
Jonathan Berger . . . Frisch School
Noah I. Dauber . . . Frisch School
Jonathan J. Feldman . . . Frisch School
Aaron M. Frankel . . . Frisch School
Kenneth Y. Liu . . . Paramus H.S.
Allison Millevoi . . . Paramus H.S.
Neeta Rastogi . . . Paramus H.S.
Carrie L. Zinaman . . . Frisch School
RAMSEY
Gianpaolo Aroldi . . . Ramsey H.S.
Simon C. Chan . . . Ramsey H.S.
Matthew R. Howe . . . Don Bosco Preparatory H.S.
Mark W. Klein . . . Don Bosco Preparatory H.S.
Chetan R. Rao . . . Ramsey H.S.
Christopher A. Williams . . . Don Bosco Preparatory H.S.
RIDGEWOOD
Clement C. Cypra . . . Ridgewood H.S.
Nicholas C. Flowers . . . Ridgewood H.S.
Gary N. Horowitz . . . Ridgewood H.S.
Christopher J. Lalonde . . . Ridgewood H.S.
Dave J. McCann . . . Ridgewood H.S.
Michael G. Selhorn . . . Ridgewood H.S.
SADDLE RIVER
Adam K. Webb . . . Saddle River Day School
TEANECK
Kyle A. Lapidus . . . Teaneck H.S.
Nicole M. Lisa . . . Teaneck H.S.
Jeffrey P. Mach . . . Teaneck H.S.
Lauren M. Schumer . . . Teaneck H.S.
Gabriel Wolosin . . . Teaneck H.S.
TENAFLY
Abraham Burickson . . . Tenafly H.S.
Anne Chiorazzi . . . Tenafly H.S.
Ruth B. Genn . . . Tenafly H.S.
Kenneth S. Lee . . . Tenafly H.S.
Sooanne J. Park . . . Tenafly H.S.
Rachel P. Willner . . . Tenafly H.S.
Letitia Yang . . . Tenafly H.S.
Steven S. Yang . . . Tenafly H.S.
Nafeez M. Zawahir . . . Tenafly H.S.
Parvin Zawahir . . . Tenafly H.S.
WALLINGTON
Melanie A. Abell . . . Wallington H.S.
Essex County
CALDWELL
Sharon M. Karg . . . Mount St. Dominic Academy
GLEN RIDGE
Sandra J. Barron . . . Glen Ridge H.S.
LIVINGSTON
Rohit K. Bawa . . . Newark Academy
Sandeep K. Bhatt . . . Newark Academy
Aaron N. Casser . . . Livingston H.S.
Jeffrey Gordon . . . Newark Academy
Jamie L. Harris . . . Newark Academy
Edward S. Huang . . . Livingston H.S.
Katherine K. Huang . . . Livingston H.S.
Joseph Lee . . . Livingston H.S.
Marnie L. Rosenberg . . . Livingston H.S.
Anjana Samant . . . Livingston H.S.
Zachary B. Smilack . . . Newark Academy
Sefton C. Vergano . . . Newark Academy
Jean Y. Whang . . . Livingston H.S.
John L. Yang . . . Livingston H.S.
MAPLEWOOD
Miriam J. Axellute . . . Columbia H.S.
Nicholas A. Harrison . . . Columbia H.S.
Vishal Jain . . . Columbia H.S.
MILLBURN
Deborah A. Friedman . . . Millburn H.S.
Kimberly J. Helmer . . . Millburn H.S.
MONTCLAIR
Vinit Ahuja . . . Montclair Kimberly Academy
Laura C. Caprario . . . Montclair Kimberly Academy
Michael R. Castine . . . Montclair Kimberly Academy
Sebastian Cwilich . . . Montclair H.S.
Christopher H. Giampapa . . . Montclair Kimberly Academy
Edwin Y. Kim . . . Montclair Kimberly Academy
Sue J. Kim . . . Montclair Kimberly Academy
Jason G. Klein . . . Montclair H.S.
Jane C. Manners . . . Montclair H.S.
Sunil Mirchandani . . . Montclair Kimberly Academy
Max Rim . . . Montclair Kimberly Academy
Brian A. Wecht . . . Montclair Kimberly Academy
NEWARK
Charles E. Eaton . . . St. Benedict's Preparatory School
NORTH CALDWELL
Leda A. Anastasiades . . . West Essex H.S.
Jesse S. Levitt . . . West Essex H.S.
Gregory G. Lovallo . . . West Essex H.S.
Janet E. Menaker . . . West Essex H.S.
Jerry W. Tsong . . . West Essex H.S.
NUTLEY
Hao V. Quach . . . Nutley H.S.
Seth E. Surgan . . . Nutley H.S.
Patricia S. Udomprasert . . . Nutley H.S.
VERONA
Jason N. Rogart . . . Verona H.S.
WEST CALDWELL
David S. Rossi . . . James Caldwell H.S.
WEST ORANGE
Brian J. Ayres . . . West Orange H.S.
Lisbeth Dyer . . . West Orange H.S.
Raymond R. Escorpizo . . . Seton Hall Preparatory School
Henry M. Grosman . . . West Orange H.S.
Shari A. Martin . . . West Orange H.S.
Hilary E. Price . . . West Orange H.S.
Yuval Segal . . . Solomon Schechter Day School
Hudson County
JERSEY CITY
Daniel P. Boland . . . St. Peter's Preparatory School
James J. Hitchell . . . St. Peter's Preparatory School
Samir M. Parikh . . . St. Peter's Preparatory School
Hunterdon County
ANNANDALE
James B. Babington . . . North Hunterdon H.S.
Jason G. Gillmore . . . North Hunterdon H.S.
Karen S. Huang . . . North Hunterdon H.S.
David A. Jacobitz . . . North Hunterdon H.S.
William S. Kartalopoulos . . . North Hunterdon H.S.
Scott E. Shrum . . . North Hunterdon H.S.
FLEMINGTON
Jay Martin . . . Hunterdon Central H.S.
Tara L. Messenger . . . Hunterdon Central H.S.
Susan L. Olsen . . . Hunterdon Central H.S.
Diane P. Vadino . . . Hunterdon Central H.S.
Michael A. Wood . . . Hunterdon Central H.S.
FRENCHTOWN
Jamie S. McGovern . . . Delaware Valley Regional H.S.
GLEN GARDNER
Kimberly A. Knowles . . . Voorhees H.S.
Rebecca L. Perkins . . . Voorhees H.S.
Mercer County
HIGHTSTOWN
Kevin L. MacMillan . . . Peddie School
Hoai A. Nguyen . . . Hightstown H.S.
Kristen A. Olsavsky . . . Hightstown H.S.
Jeffrey R. Penn . . . Peddie School
Robert J. Ruberton . . . Peddie School
LAWRENCEVILLE
Rebecca L. Blackwell . . . Lawrenceville School
Igor E. Brodsky . . . Lawrenceville School
Rajib Chanda . . . Lawrenceville School
Henry H. Chang . . . Lawrenceville School
Gregory P. Comer . . . Lawrence H.S.
Donald D. Conklin . . . Lawrenceville School
Amy C. Groth . . . Lawrence H.S.
John W. Hopson . . . Lawrenceville School
Steven E. Long . . . Lawrenceville School
Thomas T. Reid . . . Lawrenceville School
Emma M. Sadler . . . Lawrence H.S.
Andrew T. Selden . . . Lawrenceville School
Duncan N. Stevens . . . Lawrenceville School
Jonathan J. Woell . . . Lawrence H.S.
Alexander K. Woo . . . Lawrenceville School
Bryan P. Wu . . . Lawrenceville School
PENNINGTON
Katherine E. Harrod . . . Hopewell Valley Central H.S.
Krista L. Knox . . . Hopewell Valley Central H.S.
Kaelyn E. Stiles . . . Hopewell Valley Central H.S.
PRINCETON
Katherine L. Bertone . . . Hun School of Princeton
Gavin J. Boyles . . . Princeton H.S.
Anne C. Bracy . . . Princeton H.S.
Jean Chen . . . Princeton Day School
Elon Danziger . . . Princeton H.S.
Michael J. Goldberg . . . Princeton H.S.
Elizabeth Harman . . . Princeton Day School
Jon A. Hlafter . . . Princeton H.S.
Stacy A. Ho . . . Princeton Day School
Catharine M. Hornby . . . Stuart Country Day School
Vashti Menasian . . . Princeton Day School
David S. Patterson . . . Princeton H.S.
Rebecca E. Stich . . . Princeton H.S.
Allen M. Thomas . . . Princeton H.S.
Craig J. Webster . . . Princeton H.S.
Kim K. Wong . . . Princeton H.S.
Justin Yuen . . . Princeton H.S.
PRINCETON JUNCTION
Jared M. Brown . . . West Windsor-Plainsboro H.S.
Rajiv K. Garg . . . West Windsor-Plainsboro H.S.
Douglas M. Genne . . . West Windsor-Plainsboro H.S.
Oliver B. Hsiang . . . West Windsor-Plainsboro H.S.
Stephen K. Hsueh . . . West Windsor-Plainsboro H.S.
Mona R. Kapadia . . . West Windsor-Plainsboro H.S.
Eugene Kontorovich . . . West Windsor-Plainsboro H.S.
Laura A. Loftus . . . West Windsor-Plainsboro H.S.
Sachin Mehta . . . West Windsor-Plainsboro H.S.
Antonis A. Polemitis . . . West Windsor-Plainsboro H.S.
Wendy A. Prudhomme . . . West Windsor-Plainsboro H.S.
Jeremy F. Rauch . . . West Windsor-Plainsboro H.S.
Thomas J. Russo . . . West Windsor-Plainsboro H.S.
Sarah Schlesinger . . . West Windsor-Plainsboro H.S.
Gregory S. Tung . . . West Windsor-Plainsboro H.S.
Ryan S. Wise . . . West Windsor-Plainsboro H.S.
TRENTON
Alianna L. Inzana . . . Villa Victoria Academy
Amy V. Kotecha . . . Hamilton H.S. East
Geoffrey W. Weber . . . Hamilton H.S. East
Middlesex County
EAST BRUNSWICK
Nabila A. Dahodwala . . . East Brunswick H.S.
Swati Dutta Roy . . . East Brunswick H.S.
Daniel E. Entin . . . East Brunswick H.S.
Amy Beth Erenrich . . . East Brunswick H.S.
Brian Gottlieb . . . East Brunswick H.S.
Tara S. Herman . . . East Brunswick H.S.
Zoltan P. Maliga . . . East Brunswick H.S.
Joseph G. Pollak . . . East Brunswick H.S.
Debra S. Shaffer . . . East Brunswick H.S.
Irene V. Small . . . East Brunswick H.S.
Jocelyn So . . . East Brunswick H.S.
Jerome H. You . . . East Brunswick H.S.
EDISON
Kenneth M. Ayotte . . . Edison Township H.S.
Max D. Barry . . . Edison Township H.S.
Shefali A. Gandhi . . . John P. Stevens H.S.
Jason W. Iafolla . . . John P. Stevens H.S.
Krishna Juluru . . . John P. Stevens H.S.
Sharon L. Karmon . . . Edison Township H.S.
Stacey E. Kohut . . . John P. Stevens H.S.
Melissa M. Korzeniowski . . . Bishop George AHR H.S.
Christine A. Ladislaw . . . John P. Stevens H.S.
Tamara S. Ling . . . John P. Stevens H.S.
Jason I. Liu . . . John P. Stevens H.S.
David N. Mann . . . John P. Stevens H.S.
Alison L. Marquez . . . Bishop George AHR H.S.
Brett J. Pogany . . . John P. Stevens H.S.
Arlene P. Pons . . . Bishop George AHR H.S.
Rajesh Raman . . . Edison Township H.S.
Alok Sanghvi . . . John P. Stevens H.S.
Michael R. Santoro . . . Edison Township H.S.
Bing H. Shen . . . John P. Stevens H.S.
Jae W. Suh . . . John P. Stevens H.S.
Daniel S. Voloch . . . John P. Stevens H.S.
Jason M. Yanussi . . . Edison Township H.S.
HIGHLAND PARK
Christopher P. Herzog . . . Highland Park H.S.
ISELIN
Christopher K. Kiplok . . . John F. Kennedy Memorial H.S.
JAMESBURG
Joseph E. Onder . . . Monroe Township H.S.
METUCHEN
Patrick M. Chae . . . St. Joseph's H.S.
Daniel L. Cohen . . . Metuchen H.S.
Robert K. Fitzpatrick . . . St. Joseph's H.S.
Daniel G. Sulzinsky . . . St. Joseph's H.S.
MONMOUTH JUNCTION
Edward J. Watts . . . South Brunswick H.S.
OLD BRIDGE
Janice Chen . . . Cedar Ridge H.S.
Kenneth D. Klose . . . Cedar Ridge H.S.
Darren M. Ward . . . Cedar Ridge H.S.
PISCATAWAY
William Louie . . . Piscataway H.S.
WOODBRIDGE
Michael A. Ruskai . . . Woodbridge H.S.
Monmouth County
ENGLISHTOWN
James C. Deikun . . . Manalapan H.S.
David B. Kacedon . . . Manalapan H.S.
FREEHOLD
Sameena J. Ahmed . . . Freehold Borough H.S.
Sandra L. Batista . . . Freehold Township H.S.
Norah E. Howe . . . Freehold Township H.S.
Marci J. Klein . . . Freehold Township H.S.
Evan S. Poli . . . Freehold Township H.S.
Michael J. Shen . . . Freehold Township H.S.
Nicole M. Terranova . . . Freehold Borough H.S.
Jon A. Zeppieri . . . Freehold Township H.S.
HILLSDALE
Carrie F. Apfel . . . Pascack Valley H.S.
HOLMDEL
Mark R. Freeman . . . Holmdel H.S.
Lev S. Kaufman . . . Holmdel H.S.
Christie M. Lacava . . . Holmdel H.S.
Eric E. Paras . . . Holmdel H.S.
Tracey A. Reilly . . . Holmdel H.S.
Omar A. Saleh . . . Holmdel H.S.
Austina M. Vainius . . . Holmdel H.S.
Gerald J. Wang . . . Holmdel H.S.
Betty Wu . . . Holmdel H.S.
LINCROFT
Edward A. MacDuffie . . . Christian Brothers Academy
William J. Maris . . . Christian Brothers Academy
Alan T. Young . . . Christian Brothers Academy
MANASQUAN
Jennifer H. Horne . . . Manasquan H.S.
OAKHURST
Eugene D. Choi . . . Ocean Township H.S.
Erin M. Quinn . . . Ocean Township H.S.
Jason R. Simmons . . . Ocean Township H.S.
Douglas A. Timms . . . Ocean Township H.S.
Brian L. Zavin . . . Ocean Township H.S.
RED BANK
Timothy P. Christofili . . . Red Bank Catholic H.S.
Michele P. Lutz . . . Red Bank Catholic H.S.
RUMSON
Catherine H. Bailey . . . Rumson-Fair Haven Regional H.S.
David A. Balma . . . Rumson-Fair Haven Regional H.S.
TINTON FALLS
Victor Kong . . . Ranney School
Max L. Schiff . . . Ranney School
WEST LONG BRANCH
Kendall K. Collins . . . Shore Regional H.S.
Alexis J. Diamond . . . Shore Regional H.S.
Scott D. Donofrio . . . Shore Regional H.S.
Amanda B. Poole . . . Shore Regional H.S.
Daniel J. Strange . . . Shore Regional H.S.
Morris County
CHATHAM
Susan E. Gurgel . . . Chatham H.S.
Marisa A. Keselica . . . Chatham H.S.
EAST HANOVER
Robert P. Shiau . . . Hanover Park H.S.
KINNELON
Alexander Bronstein . . . Kinnelon H.S.
Jan Mordhorst . . . Kinnelon H.S.
MADISON
Robin W. Malone . . . Madison H.S.
MONTVILLE
Jodi L. Accaria . . . Montville Township H.S.
Ranjit S. Ahluwalia . . . Montville Township H.S.
June Chen . . . Montville Township H.S.
Neal R. Shenoy . . . Montville Township H.S.
Carmit Steren . . . Montville Township H.S.
MORRISTOWN
Anna R. Carr . . . Morristown H.S.
Won Choi . . . Delbarton School
Christian Fichter . . . Delbarton School
David C. Green . . . Morristown H.S.
Michael Horty . . . Delbarton School
Michael G. Hulsy . . . Delbarton School
John G. Jerow . . . Delbarton School
Alexis Levenson . . . Morristown H.S.
James H. Mackey . . . Delbarton School
Paul H. Manger . . . Delbarton School
Bethany A. Marston . . . Morristown H.S.
Sarah A. Nelson . . . Morristown H.S.
Eldon Pei . . . Delbarton School
Peter C. Pfaffenroth . . . Delbarton School
Stephen D. Ripp . . . Delbarton School
Michael H. Rubin . . . Morristown-Beard School
Howard Steyn . . . Morristown H.S.
Jonathan R. Sugano . . . Morristown H.S.
Alei Tsonopoulos . . . Morristown H.S.
Amy E. Wissekerke . . . Morristown H.S.
MOUNTAIN LAKES
Scott T. Jones . . . Mountain Lakes H.S.
Stephen G. O'Grady . . . Mountain Lakes H.S.
Zita A. Peterlin . . . Mountain Lakes H.S.
Frederick A. Richard . . . Mountain Lakes H.S.
PARSIPPANY
Denise M. Bickel . . . Parsippany Hills H.S.
Christine M. Chin . . . Parsippany H.S.
Nancy D. Lin . . . Parsippany Hills H.S.
Craig E. Pollack . . . Parsippany H.S.
Timothy E. Preston . . . Parsippany Hills H.S.
Tina T. Wu . . . Parsippany Hills H.S.
POMPTON PLAINS
Rex G. Mathew . . . Pequannock Township H.S.
RANDOLPH
Stephanie J. Adler . . . Randolph H.S.
Anthony A. Ambuehl . . . Randolph H.S.
Ian K. Jacobson . . . Randolph H.S.
Jordana Kron . . . Randolph H.S.
Ilana L. Mair . . . Randolph H.S.
Stephen P. Panyko . . . Randolph H.S.
Parikhit Sinha . . . Randolph H.S.
William J. Tilley . . . Randolph H.S.
Christopher J. White . . . Randolph H.S.
Erika L. Whitney . . . Randolph H.S.
ROCKAWAY
Joseph L. Bader . . . Morris Hills H.S.
SUCCASUNNA
Seth M. Bienstock . . . Roxbury H.S.
Shabbar F. Danish . . . Roxbury H.S.
WHIPPANY
Nilesh A. Bhandari . . . Whippany Park H.S.
Cindy S. Chen . . . Whippany Park H.S.
Janice Chen . . . Whippany Park H.S.
Ocean County
BRICK
Francis P. Kolor . . . Brick Township Memorial H.S.
OCEAN
Yair J. Listokin . . . Hillel H.S.
POINT PLEASANT BEACH
Dawn R. Applegate . . . Point Pleasant Beach
TOMS RIVER
Jeannine A. DeFoe . . . Toms River H.S. East
Rachel E. Eckhardt . . . Toms River H.S. South
Douglas T. Hudson . . . Toms River H.S. North
Anthony M. Maroldo . . . Toms River H.S. South
Passaic County
CLIFTON
Jason P. Colby . . . Clifton H.S.
Neal Dalal . . . Clifton H.S.
Kristin L. Vassallo . . . Clifton H.S.
HALEDON
Jordan A. Hague . . . Manchester Regional H.S.
Eric B. Perlmutter . . . Manchester Regional H.S.
MIDLAND PARK
Colin P. Campbell . . . Midland Park H.S.
WAYNE
Michael A. Birenbaum . . . Wayne Hills H.S.
Richard T. Boniface . . . Wayne Valley H.S.
Jason E. Chen . . . Wayne Hills H.S.
Aniruddha Dube . . . Wayne Valley H.S.
Andrew R. Fechner . . . Wayne Valley H.S.
Richard R. Flynn . . . Wayne Valley H.S.
Jacqueline C. Gigantes . . . Wayne Valley H.S.
Thomas M. Halleran . . . Wayne Hills H.S.
Raymond Liu . . . Wayne Hills H.S.
Aaron R. Moshiashwili . . . Wayne Valley H.S.
Michael J. Mullins . . . Wayne Valley H.S.
Robert L. Rossi . . . Wayne Valley H.S.
Thomas Yuen . . . Wayne Hills H.S.
WEST MILFORD
Jason M. Hotra . . . West Milford Township H.S.
Bahar Shahpar . . . West Milford Township H.S.
Somerset County
BASKING RIDGE
James A. Cozine . . . Ridge H.S.
James M. Jardinella . . . Ridge H.S.
Douglas B. Robinson . . . Ridge H.S.
BELLE MEAD
Ko-Ming Chang . . . Hillsborough H.S.
Alison M. Schmidt . . . Hillsborough H.S.
BERNARDSVILLE
Stacy E. Patterson . . . Bernards H.S.
Ashley A. Puckhaber . . . Bernards H.S.
MARTINSVILLE
Neil Ashar . . . Pingry School
Chris E. Borasky . . . Pingry School
Patricia A. Brick . . . Bridgewater-Raritan H.S. East
Jeffrey Cheng . . . Bridgewater-Raritan H.S. East
Kuenley Chiu . . . Pingry School
Suzy Choe . . . Bridgewater-Raritan H.S. East
Edward K. Chung . . . Pingry School
Sunni M. Fass . . . Bridgewater-Raritan H.S. East
Joshua H. Geller . . . Bridgewater-Raritan H.S. East
Suleman A. Khawaja . . . Pingry School
Michelle Kiang . . . Bridgewater-Raritan H.S. East
Herbert Kwan . . . Pingry School
Herman K. Lau . . . Bridgewater-Raritan H.S. East
Monir S. Mamoun . . . Pingry School
Robert G. Mayberry . . . Bridgewater-Raritan H.S. East
Sean P. McGinnis . . . Bridgewater-Raritan H.S. East
Kimberly H. McIntyre . . . Pingry School
Shadi Nahvi . . . Pingry School
Ryan T. Nakagawa . . . Pingry School
Aman K. Parikh . . . Bridgewater-Raritan H.S. East
Nehal D. Patel . . . Pingry School
Pamela A. Phillips . . . Pingry School
Douglas M. Schmidt . . . Pingry School
Peter N. Siniawer . . . Pingry School
David A. Sobel . . . Pingry School
Kristin D. Sostowski . . . Pingry School
Jay S. Yook . . . Pingry School
Jeffrey H. Zeeman . . . Bridgewater-Raritan H.S. East
NORTH PLAINFIELD
Peter K. Lee . . . North Plainfield H.S.
SKILLMAN
Daniel J. Grabon . . . Montgomery H.S.
Jason Hong . . . Montgomery H.S.
David Y. Kwok . . . Montgomery H.S.
Alison E. Post . . . Montgomery H.S.
SOMERSET
Julie P. Ciamporcero . . . Rutgers Preparatory School
SOMERVILLE
Elizabeth H. Bachhuber . . . Somerville H.S.
Jacob D. Jaffe . . . Somerville H.S.
Ernest S. Kim . . . Somerville H.S.
WARREN
Jacob H. Chung . . . Watchung Hills Regional H.S.
Karl E. Horster . . . Watchung Hills Regional H.S.
Roseann M. Latore . . . Watchung Hills Regional H.S.
Jonathan R. Santos . . . Watchung Hills Regional H.S.
Philip D. Schumaker . . . Watchung Hills Regional H.S.
Benson P. Yang . . . Watchung Hills Regional H.S.
Sussex County
HAMBURG
Santiney Han . . . Wallkill Valley Regional H.S.
NEWTON
Aaron R. Girard . . . Newton H.S.
William A. Hart . . . Kittatinny Regional H.S.
Alison L. Kinney . . . Newton H.S.
SPARTA
Paul J. Olmos . . . Sparta H.S.
Anne E. Richards . . . Sparta H.S.
STANHOPE
Sandeep Bansal . . . Lenape Valley Regional H.S.
VERNON
John G. Esteve . . . Vernon Township H.S.
Union County
CRANFORD
Erica E. Greulich . . . Cranford H.S.
ELIZABETH
Moshe C. Burnstein . . . Jewish Educational Center
Elana Y. Fishkin . . . Bruriah H.S. for Girls
Nechama Gittler . . . Bruriah H.S. for Girls
Leah R. Kesler . . . Bruriah H.S. for Girls
NEW PROVIDENCE
Sarah P. Baker . . . New Providence H.S.
Morgan C. Hamm . . . New Providence H.S.
Richard Kim . . . New Providence H.S.
Wesly Yang . . . New Providence H.S.
PLAINFIELD
Aruna Krishnan . . . Mount St. Mary Academy
ROSELLE
William J. Donahue . . . Abraham Clark H.S.
ROSELLE PARK
Michael Allen . . . Roselle Park H.S.
SCOTCH PLAINS
Rachael B. Evans . . . Scotch Plains-Fanwood H.S.
Ethan D. Nash . . . Scotch Plains-Fanwood H.S.
Jasmine B. Vasavada . . . Scotch Plains-Fanwood H.S.
SUMMIT
Andrew J. Berkley . . . Summit H.S.
William Jimenez . . . Oratory Preparatory School
Shannon A. Marshall . . . Oak Knoll School
James D. Robbins . . . Oratory Preparatory School
Paula E. Wasley . . . Oak Knoll School
WESTFIELD
Natasha E. Bartolf . . . Westfield H.S.
Seth A. Coren . . . Westfield H.S.
Peter J. Fontana . . . Westfield H.S.
Sheryl R. Krevsky . . . Westfield H.S.
Benjamin W. Parker . . . Westfield H.S.
Russell T. Schundler . . . Westfield H.S.
Jonathan C. Snitow . . . Westfield H.S.
Warren County
BLAIRSTOWN
Damon R. Caldwell . . . Blair Academy
Rachel Fennell . . . North Warren Regional H.S.


Few Nations Agree to Accept Freed Bosnian Prisoners as Refugees
The world reacted with disgust and indignation to images of the torture and starvation of Bosnian Muslims in Serbian-run prison camps this summer, but now that Serbs have agreed to free the prisoners, few foreign countries are volunteering to accept them.
"These are the most classic cases of genuine refugees that you will ever see," said Jose Maria Mendiluce, chief of the United Nations refugee program in the former Yugoslavia.
"They are people who have suffered horrendously. It is very disappointing that the international community has not been able to open more doors for them."


2 Artists: From Ambiguity to Innuendo
THE Newark Museum opens its "Projects" series with 11 paintings and drawings by Elizabeth Murray.
A specialist in the shaped canvas, Ms.
Murray has had 18 solo exhibitions in as many years, which is a formidable enough accomplishment.
But in the same period she has also participated in countless museum surveys, including half a dozen Whitney Biennials, as well as in gallery groups in the United States and abroad.
Her career reached a climax in 1987 with a touring museum retrospective.


Sports of The Times; At Age 62, Don Shula Is Still Going Strong
WHEN the Dolphins were on a 6-10 treadmill four years ago, the cynics had Don Shula all figured out.
The game had passed him by.
At age 58, he was too old to be coaching in the National Football League.
He couldn't relate to today's players.
His concepts and strategy were out of sync with those of all the bright young coaches.
He ought to retire before he disappears under all that tarnish.
But now, instead of Don Shula disappearing, the cynics have.


Menopause Has No Part in Year of the Woman
To the Editor:
Menopause, Helen E. Fisher argues (Op-Ed, Oct. 21), unmasks women's testosterone levels, contributing to increased numbers of women running for political office.
A few scientific studies have found a relationship between elevated testosterone levels and positions of dominance, but it is not clear from these studies whether testosterone levels are the cause or effect of the social position.


Violent Backdrop for Anti-Gay Measure
Although recent polls indicate that an anti-homosexual measure on the Oregon ballot is headed for defeat, the referendum has produced a sharp increase in recent weeks in harassment and violence, by both sides.
The police in Oregon say that in the last month the number of arson fires, vandalism incidents and verbal threats, from both gay rights opponents and those in favor of laws protecting homosexuals, has gone up sharply as the campaign has heated up.


Making a Difference; Shaking Up A Wannabe In Biotech
JOHN L. Castello joined the Xoma Corporation as president and chief executive six months ago, with a clear charter to shake things up.
Its leading new drug was stranded in regulatory limbo, and the biotech company was bleeding cash.
Now there's a whole lot of shaking going on at Xoma.
Last week, Mr.
Castello made some major changes.


A New Taste For the Tropics
Restaurant cooking is taking a turn for the tropical.
While fruits with unfamiliar names like guanabana and tamarillo may puzzle grocery shoppers, they are a welcome challenge to chefs, who are experimenting with these new ingredients and touching off a trend some call "new world cuisine."
It developed over the past two or three years, as markets began to stock a more varied array of typical tropical offerings, such as pineapples and coconuts, as well as less commonplace ones, like fragrant guavas, golden carambolas, giant starchy yucca roots, nutty potato-like boniato and pale, cucumber-like chayote squash.


NORTHEAST NOTEBOOK: Wilmington, Del.; Waterfront Restoration
WORK is under way here to restore a Georgian Revival waterfront building, once the headquarters of one of the 19th century's premier shipbuilding companies.
The interior of the three-story building, all that remains of the once-43-acre U.S.
Shipbuilding Corporation's Harlan Shipyard on the Christina River, has been gutted to make way for the more than $1 million restoration.


Quick! How Many? How Many?
Allen Hunt calls himself a perfectionist.
Problem is, he can rarely be perfect in this job.
Mr.
Hunt, a gawky 24-year-old with tiny dreadlocks that peek out from beneath a baseball cap, counts human traffic for the Transit Authority.


Tours: Indonesia And Morocco
Visits to four of the Spice Islands -- Bali, Sulawesi, Java and Lombok -- are scheduled on a tour to INDONESIA from Dec. 18 to Jan. 2, sponsored by the 92d Street Y in Manhattan.
A dance performance, gallery tours and visits to palaces and temples are on the sightseeing program, which costs $3,393 a person, including round- trip air fare from New York, taxes and service charges at hotels, some meals and private bus tours with guide.
An optional extension to Padang and Jakarta, Indonesia's capital, costs an additional $899.
Information: (212) 415-5599.


Turkish Visas
To the Editor: Americans who may end up traveling more than three consecutive months in Turkey should be aware they will need visas.
I spent 100 days there this summer, and the police at the airport at Izmir made me pay a fine of more than $100 before I could board my flight home.
When I pleaded ignorance, pointing out where my passport showed I'd stayed in Turkey longer than 90 days three other times in the last six years, they threatened to fine me retroactively for not getting visas then, charging it was a mistake that I hadn't been caught earlier.
I left Turkey with a bitter taste in my mouth.
RANDY BLASING Providence, R.I.
Ugur Ariner, Turkish deputy consul general, comments: When United States citizens stay longer than three months, they should apply to a local police station, within the permitted duration of stay, for an extension.
Research, education and working situations are subject to different regulations.


Albany Likely To See Gains For Minorities
While Tuesday's election is not expected to alter drastically the balance of power between the Democrats, the majority party in the New York State Assembly, and the Republicans, some new black and Hispanic members are likely to be elected.
The once-a-decade redistricting of the State Legislature this year carved out five new Assembly districts in New York City and Westchester County in which black and Hispanic residents are a majority.
Each of these districts is likely to elect a minority candidate.
With the retirement of one black Assemblywoman, Geraldine L. Daniels, that could bring the total number of minority seats in the Assembly to 26 out of a total of 150.


Fairfield Porter's Realist Art Is Rediscovered
"SOMETIMES I'm so wonderful I want to tell everyone," the painter Fairfield Porter (1907-75) said at the age of 24 in a rare burst of immodesty.
"They ought to know it. It isn't right that they don't."
Now a biography, "Fairfield Porter: An American Classic" (Harry N. Abrams Inc.), aims to publicize that Porter is indeed wonderful.


Heading a Throng


Voting Scared; Americans Are Sadder and Wiser, But Not Apathetic
THERE was a time when Americans found Presidential elections exhilarating -- bands and bumper-stickers, good guys and bad guys, visions for a brighter tomorrow that had the aura of not just hope but certainty.
But not in 1992.
A year of traveling the nation chatting with a thousand voters -- in malls and front yards, in bowling alleys and libraries -- leaves the bland taste of malaise.
If the public mood were summed up in a color, it would be gray.
People are at once scared and resigned -- scared that the economy has irreparable flaws; scared that the country is adrift; resigned to a visceral feeling that the next President, even if he is their own candidate, will not be able to do much about it.


This Time, Devils Play the Role of Home Wrecker
Like doubleheaders in baseball, home-and-home series in hockey often end up with one victory for each team.
That's how it turned out this weekend for the Devils and the Islanders, who tampered with the formula only in that each won in the opponent's building.
Tonight's result was a 5-3 victory at Nassau Coliseum for the Devils, who led by two goals early in the first period and then broke a 2-2 tie with three in succession early in the third.


GAY POLITICS GOES MAINSTREAM
By using the red-ribbon symbol of AIDS awareness to illustrate an article on gay politics, you perpetuate the myth that AIDS is a homosexual disease only.
While AIDS has certainly had its most devastating impact on the gay community, the simple truth is that
anybody
can get AIDS.
Young and old alike need to understand this if we are to make any progress on AIDS prevention.
JACQUELINE R. KAHLE
Wilton, N.H.


Bosnians Run Short Of Time And Allies
For anyone who still hoped that Bosnia and Herzegovina could be saved from the nationalist scourges sweeping down its alpine valleys, there was a discouraging message written in the smoke that curled skyward over Prozor last week.
For months, Muslim and Croatian fighters had fought together here, holding off Serbian units whose goal was to add Prozor to the scores of non-Serbian towns and villages already seized for a Serbian mini-state that now straddles two-thirds of this republic.
While the Muslims and Croats of Prozor held together in loyalty to the Bosnian Government in Sarajevo, they stood as a local symbol of the alternative to "ethnic cleansing" and rampant nationalism that have driven the war in Bosnia.


Taking Action On Phone Scams
TRAVEL scams are under renewed attack by state attorneys general and two Federal agencies.
Regulations are in the works that would shut down dishonest telephone-marketing schemes and offer help to consumers who have lost money to operations that put through credit card charges but never deliver the vacations they promise in their brochures and sales talks.
But Henry Herschel of the Missouri Attorney General's office, in the forefront of the attack, fears increased enforcement efforts may only inspire the perpetrators of telephone confidence games.
"Attorneys general come on like the cavalry," he said, "and we chase the bad guys out of our own state, but all we seem to do is challenge their creativity."


Candidate Feels Force of Anti-Castro Voters
Every morning before she gets out of bed to campaign for Congress, Magda Montiel Davis says she calms her nerves by tucking her knees into her chest to assume the fetal position.
It is not stage fright that troubles Ms.
Montiel Davis, the Democratic challenger to Representative Ileana Ros-Lehtinen, a Republican identified with anti-Castro politics.
It is the occasional bomb threat phoned into her law office, the reports in the Spanish-language media calling her a "Castrista," and the shouts of "Comunista" by hecklers as she campaigns around Little Havana.


Mutual Funds; Of Stocks and the Democrats
Conventional wisdom holds that stocks suffer when Democrats occupy the White House.
While it's true that large-company stocks fare better under Republicans, stocks of smaller companies thrive under Democratic Presidents, according to a recent study by the Liberty Financial Companies, which sponsors the Stein Roe mutual funds and Liberty Financial Funds.


National Merit Scholar Semifinalists
The National Merit Scholarship Corporation has announced the names of 15,000 high school seniors who are semifinalists in its 1993 college scholarship competition.
The private nonprofit organization will announce the names of 6,500 scholarship winners in the spring.
Here are the semifinalists from Westchester and nearby areas of the Hudson Valley: Westchester County
ARMONK
Rishi Bhandari . . . Byram Hills H.S.
Nancy H. Hurwitz . . . Byram Hills H.S.
Kirtine Lee . . . Byram Hills H.S.
Brendan S. Maher . . . Byram Hills H.S.
Michael J. Smith . . . Byram Hills H.S.
Ying Taur . . . Byram Hills H.S.
Steven Y. Yi . . . Byram Hills H.S.
BEDFORD
Douglas R. Altilio . . . The Fox Lane H.S.
Andrew D. Brown . . . The Fox Lane H.S.
Ian Downes . . . . . . The Fox Lane H.S.
Charles H. Sanders . . . The Fox Lane H.S.
BRIARCLIFF MANOR
Nancy L. Jacobson . . . Briarcliff Manor H.S.
Vivek Jain . . . . . . Briarcliff Manor H.S.
BRONXVILLE
Aileen J. Bramhall . . . Bronxville H.S.
Phoebus J. Dhrymes . . . Bronxville H.S.
Wendy S. Ruhm . . . Bronxville H.S.
Michael E. Szypula . . . Bronxville H.S.
CHAPPAQUA
Theodore C. Cha . . . Horace Greeley H.S.
Jason R. Crocker . . . Horace Greeley H.S.
Brandon M. Dellaglio . . . Horace Greeley H.S.
Gabriel B. Eber . . . Horace Greeley H.S.
Joshua D. Fine . . . Horace Greeley H.S.
Adrian Gorycki . . . Horace Greeley H.S.
Beverly S. Grossman . . . Horace Greeley H.S.
Sarah E. Karush . . . Horace Greeley H.S.
Robert A. Kinyon . . . Horace Greeley H.S.
Erik C. Kroner . . . Horace Greeley H.S.
Daveena D. Ma . . . Horace Greeley H.S.
Theron L. Metz . . . Horace Greeley H.S.
Seong M. Monahan . . . Horace Greeley H.S.
Gregory A. Roth . . . Horace Greeley H.S.
Carla A. Rummo . . . Horace Greeley H.S.
Steven J. Silvers . . . Horace Greeley H.S.
EASTCHESTER
Barbara H. Chuang . . . Eastchester H.S.
HARRISON
Marnie E. Davidoff . . . Harrison H.S.
HARTSDALE
Sean S. Duggan . . . Woodlands H.S.
Jocelyn M. Kiley . . . Woodlands H.S.
Elizabeth A. Papp . . . Maria Regina H.S.
IRVINGTON
John M. Huzinec . . . Irvington H.S.
John B. Mitchell . . . Irvington H.S.
David Wolff . . . Irvington H.S.
KATONAH
Parag P. Chordia . . . John Jay H.S.
Michael A. Spiegelman . . . John Jay H.S.
MAMARONECK
Susan E. Kearns . . . Mamaroneck H.S.
Sarah F. Leleiko . . . Mamaroneck H.S.
Jeremy L. Lizt . . . Mamaroneck H.S.
Melissa R. Morrone . . . Mamaroneck H.S.
Elizabeth S. Reich . . . Mamaroneck H.S.
Jeremy D. Schneider . . . Mamaroneck H.S.
Thomas Y. Shin . . . Rye Neck H.S.
Gregory A. Warner . . . Mamaroneck H.S.
NEW ROCHELLE
Michael Bahar . . . New Rochelle H.S.
Elizabeth M. Bailey . . . The Ursuline School
Melissa E. Fuchs . . . New Rochelle H.S.
Seth J. Ludman . . . New Rochelle H.S.
Nancy Michael . . . New Rochelle H.S.
Jason P. Mitchell . . . Iona Preparatory School
Joseph J. O'Connell . . . Iona Preparatory School
James S. Rosoff . . . New Rochelle H.S.
Allison R. Tumarkin . . . The Ursuline School
Seth J. Yoskowitz . . . New Rochelle H.S.
PEEKSKILL
Christian R. Brunelli . . . Walter Panas H.S.
Joshua L. Monter . . . Walter Panas H.S.
PELHAM
Brian M. Carney . . . Pelham Memorial H.S.
PLEASANTVILLE
Rishi Manchanda . . . Pleasantville H.S.
Benjamin C. Matteo . . . Pleasantville H.S.
James E. Schmitz . . . Pleasantville H.S.
Jennifer W. Tang . . . Pleasantville H.S.
Paul F. Titterton . . . Pleasantville H.S.
RYE
John M. Chakan . . . Rye Country Day School
Anjali Chopra . . . Rye Country Day School
Jean M. Hammel . . . Rye H.S.
Anna M. Kaufmann . . . Rye Country Day School
Stuart S. Levine . . . Rye H.S.
Jardayna Y. Werlin . . . School of the Holy Child
Andrew F. Woo . . . Rye H.S.
RYE BROOK
Alexander Rozenfeld . . . Blind Brook H.S.
SCARSDALE
Greg S. Alakalay . . . Scarsdale H.S.
Samuel E. Bonderoff . . . Scarsdale H.S.
T. Anthony Brenninkmeyer . . . Scarsdale H.S.
Noah J. Breslow . . . Scarsdale H.S.
David Canes . . . Scarsdale H.S.
Merry J. Chan . . . Scarsdale H.S.
Jason S. Chow . . . Scarsdale H.S.
Eileen M. Cunningham . . . Scarsdale H.S.
Agnes Gellen . . . Scarsdale H.S.
Daniel Huang . . . Scarsdale H.S.
Amy S. Hurwitz . . . Scarsdale H.S.
Raj Inamdar . . . Scarsdale H.S.
Prat Itharat . . . Edgemont H.S.
Ethan I Jacobs . . . Scarsdale H.S.
Grace Y. Lin . . . Edgemont H.S.
Venkatesh L. Murthy . . . Scarsdale H.S.
Christopher K. Stern . . . Scarsdale H.S.
Christine S. Wu . . . Edgemont H.S.
SHRUB OAK
Thomas A. Magnani . . . Lakeland H.S.
TARRYTOWN
Justin T. Burk . . . Hackley School
Dana C. Gottlieb . . . Hackley School
David J. Greenbaum . . . Hackley School
Jeremiah L. Grossman . . . Hackley School
Raphael L. Jacoby . . . Hackley School
Jonathan S. MacCabee . . . Hackley School
Maribeth McCauley . . . Hackley School
Bennett Myers . . . Hackley School
THORNWOOD
Alec H. Bemis . . . Westlake H.S.
James H. Taylor . . . Westlake H.S.
WHITE PLAINS
Tom W. Hirt . . . White Plains H.S.
Brielle V. Rosa . . . White Plains H.S.
Michael P. Schmidt-Lange . . . White Plains H.S.
Jack L. Ying . . . White Plains H.S.
YONKERS
Michael J. Greenberg . . . Charles E. Gorton H.S.
YORKTOWN HEIGHTS
Tien-Hsin C. Chi . . . Yorktown H.S.
Todd E. Goldwasser . . . Yorktown H.S.
Chelsea M. Harper . . . Yorktown H.S.
Putnam County
LINCOLNDALE
Brian S. Eng . . . Somers H.S.
Rockland County
MONSEY
Batsheva L. Ginsberg . . . Bais Yaakov of Spring Valley
NANUET
Justin A. Menza . . . Nanuet H.S.
Daniel Park . . . Nanuet H.S.
Chris M. Wendl . . . Nanuet H.S.
NEW CITY
Joshua Berson . . . Clarkstown H.S. North
Jason B. Friedman . . . Clarkstown H.S. North
Andrew H. Kim . . . Clarkstown H.S. North
Eric T. Levy . . . Clarkstown H.S. North
Shirley S. Liao . . . Clarkstown H.S. North
Jordan M. Lisella . . . Clarkstown H.S. North
Jessica L. Marcus . . . Clarkstown H.S. North
Michael E. Nabavian . . . Clarkstown H.S. North
Andrew L. Oransky . . . Clarkstown H.S. North
Greg M. Pomerantz . . . Clarkstown H.S. North
Victor Y. Tsou . . . Clarkstown H.S. North
NYACK
Aaron G. Goldstein . . . Nyack H.S.
ORANGEBURG
Cindy M. Bofetiado . . . Tappan Zee H.S.
Ernesto M. Faunlagui . . . Tappan Zee H.S.
Jaime G. Fitzgerald . . . Tappan Zee H.S.
Patricia E. Kapunan . . . Tappan Zee H.S.
SPRING VALLEY
Matthew I Dworkin . . . Spring Valley H.S.
Jennifer M. McKenna . . . Ramapo H.S.
SUFFERN
Steven C. Antonelli . . . Suffern H.S.
Matthew S. Davis . . . Suffern H.S.
Amy E. Fritz . . . Suffern H.S.
Jennifer A. Gilmore . . . Suffern H.S.
Joanna L. Kemmelman . . . Suffern H.S.
Robert L. Murken . . . Suffern H.S.
Alexander N. Pita . . . Suffern H.S.
Daniel B. Sentell . . . Shaarei Torah of Rockland
Theodore M. Yang . . . Suffern H.S.
WEST NYACK
Mary J. Hahn . . . Clarkstown H.S. South
Kevin P. Paquette . . . Clarkstown H.S. South
Ruth A. Payne . . . Clarkstown H.S. South
Michael A. Piskun . . . Clarkstown H.S. South
Orange County
CORNWALL
Cynthia L. Conklin . . . Cornwall Central H.S.
HIGHLAND FALLS
Jeffrey W. Donnithorne . . . James I. O'Neill H.S.
Eric K. Hand . . . James I. O'Neill H.S.
Scott G. Mermelstein . . . James I. O'Neill H.S.
HOPEWELL JUNCTION
Richard T. Chang . . . John Jay H.S.
Christina A. Marsh . . . John Jay H.S.
Sohail Y. Suleman . . . John Jay H.S.
Vikas V. Tewari . . . John Jay H.S.
NEWBURGH
Nick A. Baran . . . Newburgh Free Academy


Cone Gets 40% Share
Winning the World Series was worth about $120,000 to full-time members of the Toronto Blue Jays and some sidelined players as well.
According to The Toronto Globe and Mail, the players voted full $120,000 shares for themselves, Manager CITO GASTON, most coaches and trainers and three players who were injured for most or all of the season: DAVE STIEB, RANCE MULLINIKS and KEN DAYLEY.


Polish Orchestra Picks Peekskill on First Tour
THE number of classical music presentations at the Paramount Center in Peekskill has been diminishing recently but not the quality.
The center has scored a coup by presenting the Artur Rubinstein Philharmonic of Poland at the outset of the orchestra's first American tour.
The fund-raising event on Friday at 8 P.M. is primarily designed to provide funds for installing an infrared hearing system.
The orchestra, in its first appearance in the New York City area on its third stop in the United States, will be conducted by the music director, Ilya Stupel, and the program will consist of two works by Tchaikovsky -- "Capriccio Italien" and the Fifth Symphony -- and Chopin's E minor Piano Concerto.
The Italian-born pianist Giorgia Tomassi, 22 years old, who earlier this year won the gold medal at the Rubinstein International Piano Competition in Tel Aviv, will be the soloist.
More details are available by calling 736-9585.


ABOUT-FACE
Norman's article goes to the soul.
I was an Air Force combat pilot in Vietnam, also during its bloodiest years.
I believe that I can understand how George Bush's combat experience has had little impact on his "compassion level" or that of his Presidency.
He, too, was a pilot, and he had it even safer than I did.
Bush returned to a carrier after missions; I returned to "Rocket City," the playfully accurate name for Pleiku in the Central Highlands.
There was such detachment from the war during a "routine mission" -- seeing it from above -- that I find myself, today, wishing I had listened to that Marine Corps recruiting sergeant who tried selling me on the corps as I was leaving the Air Force recruiter, back in 1967.
Now, when it is all over, I see myself less a veteran for not having had the honor of the daily mud and gore.
We pilots had our own kind of terror.
But it is not the same as being on the ground.
So I do not believe George Bush's war experiences give him a measurable edge over Bill Clinton.
If anything, perhaps Bush, as well, has considered the nature of battle and has mulled over the ground war.
Maybe this is why he has seemed eager to take up the sword and has committed our troops to engagements that really are not ours.


A Pact With the Devil
STELLA
By Peter Wyden. Illustrated. 382 pp. New York: Simon &amp; Schuster. $23.


Pumping Along Till the Bubble Bursts
To the Editor:
Regarding "Just as in '87, a Split in Opinion" (Oct. 18), there must be a megaburst of cosmic rays in the fall equinox that shocks market players out of their manic state and into the real world.
Or so it seemed in 1720 when the South Sea Bubble burst; also in 1929 as the roaring 20's climaxed, and again in 1987 as Merrill's bull, certified immortal by its handlers, dropped dead in living color on TV.


THE 1992 FOLLIES
Many an eerie sight have I seen since covering my first Presidential election 36 years ago.
I have seen Adlai Stevenson shake hands with a department store mannequin, and I have seen Barry Goldwater embraced by Col.
Harlan Sanders in his white Kentucky Fried Chicken suit.
I have seen squadrons of nuns leaping in shamelessly uninhibited ecstasy as young Jack Kennedy sped through Cleveland in an open car.


In Prince's Eden, The Animals Vie With His Psyche
Adam Gained dominion over Paradise only after granting names to all the animals.
Prince, pop star and cosmologist, uses names the same way, to declare mastery; the animals in Prince's garden are his own sensual and creative drives.
"In the beginning God made the sea/ But on the 7th day he made me," he whoops on "My Name Is Prince," the single and first track from his new album.
As a choppy dance groove propels him forward, he continues this tale of a new creation: "He was trying 2 rest y'all when He heard the sound/ My God was worried 'til He heard me sing." From this point on, Prince's latest self-termed song cycle reconstructs Eden as a den of sensuality, with the artist as its sole proprietor.
The album (Paisley Park/Warner Brothers 45037; CD and cassette) -- whose title is an unpronounceable amalgam, concocted by Prince, of the male and female symbols -- weaves a funky fairy tale about sexual and musical conquest, dipping into the Bible and the hipster dictionary for lyrical inspiration.
"In a word or 2 -- it's u I wanna do/ No, not cha body yo mind u fool," he declares in typical Prince slang in the Parliament-Funkadelic-influenced flagship number, "Sexy MF." With these words, the album draws the listener into a musical seduction in which sex, spirituality and music converge as the route to salvation.


Kathleen Brady, Gregory Heher
Kathleen Frances Brady, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William R. Brady of Brielle, N.J., was married yesterday to Gregory Joseph Heher, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Harry Heher Jr. of Princeton, N.J.
The Rev.
Michael J. Maruca performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Church of St.
Rose in Belmar, N.J.
Mrs.
Heher, 27 years old, graduated from St.
Lawrence University.
She is a senior underwriter at the American Re-Insurance Company in New York.
Her mother, Susan S. Brady, and her father own Brady Associates, a commercial real-estate concern in Montclair, N.J.


Candidates On Television
The New York Senate candidates, Robert Abrams and Alfonse M. D'Amato, will debate today from 11:30 A.M. to 12:30 P.M. on WNBC-TV, Channel 4 in the New York City area.
The debate will also be broadcast live on C-Span nationwide.


Crown Heights Standoff: A Routine of Animosity
Winston Gordon, his path blocked by scores of Hasidim tarrying on the street, began shouting with resentment.
"This is ridiculous," protested Mr.
Gordon, who is black, as the Hasidim, leaving services at the Lubavitch World Headquarters, clustered on Eastern Parkway.
"This is not Palestine. They aren't going to throw other people out of this neighborhood."


Lee Hennessee, Charles Gradante
Elizabeth Lee Hennessee, the daughter of Mary Frances Dillon and William E. Hennessee, both of Raleigh, N.C., was married yesterday to Charles Joseph Gradante, a son of Sebastian Gradante of Boca Raton, Fla., and Mildred Gradante of New York.
The Rev.
Timothy Keller performed the ceremony at St.
Bartholomew's Episcopal Church in New York.
Mrs.
Hennessee-Gradante, who is known as Lee, is a senior money management consultant and a vice president at Shearson Lehman Brothers in New York.
She graduated from Randolph-Macon Woman's College.
Her father, who is retired, was the senior vice president in charge of advertising and tobacco sales at the Dillon Supply Company in Raleigh.


Specifically, Bill Clinton; The Campaign, Issue by Issue
The forest: Last Sunday we weighed President Bush's sensible stewardship of foreign affairs against domestic leadership so limp it has prompted the title President Noodle.
Likewise, we weighed Gov.
Bill Clinton's lack of national experience and a tendency to evasiveness against his program for growth and his devotion to civil rights and social harmony.
In our judgment, the scales tip decisively in favor of Bill Clinton.
The trees: Such an overall assessment scants individual issues that also bear heavily on the choice for President.
Here is an evaluation of the two candidates regarding such issues.
Ross Perot will be appraised separately tomorrow.
Murderers, Age 12 and Under
The horror mounts; ever-younger and ever-more volatile children commit murder with guns.
A Northeastern University study reports that arrests of boys
12 and under
for murder doubled between 1985 and 1991.
What kind of society shrugs at such an evolving epidemic?


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: November 1, 1992
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
2
MIDNIGHT WHISPERS, by V. C. Andrews. (Pocket, $5.99.) The travails of Christie Longchamp, haunted by her relatives' passions.
2
40
THE FIRM, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $5.99.) A young lawyer learns that his firm is engaged in secret, possibly illegal activities.
3
29
A TIME TO KILL, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $5.99.) Racial tensions surface during the trial of a man charged with murder in rural Mississippi.
4
4
SCARLETT, by Alexandra Ripley. (Warner, $6.99.) The sequel to Margaret Mitchell's "Gone With the Wind."
5 *
6
NO GREATER LOVE, by Danielle Steel. (Dell, $6.50.) The sinking of the Titanic greatly alters the fortunes of Edwina Winfield and her large family.
6
1
REMEMBER, by Barbara Taylor Bradford. (Ballantine, $5.99.) A television correspondent takes a trip across Europe to learn the truth about her fiance's suicide and herself.
7
3
THE HELLION BRIDE, by Catherine Coulter. (Jove, $5.99.) The romance of a British rake and a plantation belle in 19th-century Jamaica.
8
1
A RIVER RUNS THROUGH IT, by Norman Maclean. (Pocket, $4.99.) Three stories about the pleasures of the outdoors in western Montana.
9
2
RELICS, by Michael Jan Friedman. (Pocket, $4.99.) Capt.
Montgomery Scott returns in a new "Star Trek" tale.
10
2
PRIVATE EYES, by Jonathan Kellerman. (Bantam, $6.50.) The psychologist-detective Alex Delaware goes to the rescue of an actress.
11
6
SAINT MAYBE, by Anne Tyler. (Ivy, $5.99.) The struggles of a young man to atone for the wrong he feels he has done his brother.
12
6
A THOUSAND ACRES, by Jane Smiley. (Fawcett, $12.) The fortunes of a family that operates a large industrialized farm in the Midwest.
13
5
FOREVER IN YOUR EMBRACE, by Kathleen E. Woodiwiss. (Avon, $12.50.) A countess and a British soldier of fortune in 17th-century Russia.
14
1
DEATH COUNT, by L. A. Graf. (Pocket, $4.99.) A saboteur on the loose aboard "Star Trek" 's U.S.S.
Enterprise.
15
6
THE CAT WHO MOVED A MOUNTAIN, by Lilian Jackson Braun. (Jove, $4.99.) Jim Qwilleran tracks down the murderer of a millionaire.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
2
4
PUTTING PEOPLE FIRST, by Bill Clinton and Al Gore. (Times Books/Random House, $7.99.) The Democratic candidates detail their program for "changing America."
3
28
AMERICA: WHAT WENT WRONG? by Donald L. Barlett and James B. Steele. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $6.95.) How the practices of Washington lawmakers and Wall Street deal makers have benefited a few Americans at the expense of most.
4
76
YOU JUST DON'T UNDERSTAND, by Deborah Tannen. (Ballantine, $10.) The different languages men and women speak.
5
10
THE GOVERNMENT RACKET, by Martin L. Gross. (Bantam, $7.99.) Several hundred examples of waste authorized by the White House and Congress, with suggestions for curbing it.
6
3
BACKLASH, by Susan Faludi. (Anchor/ Doubleday, $12.50.) A journalist contends that the media and political groups are staging a war against women's rights.
7 *
3
SEX, ART, AND AMERICAN CULTURE, by Camille Paglia. (Vintage, $13.) Twenty-one essays on contemporary subjects, ranging from Madonna to Anita Hill to date rape.
8
68
A YEAR IN PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A sojourn in the south of France, as described by a British writer.
9 *
10
DEN OF THIEVES, by James B. Stewart. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $12.) How Ivan Boesky, Michael Milken, Martin Siegel and Dennis Levine plundered and created havoc on Wall Street.
10 *
469
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Psychological and spiritual inspiration by a psychiatrist. (LP)
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
6
THE INDISPENSABLE CALVIN AND HOBBES, by Bill Watterson. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $12.95.) A collection of previously published cartoons.
2
64
LIFE'S LITTLE INSTRUCTION BOOK, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $5.95.) Some 500 tips for achieving a self-fulfilling life.
3
93
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $9.95.) Principles for success.
4
112
THE T-FACTOR FAT GRAM COUNTER, by Jamie Pope-Cordle and Martin Katahn. (Norton, $2.50.) How to reduce fat in one's diet.
5
3
THE OLD FARMER'S ALMANAC 1993. (Yankee Publishing, $3.95.) The 201st annual edition.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,000 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 38,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.


Subaru's Justy, an Endangered Specie
AH, the sacrifices one makes.
Dominating the driveway is a lovely Cadillac Brougham, a golden behemoth that has been stretched and redesigned for '93 and that now is the largest production car in the world.
It is powerful and it floats.
But it has been standing there, quiet and alone, because I have been driving its antithesis, putt-putting in the pursuit of journalism.


The Quiz
It might just be possible that if early humans had known how much water there was in the world compared with land mass, they might have named this planet Water instead of Earth.
The early voyagers certainly helped expand our horizons as they crisscrossed the Atlantic, the Pacific and the various other oceans and seas.
We now know that most of this planet is covered by water.
What else do you know about bodies of water?
Follow the course of this quiz.
(Answers on page 12)  1. How many oceans are there? Name them.
2.
The oceans cover how much of the earth's surface? a) 50 percent; b) 70.4 percent; c) 65.5 percent
3. How deep is a fathom?
4. Describe the Marianas Trench and explain why it is noteworthy.
5. If most rainwater originates in the oceans, why isn't rainwater salty?
6. What is a continental shelf?
7. Describe the basic movements of ocean currents.
8. Which is the longest river in the world: the Amazon, the Nile or the Mississippi?
9.
Name the Great Lakes, which form part of the border between Canada and the United States, in order from west to east.
10.
Match the following rivers -- Irrawaddy, Fraser, Magdalena, Burdekin, Mekong -- with the main countries or regions through which they flow: Colombia; Myanmar; British Columbia, Canada; Southeast Asia; Queensland, Australia.
11. Why does ice float on the water's surface?
12. Victoria Falls in Africa is the highest waterfall in the world. True or False?
13. What is meant by the term "mean sea level"?
14.
Spring tides are the extreme tides that occur twice a month when the moon is new and full.
What is the name of the weaker tides that occur twice a month, during the first and second quarters of the moon's phases?
15.
Which of the following correctly describes a lagoon? a) a tropical swamp; b) an inland salt-water lake; c) a shallow sheet of salt water separated from the open sea by a barrier.
16.
The saltiest body of water is: a) the Atlantic Ocean; b) the Dead Sea; c) the Great Salt Lake.
17.
All but one of the following bodies of water belong to the same classification; which is the exception?
The Dead Sea, Lake Superior, the Caspian Sea, the Bering Sea, Lake Como.
18.
Excluding glaciers and the Arctic and Antarctic icecaps, fresh water accounts for what percent of water on the earth's surface? a) 10.2 percent; b) 5.4 percent, c) 2.8 percent.
19.
In what way does Lake Erie differ from the following lakes -- Mead, Franklin D. Roosevelt and Gatun?


Profile/Wallace Steinberg; Laying Pipe for the Fountain of Youth
PRESIDENTIAL candidates who are younger than, say, 200 or 250?
In the future, says Wallace Steinberg, we will not even consider them.
Far too immature.
"No one I know is really emotionally mature," Mr.
Steinberg said.
"I'm certainly not mature, and I'm 58." It might take him 100 years or so to complete the maturation process, he said, insisting that the idea of living until the process is complete is not as bizarre as it sounds.


An Old U.N. Hand Is New Envoy to Somalia
Ismat Kittani, Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali's new envoy to Somalia, grew up barefooted in a Kurdish village in western Iraq and likes to recall that he first saw an electric light when he was 12 years old.
In the years since then -- he is now 63 -- Mr.
Kittani has become a prominent figure in the United Nations hierarchy, first as a diplomat and later as a member of the United Nations staff, before being named to replace Mohammed Sahnoun, the envoy to Somalia who tendered a forced resignation this week.


Calls for Change Mark Congressional Races
The calls for political change that have resounded through the nation this year are echoing loud and clear in Congressional races across New York, New Jersey and Connecticut -- perhaps most strikingly in New York, where at least 10 familiar faces will be gone from the House delegation in January.
In tough radio commercials around the region, the themes of the Presidential campaign buzz night and day: anti-incumbency, disgust with Congress, fights over abortion rights.
But local political feuds also loom large, as in an open district in central New Jersey where the former Republican state chairman has styled his campaign as a referendum on the tax policies of the Democratic Governor, Jim Florio -- in military sound bites that evoke the Persian Gulf war.


Why Sinead O'Connor Hit a Nerve
You think it's easy to get booed at Madison Square Garden?
Maybe it is for a visiting hockey team, but at a rock concert, drawing boos qualifies as a perverse kind of achievement.
Sinead O'Connor, who was booed (as well as cheered) at the Bob Dylan tribute on Oct. 16, once again showed that she has a gift that's increasingly rare.: the ability to stir full-fledged outrage.
She has stumbled onto the new 1990's taboo: taking on an authority figure.
O'Connor was booed because, 13 days earlier, she had torn up a photograph of Pope John Paul II on NBC's "Saturday Night Live," saying, "Fight the real enemy." Compounding her impropriety, she dropped her scheduled Dylan song and reprised "War," the anti-racism song by Bob Marley and Haile Selassie.
Her expression was timorous, defiant, martyred, and she made all the late-edition newspapers and television news.


Streetscapes: 10 Gracie Square; Under a Most Elegant Facade, Rust
WITH scores of stone blocks removed and replaced with plywood and others drilled or sawn, it looks like 10 Gracie Square is being unbuilt.
In fact that's close to what has happened: The steel in this unusual 1930 apartment house was not rustproofed, not even primed, and the co-op has had to replace the stone facade's severely rusted supports.


War Casualties


'A Day Away From Tallulah . . .'
To the Editor:
The bon mot in question was the doing of Robert Benchley, who said, "A day away from Tallulah is like a month in the country."  GILBERT R. CHERRICK Bronx


Joan M. Tormey, Geoffrey P. Milton
Dr. and Mrs.
James B. Tormey Jr. of Garden City, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter Joan Marie Tormey to Geoffrey Paul Milton, the son of Alice C. Milton of Berkshire, Reading, England, and the late Maj.
Eric J. C. Milton.


A Bank That Lived to Tell the Tale
The dark days at the Shawmut Bank started in February 1990, when an army of 170 Federal examiners arrived at the bank's main offices in Massachusetts and Connecticut for what would prove to be a six-week audit of Shawmut's real estate loans.
Shawmut, which had been confident enough to ask the examiners to come a month early, was stunned by the results.
The examiners took a much dimmer view of repayment prospects than the bank did.
Determined that they would not be accused of the slack supervision that helped topple the savings and loan industry, the regulators forced Shawmut to restate its 1989 results, turning a $202 million profit into a $129 million loss.


A Hot Line To Grammar And Spelling
WHAT'S the difference between "affect" and "effect"?
For a quick answer, call one of the 60-plus hot lines around the United States and Canada that offer quick solutions for pesky grammar and spelling problems.
Writing teachers armed with reference guides and unabridged dictionaries answer questions ranging from the proper use of the comma to the proper way to address a female judge.
They help format business letters and structure sentences.
And they place tricky punctuation.


Some Chores to Do Before Winter Sets In
With those cherished extra hours of light now gone, the timetable for getting things done is reduced.
Signals are everywhere.
The plant kingdom is winding down.
Deciduous trees have completed their cycle.
The annual foliage display was fantastic this year.
But the leaves are falling and the old get-out-the-rakes-and-blowers ritual has begun.
Even the conifers have completed their cycle and old needles are dropping off at rapid rates.
Plants are on their own, at last, as nature intended.


Johnson's Return to League Isn't Welcomed by Some
Karl Malone, known around the National Basketball Association as the Mailman, delivered a strong message last week, challenging the accepted belief that Magic Johnson has been universally welcomed back to the league even though he has the virus that causes AIDS.
"Look at this, scabs and cuts all over me," Malone, the Utah Jazz All-Star forward, said last Tuesday night in the visitors' locker room at Madison Square Garden before a preseason game against the Knicks.


Senate Choice: Mr. Inside or Mr. Outside
THE first question in the televised debate between the state's United States Senate candidates last Monday was about converting Connecticut's military industries to peacetime uses, but Brook Johnson began his response with two statements: he has lived in Greenwich since 1978, and he has never shipped an American job overseas.
The moment was awkward for Mr.
Johnson, the Republican candidate, a businessman who had spent $1.6 million of his own money on television advertisements to make himself known.
Because of attack ads by his Democratic opponent, Senator Christopher J. Dodd, Mr.
Johnson seemed compelled to begin by defending his legitimacy as a resident of the state and as a pro-American businessman.


When the Movement Knew Sin
RADS
The 1970 Bombing of the Army Math Research Center at the University of Wisconsin and Its Aftermath.
By Tom Bates.
Illustrated. 465 pp.
New York: HarperCollins Publishers. $25.


Mix, Don't Match
IN VALERIE HARR's sixth-grade math class, a bright yellow pumpkin sits on each student's desk.
There are big ones, little ones, heavy ones and puny ones.
The varying sizes of the pumpkins are like the students themselves, these middle school pupils caught in that awkward transition between childhood and high school age -- some smaller and baby-faced, others lanky and towering.


Machine Politics
WHAT: The Shoup Voting Machine, made by the R. F. Shoup Company of Bryn Mawr, Pa., vintage 1962.
New York City's mechanical counter of choice for decades; 6,500 in use (or disrepair) citywide; out of production for a decade.
Understated battleship gray, accented with a red lever, black vinyl curtains and colored lights designating party affiliation in primary elections.
Overweight at 750 pounds; rolled on casters; often dropped in moving by truckers hired under patronage arrangements.
WHY: Because politics is a choice between the lever of two evils.
The Shoup is a collateral descendant of the first mechanical voting device, invented just 100 years ago in Lockport, N.Y., by a Rochester safe maker, Jacob H. Myers.
He built a 10-by-10-foot room of wood and steel with interlocking doors, to "protect mechanically the voter from rascaldom, and make the process of casting the ballot perfectly plain, simple and secret."


Don't Be Deceived by Jets (1-6) and Dolphins (6-1)
When the National Football League schedule appeared and the Jets left the preseason with a glistening 5-0 record, their game against Miami this afternoon at Giants Stadium looked like a contest with direct bearing on the American Football Conference East division championship.
After all, last season the Jets had beaten the Dolphins in overtime at Joe Robbie Stadium in Miami in the last regular-season game of the year, making it to the playoffs.
The Jets appeared ready to stake a solid claim to the No. 2 spot this season behind Buffalo in the division.


Nets Unravel in Final Exhibition Game
Bring on the season.
Can regular-season play be any worse than it was tonight for the Nets?
New Jersey lost a lackluster final exhibition to the Miami Heat, 108-102, at the West Palm Beach Auditorium.
Down the stretch, the Nets lacked cohesion and focus.
New Jersey could not take advantage of Miami's poor shooting late in the game.


A Country Inn's Restaurant in Revival
FANS of the Inn at Chester will be happy to learn that it has reopened, under new ownership, with a revival of its restaurant as well.
This time around, the restaurant has a new name, The Post and Beam, which aptly describes the room's interior construction.
Much is the same as before: the weathered barn atmosphere with a 20-foot ceiling and a vast stone fireplace at one end (stacked with birch logs), a balcony at the other, and a narrow glass-enclosed greenhouse along the exterior wall.
Light from a handsome Colonial-style pewter chandelier and wall sconces add a romantic aura to the room.
Simple white Syracuse china and fresh flowers on each table project both simplicity and elegance.
If the dining room conveys a sense of antiquity, the menu decidedly does not.
This is no old-fashioned New England inn menu; there's not a cut-glass dish of cottage cheese, corn relish or Indian pudding in sight.
It is a menu of the 1990's in spirit, in its use of fresh ingredients and food combinations.
The current menu breathes the winds of autumn, with several fall vegetables (butternut squash, sweet potatoes and the like) and game and red meat dishes.


GAY POLITICS GOES MAINSTREAM
It must have seemed more rousing to date the "political awakening of homosexuals" from very recent history.
In his article "Gay Politics Goes Mainstream" (Oct. 11), Jeffrey Schmalz says AIDS caused this awakening, that "the story of gay life shattered into two eras -- pre-plague and post-plague."
Lest we forget, it was the Stonewall uprising in Greenwich Village in 1969 that created the foundation for the new lesbian and gay politics and gave birth to the lesbian and gay movement, now rekindled by the AIDS crisis.


Beers That Love Food
WEANED ON bland, watery lagers, Americans are often stunned to taste a craft-brewed beer.
Real beer -- with the flowery aroma of hops, the nuttiness of roasted grain and yeasts that produce a somewhat bready, fruity complexity.
This is beer too rich to swill by the six-pack and too noble to spend life as a chaser for nachos and ballpark franks.
The truth is, American craft beers, or microbrews, have enough depth and nuance and range of flavor to complement everything from the most delicate quenelles to an esophagus-scorching vindaloo.
These are beers that will stand up to dishes that would maul a chardonnay or a cabernet sauvignon.


New York Tests a Model: Public Works in Private Hands
WHAT do Central Park, the Museum of Natural History, the Triborough Bridge, LaGuardia Airport, the Croton Reservoir and Donald J. Trump's proposed Riverside South project have in common?
All were initiated during economic panics or recessions.
What is the singular difference between Riverside South and the rest?
They were built with government in a dominant role; Mr.
Trump's proposal for the largest tract of developable land in Manhattan represents the privatization of public works to an unparalleled degree.
Not only did he agree to create a 21-acre public park and to reserve at least 12 percent of the proposed housing for subsidized apartments, but he also pledged $12 million toward the renovation of two nearby subway stations.


San Juan Plaza Salutes Columbus
Old San Juan has a new outdoor plaza, overlooking the Atlantic Ocean, that is the highest point in the city.
The Quincentennial Plaza of America and Puerto Rico, which opened last month, was designed by an architectural firm in San Juan, Rivera &amp; Alejandro, as part of the island's Columbus quincentennial program.
Columbus landed in Puerto Rico in 1493 during his second voyage -- his only landfall in what is now the United States.
The plaza connects the square of San Jose Church, which has a statue of Ponce de Leon, with the grounds of El Morro fortress.
Among the plaza's adornments are a 100-jet fountain and two needle-shaped cylinders pointing toward the North Star, historically a navigational marker for explorers.
There is also a 40-foot-high totemic sculpture, covered in ceramic fragments and black granite, by Jamie Suarez, a Puerto Rican artist.


George M. Ferris, 99, Ex-Investment Banker
George M. Ferris, a retired investment banker and philanthropist in Washington, died Thursday at his home in Chevy Chase, Md.
He was 99 years old.
He died of arteriosclerosis, his family said.


Q and A
Traveling to Antarctica
Q.
I am interested in a trip to Antarctica.
Can you give information on what companies go there? -- Mike Hoyland, Stamford, Conn.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Ronald Reagan; Vintage Reagan Stumps in South
Speaking shortly before Bill Clinton held a rally on the other side of Atlanta, Ronald Reagan offered an artful blend of nostalgia, theater and politics as he campaigned on behalf of President Bush in this Southern battleground state today.
"I know today is Halloween, a time for ghosts and goblins and other scary things," Mr.
Reagan told a small but adoring crowd of perhaps 1,500 people at a suburban amphiteater just outside Atlanta.
"But this year be on the lookout for a couple of tricksters who have been on the prowl for months. They may have the best costumes we've seen in in a while, but under those masks are a couple of tax-and-spenders who will scare the daylights out of your pocketbooks."


Vote on the Issues, and May the Best Man Win
To the Editor:
Having heard the charges against Bill Clinton regarding his alleged "draft evasion," I would like to step forward as a witness to the truth.
As a classmate of Bill Clinton at Georgetown University, former Mayor of Sarasota and local co-chairman for the Bush campaign in 1988, I offer the following as objective testimony.


U.N. Says Khmer Rouge Stance May Doom Talks
United Nations officials and foreign diplomats say they are uncertain how, or whether, the Cambodian peace talks can be salvaged after the Khmer Rouge, the country's most powerful guerrilla group, rejected yet another overture for it to disarm and join in free elections scheduled for next year.
Diplomats who had once talked optimistically about their chances of persuading the Khmer Rouge to rejoin the peace process now concede that the elections may have to be held without the Khmer Rouge, whose brutal rule over Cambodia ended in 1979.


Heirs to Mao See Markets Trickle Down
The dusty main street of this rural Chinese community is a flourishing free market, with peasants and townspeople jostling each other to sell everything from shoulder pads to pictures of Hong Kong actresses.
Now, in a tribute to the maneuverings of the leadership in Beijing, 600 miles north, local Communist Party officials are planning to put up a red banner over the street along the lines of "Struggle for a socialist market economy!" More to the point, they are also planning to establish several more free markets and to devote more attention to the needs of local businesses.


Tech Notes; Hardwood: The Beanstalk Approach
As more and more natural forests are destroyed -- whether for paper or lumber -- scientists are developing other methods to grow and harvest trees.
One approach they have come up with uses genetic engineering to produce a hardwood tree that is said to mature in seven years.
Called a paulownia clone, the tree was developed in Australia after 10 years of research, and represents part of a growing effort to harvest trees artificially.
A number of tree farmers have established paulownia plantations in the eastern United States.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Campaign Almanac; Countdown to Election Day
GEORGE BUSH
President Bush used an attack on his honesty by Gov.
Bill Clinton as an occasion to mount his sharpest assault yet on his rival's fitness for office.
He denounced Mr.
Clinton for accusing him of repeatedly lying about his knowledge of the Iran arms-for-hostage affair in 1986.
The President -- on the third stop of a train trip through Wisconsin intended to project an image of confidence and momentum -- then unleashed a scorching recital of what he called Mr.
Clinton's deceptions and reversals on seven issues, including his draft history, his use of marijuana and his positions on free trade, right-to-work laws and the Persian Gulf war.
BILL CLINTON


Wendy Wasserstein's School of Life
For a brief period, when she was still casting about for titles, Wendy Wasserstein thought of calling her new play "Three Days That Shook the Rosensweigs."
I can't tell you why she settled for "The Sisters Rosensweig" instead.
But it was probably a wise choice.
"Three Days That Shook the Rosensweigs" implies monumental family clashes and comedy of an antic nature.
For anyone heading off to the Mitzi E. Newhouse Theater at Lincoln Center, that would have been misleading.


6 Months After Riots, Los Angeles Still Bleeds
Six months after the burning and looting that swept Los Angeles last spring, Joe Chiu has still not rebuilt his gutted meat market in Koreatown or his grocery in Long Beach.
The Federal Small Business Administration has approved his $500,000 loan, but his contractors have been turned down for building permits at least three times because city building rules are much stricter now than when he opened 27 years ago.
"They won't meet you halfway," said Mr.
Chiu, who is president of an association for Chinese-American riot victims.
"The money is there, but there's been no real effort."


Janet E. Stewart And C. S. Moffitt
Janet Elizabeth Stewart, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
J. .L.
Stewart of Rochester, Minn., was married yesterday to Christopher Stuart Moffitt, a son of the late Mr. and Mrs.
David S. Moffitt.
The Very Rev.
William Manning Hale performed the Episcopal ceremony at Christ Church in Alexandria, Va.
Mrs.
Moffitt, 31 years old, manages charitable giving for Paul Mellon, the philanthropist, in Washington.
She graduated from the University of Wisconsin and received a master's degree in American studies from the College of William and Mary.


Hail the Conquered Hero
CHRISTMAS IN JULY
The Life and Art of Preston Sturges.
By Diane Jacobs.
Illustrated. 525 pp.
Berkeley: University of California Press. $30.


Shells Fly, but Mideast Talks Go On
ALTHOUGH tangible results were meager, the Middle East peace talks ended their first year last week by proving themselves admirably resilient, even as the region was swept up once more in violence.
Guerrillas of the pro-Iranian Party of God planted a bomb that killed five Israeli soldiers in southernmost Lebanon.
Israel struck back with warplanes and howitzers that left Lebanese villagers dead.
Then, the guerrillas fired rockets and killed a teen-age boy in northern Israel.
The Israelis, on edge as well because of a resurgence of violence in their occupied territories, responded with tank movements and make-my-day warnings.


To Investors, The Economy Looks Brighter
As the election nears, there are clear signs of improvement in the economy, or at least in some parts of it.
Perhaps more importantly, it appears that middle-class voters are more optimistic than at any time since early 1990.
Those signs, to be sure, are limited.
For every good piece of economic news in recent weeks, there has been a bad one.
The surprisingly strong economic growth rate of 2.7 percent in the third quarter, which President Bush trumpeted last week, could easily be revised downward, and in any case is weaker than the first-quarter figure.
Those who expect the economy to keep stuttering have plenty of evidence to support their position.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-19  PHOTOS DISPEL A FAMILY'S DOUBT


Rental Coverage
To the Editor: I recently rented a car using American Express's car rental loss and damage insurance plan.
It protects for 15 days the cardholder who carries no personal auto collision coverage, without having to purchase collision coverage from the rental agency.
Unlike the rental, which starts the first day from the hour you rent, American Express defines "day" by the calendar.
So if you rent a car five minutes before midnight, at 12:01 A.M., the card member would be in the
second
day of collision coverage.


Elmer K. Timby, 86, Who Helped Design Golden Gate Bridge
Elmer K. Timby, an engineer who worked on major projects like the Golden Gate Bridge in San Francisco and the Bronx-Whitestone Bridge in New York, died on Wednesday at St.
Mary Hospital in Langhorne, Pa.
He was 86 years old and lived in Newtown, Pa.
He died of pneumonia, his wife said.


Corrections
An article Sunday asserted that in 1980 all the major media polls said the election was too close to call.
The ABC News-Harris Survey did predict a Reagan victory over Jimmy Carter.


Helping Research
Benefits for 2 science groups, Oct. 25.


Easier Ups and Downs: Caring for Garage Doors
Garage doors need simple maintenance once or twice a year to keep operating smoothly.
Performing maintenance in the fall helps insure that the door will not be a nuisance in the winter.
Start by lubricating the hinges.
Squirt a few drops of lightweight household oil on the spindles or spray them with a small amount of silicone or Teflon lubricant.
When lubricating the hinges on the sides of the door, avoid putting oil or spray on the rollers in the tracks.
They should remain dry so that they do not accumulate dirt.


In Their Own Words
PRESIDENT BUSH
Speaking at a rally in Burlington, Wis.


Environmental Group Answers Marino Attack
"Why Marino Is Attacking Gaffney"  [ Oct. 11 ]  on the race in the 5th State Senate District between Senator Ralph Marino and Suffolk County Legislator James F. Gaughran, Mr.
Marino characterized the Environmental Planning Lobby as a front for Democrats.
This blatantly false assertion grossly misrepresents E.P.L.  and is clearly intended to distract his constituents from the senator's appalling record on the environment since becoming majority leader.
Since its founding in 1969 the Environmental Planning Lobby has been a nonprofit advocacy organization that has had only one mission, to represent the interests of the state's agencies.
E.P.L., which plays no role in campaigns and endorses no candidates, has a spotless record of nonpartisanship and works equally well with Republicans and Democrats in the state capital.


Barrie Jill Rifkin, Steven Shackman
Dr. and Mrs.
Howard E. Rifkin of Woodmere, L. I., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Barrie Jill Rifkin, to Steven Shackman, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Harvey Shackman of East Meadow, L. I. A March wedding is planned.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Off the Trail/Visits With Americans; Tracing the Cash Flow That Nourishes the Capital
It is morning again at the National Library on Money and Politics where lucre can be found doing its part to maintain the shine in this shining city on a hill.
The library's computers are already whirring into another day as the distant voting public's plat du jour -- another headlined utterance of Ross Perot -- rapidly congeals under the fresh dollops of opinion pollings and minced commentary of the news cycle.
Unseen, the less sensational and far greater constant of politics -- the quiet bipartisan flow of money -- goes forward and Larry Makinson goes tap, tap, tapping after its heady glyphs on his computer screen at the library.


In War's Brutal Din, a 'Week of Tranquillity'
Preparations began here today for a "week of tranquillity" during which all sides in war-torn Bosnia and Herzegovina have pledged to allow the United Nations to prepare the region's children for the harsh Balkan winter.
A 10-truck convoy carrying clothes, food and medicine arrived at this town 10 miles from the capital, Sarajevo.
But renewed fighting was reported between here and Sarajevo this afternoon, and Serbian officials said the road into the besieged city was closed.
Tonight, Reuters reported the heaviest shelling of Sarajevo in a month with at least 20 dead and 100 wounded by tank and artillery fire.


D'Amato and Abrams: Blitzes on the Final Days
Misanthropes who dread an uplifting finish to the mean-spirited Senate race can relax.
Neither Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato nor Robert Abrams plans to waste much time or money on inspirational messages.
With so little time left and with so many New Yorkers saying they are still undecided, the candidates are out not to seduce voters, but to scare them.
Mr.
Abrams says the Republican Senator wants to ban abortion.
Mr.
D'Amato says the Democrat wants to raise taxes.


Man Held as a Fake Meter Reader Preying on the Elderly
Penny S., a 65-year-old Brooklyn woman, struggles with her health and with making ends meet in the house where she has lived for 45 years.
In August she had to scrape together $230 to pay a meter reader who demanded the money to keep her water running.
The meter reader also told her that she needed a new meter, and promised to return with one.
After waiting and waiting, she realized that he was not coming and that she had been duped.


Should Tracking Be Derailed?
FOR 70 YEARS it has been public school organizing principle No. 1: Each grade has high-track students, middle-level students and some version of the Sweathogs on "Welcome Back, Kotter." While some discuss Voltaire in class, others are in metal shop.
Some make the algebra-readiness cut, some do not.
It's the American way.
Now, a growing number of educators -- most of whom, it is safe to say, never took metal shop -- are convinced that it's the wrong way.
Their cause is "detracking," the dismantling of the sorting mechanisms that American schools rely upon.
Pressing arguments of efficacy or equity or both, they are trying to convince Americans that stratification in school hurts some and helps none.


A 'Musician' in Spite of Himself
Rainer Maria Rilke seems -- extraordinarily for so lyrical a poet -- to have been an unmusical man.
He didn't play an instrument or frequent concerts; composers didn't inspire him as Cezanne and Rodin did; he made the acquaintance of Busoni but nothing came of it.
He must be unique among German intellectual figures of his day in having had nothing substantive to say, even in passing, about the phenomenon of Wagner.
It is even odder, at first blush, that music has reciprocated and kept its distance.
The young American composer Richard Danielpour's choice of the "Sonnets to Orpheus" for a song cycle is a conspicuous exception to the reticence composers have shown over setting these immensely beautiful, popular and influential poems to music.
The new work, for soprano, strings, three winds, percussion and piano, will have its first performance on Friday, by Dawn Upshaw and the Chamber Music Society of Lincoln Center.


Foreign Affairs; George, Bill and Millie
Reaching new heights of eloquence in describing Bill Clinton and Al Gore, President Bush declared that "my dog Millie knows more about foreign affairs than these two bozos." Whether Millie's command of Mr.
Bush's specialty surpasses that of the two Democratic contenders remains to be seen.
Their record is yet too slender to render a final bozo balance sheet.
Mr.
Bush's record, however, is ample.
Now, one does not lightly go about calling Presidents bozos.
But by slapping the bozo label onto a man who might be elected President in two days, Mr.
Bush has broken the bozo barrier -- and has invited measurement by that same exacting standard.


Celebrating a Milestone In Glass Artistry
IN the eyes of the organizers of the striking exhibition of glass at the Morris Museum, 30 years ago seems to be ancient history.
The show, titled "Glass From Ancient Craft to Contemporary Art: 1962-1992 and Beyond," illustrates the many approaches that glass artists have actively explored in the last three decades.
It is all there.
All the outstanding artists, all the innovative techniques and even predictions for the future.
The glass glows with rich colors; the surfaces scintillate and reflect.


Peace Dividend?


Elizabeth Budd, Spencer Purinton
Elizabeth Goodrich Budd, a daughter of Edward and Mary Budd of Glastonbury, Conn., was married yesterday to Spencer Lewis Purinton, a son of Richard Jr. and Joanne Purinton of Byfield, Mass.
The Rev.
Herbert C. Skelly performed the Episcopal ceremony at the Church of the Holy Spirit in Chatham, Mass.
Mrs.
Purinton graduated from Tufts University.
She is a vice president in commercial lending at the State Street Bank and Trust Company in Boston.
Her father is the chairman and chief executive of the Travelers Corporation, the insurance company, in Hartford.


You Need An Angle
Rembrandt always wore one.
Scots still do, when they dress up.
The French were famous for it.
So was Field Marshall Montgomery.
What they all have in common is the beret, in all its variety.
This pie-shaped circle of wool is staging a big revival, in both Paris and New York.
What distinguishes each of the wearers is what he or she does with it.
Pulled down over the forehead, hiding all the hair, or pulled to the side for a dashing profile -- the variations are endless, allowing all a chance to flatter their foreheads, noses or chins.


When It Hurts to Laugh
The bowler-hatted Bill Irwin peers around the corner of the desolate set at the Joseph Papp Public Theater and finds himself in a place he cannot identify.
The audience should have less trouble recognizing the location; it is, once again, the inside of Samuel Beckett's brain, with its mix of memory, yearning and hopelessness.
"Texts for Nothing," Beckett's 1958 fiction pieces about regret and mortality, can be as relentless and bleak as a clinical depression.
But Mr.
Irwin (in photographs, with his comments), the actor and post-modernist clown who plays Beckett's nameless bum, and the director Joseph Chaikin turn it into a kind of existential vaudeville.
This wrestling match with dread opens tonight at the Susan Stein Shiva Theater at the Public.


Con Ed's Early Line On Workers
AT A TIME when even college graduates are often hard pressed to find jobs, Con Edison and the New York City public school system have initiated a program to put high school seniors to work.
The Con Ed cooperative education program is a hands-on work-study program that teaches high school seniors to be general utility workers.
Upon graduation, if the students pass Con Ed's entrance exam, they are offered entry-level positions.


ABOUT-FACE
While watching the first of the Presidential debates, my mind kept wandering to the thoughts expressed by Norman.
As I listened to Bill Clinton speak to "the issues," I kept wishing that he had put himself at risk in his early life -- whether in uniform or jailhouse jeans.
Like many others, I chose to serve in the military, and I feel a special sense of pride when our flag goes by.
In the end, commitment to one's country and its ideals are paramount.
CLARK LAMBERT
Woodbury, L.I.


Cara Maria Testa, David R. McGill
Mr. and Mrs.
Vincent P. Testa of Old Brookville, L. I., have announced the engagement of their daughter Cara Maria Testa to David Rogers McGill, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Michael McGill of Sea Cliff, L. I. A December wedding is planned.
Miss Testa, 22 years old, is a family case worker at St.
Christopher-Ottilie, a social services agency in Jamaica, Queens.
She graduated cum laude from Mount Holyoke College.
Her father is the owner of Testa Communications, a magazine publishing and television production company in Port Washington, L. I. Her mother, Maria Testa, is a reading specialist at Glen Head (L. I.) High School.


Keeper Of a Flame
To the Editor:
Charles M. Young dances around the racial issues involved in Michael Bolton's cover versions of soul music  [ "Platinum Pop in the Key of E," Oct. 4 ] .
Critics decry the popularity of Mr.
Bolton's, as well as the Commitments', appropriation of these songs, yet today's rhythm-and-blues singers and urban radio for black audiences ignore soul music.
When Bobby Brown was asked to induct Wilson Pickett into the Rock-and-Roll Hall of Fame last year, he had to ask who Pickett was.


A Man of Many Talents (and $100 Million?)
With the release of his latest album 10 days ago, Prince is beginning to cash in on his new six-album recording contract and worldwide publishing deal with Warner Brothers Records.
While he and his representatives say the contract is worth more than $100 million, pop stars have a rich tradition of exaggerating the value of deals.
Prince's claims were greeted by the music industry with more skepticism than usual.
To hear him tell it, his deal would be more lucrative than those recently signed by Madonna and Michael Jackson, artists whose recordings generally outsell Prince's.


Residential Resales
Closings in the week ended Oct. 17  MANHATTAN  Chelsea 525,000
133 West 17th Street  4-bedroom, 3-bath, 2,300-sq.-ft. co-op in a loft building; elevator, dining area, 11-ft. ceilings, 1,000-sq.-ft. private roof deck; maintenance $1,200, 50% tax-deductible (Brokers: Barbara M. Kaufman-Kingman Associates)  Greenwich Village 315,000
63 Downing Street  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,200-sq.-ft. condo in a 5-year-old building; 24-hr. doorman, Jacuzzi, 2 balconies, 3 exposures; common charge $465, taxes $3.504 (Broker: Bellmarc Realty)  SoHo 205,000
458 Broome Street  1,800-sq.-ft.-studio co-op in a loft building, 1 bath, dressing area, 11-ft.- ceilings, walkup; maintenance $800, 50% tax-deductible (Brokers: Stentiford Realty-J.G. Realty)  TriBeCa 575,000
55 White Street  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 2,300-sq.-ft. condo in a loft building; marble baths, Corinthian columns, fireplace, 2 exposures; common charge $507, taxes $5,460 (Brokers: Eychner Associates-Bascom/ Sears)  Upper West Side 420,000
333 West End Avenue (76th St.)  2-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 1,800-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; manned elevator, maid's room, dining room, 2 exposures; maintenance $1,369, 40% tax-deductible (Broker: Klara Madlin Real Estate)  BRONX  Baychester 145,000
2849 Bruner Avenue  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, one-family attached brick house; dining area, den, playroom, 1-car garage, 18-by-95-ft. lot; taxes $1,350 (Brokers: J.A.V. Realty-Hugh Darby Realty)  Castle Hill 148,500
2222 Gleason Avenue  3-bedroom, 1-bath, one-family detached frame house; dining room, eat-in kitchen, full basement, 2-car garage, 50-by-100-ft. lot; taxes $1,000 (Broker: Marland Real Estate)  BROOKLYN  Crown Heights 160,000
1175 Eastern Parkway  4-bedroom, 1-bath, one-family detached brick house, dining room, eat-in kitchen, 2 medical offices, on the first and ground floors, carport 32 1/2-by-120-ft. lot; taxes $2,650 (Broker: Helmar Brokerage Ltd.)  Park Slope 300,000
14 Montgomery Place  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,700-sq.-ft. condo in a 5-story house; dining room, washer/Dryer, 11-by-20-ft. rear deck, new bath; common charge $320, taxes $1,164 (Broker: F.J. Kazeroid Real Estate)  Midwood 325,000
1561 East 4th Street  3-bedroom, 2-bath, one-family detached brick-and-stucco house; dining room, finished basement, rear deck, private driveway, 26-by-100-ft. lot; taxes $1,300 (Broker: Maryl Real Estate)  QUEENS  Flushing 112,000
76-12 164th Street  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, one-family detached frame house; dining room, full basement, shared driveway, 21-by-84-ft. lot; taxes $1,100 (Broker: Agranoff Real Estate)  Queens Village 96,000
214-10 104th Avenue  2-bedroom, 2-bath, one-family detached ranch; eat-in kitchen, finished basement and attic, 1-car garage, 40-by-100-ft. lot; taxes $1,200 (Broker: Kremer Realty)  STATEN ISLAND  Livingston 230,000
35 Livingston Court  5-bedroom, 2-bath, one-family detached center-hall colonial; dining room, sun porch, pantry, finished basement, tennis court in backyard, 2-car garage, 48-by-99-ft. lot; taxes $1,300 (Broker: Coldwell Banker/DeSimone Realty)  Randall Manor 285,000
42 St.
Austins Place  5-bedroom, 4 1/2-bath, one-family detached center-hall colonial; dining room, den, 2 fireplaces, 2-car garage, 165-by-75-ft. lot; taxes $2,000 (Broker: Foreman/Rand Properties Inc.)


Post-Butoh Dance


In the Region: Connecticut; Recent Sales
Darien, Conn. 405,000
1 Colony Road  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 41-year-old split level; deck, new roof, new fencing, 0.50 acre; taxes $3,311.
Killingworth, Conn. 260,000
11 Chestnut Hill Road  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 5-year-old colonial; fireplace, mud room, country views, 2.8 acres; taxes $4,832.
Orange, Conn. 230,000
382 Timberlane Drive  3-bedroom, 3-bath, 9-year-old contemporary; solarium w/ hot tub, skylights, walk-out basement, 1.2 acres; taxes $2,035.
Bedford, N.Y. 272,000
44 Jefferson Lane  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 34-year-old colonial split-level; sunken family room, music room, attic studio; taxes $4,254.
Chappaqua, N.Y. 595,000
102 Random Farms  5-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, new post-modern; fireplace, eat-in kitchen, maid's room, den, tennis court, pool; taxes not yet assessed.
South Salem, N.Y. 350,000
Tribrook Drive
4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 6-year-old colonial; family room, fireplace, eat-in kitchen, deck; taxes $7,685.
OTHER AREAS Mineola, L.I. 214,500
480 Emory Road  4-bedroom,2-bath, 38-year-old Cape Cod; dining room, fireplace, 1-car garage; taxes $3,800.
Roslyn Heights, L.I. 220,000
91 Burnham Avenue  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 60-year-old colonial; eat-in kitchen, basement; taxes $3,800.
Edison, N.J. 140,000
18 Cambridge Road
3-bedroom, 2-bath, 38-year-old ranch; family room, new kitchen and bath; taxes $2,366.


CURRENCY
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen
123.44
121.65
129.85
per Dollar
German Mark
1.5423
1.5280
1.6745
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar
1.2388
1.2483
1.1200
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound
1.5565
1.6218
1.7675
U.S. Dollar per British Pound
Gold
$339.50
$343.20
$366.00
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


IN SHORT: FICTION
MOSTLY HARMLESS By Douglas Adams. Harmony, $20.


INSIDE
A Fear of Magic
Some players and executives in the N.B.A. are indicating that they object to the return to pro basketball of Magic Johnson, who is infected with H.I.V.
SportsSunday, section 8.
With AIDS, a Simpler Life
In the Hamptons and other resorts, gay men with AIDS are turning summer cottages into year-round residences as they simplify what remains of their lives.
Page 49.
Gunfire Explodes in Luanda
Echoes of Angola's years of civil war were felt in the capital as fierce fighting broke out between Government troops and rebels.
Page 12.
After the Fires, Frustration
Six months after the Los Angeles riots, no one has been able to harness the good will that followed them and address the causes.
Page 20.


Perot Attacks the President; Fans Lend Their Ears


Computer Words: Less Perfect?
MOST educators agree that personal computers and word-processing software have greatly facilitated students' writing process, easing the manipulation of words and language.
But recently some have become convinced that computers are also having an impact on content and quality.
Shakespeare, they assert, might have composed his work differently had he used a sonnet processor instead of a quill pen.
The notion is intriguing.
With electrons and phosphors, the personal computer enables writers to cast and recast sentences more readily, to shuffle and insert new paragraphs with ease.
And with the proper program, spelling and grammar can be checked automatically.
The mechanical benefits are undeniable.
"God looked down at the writers and said, 'I haven't done anything for these people for a long time, hundreds of years, so I'm going to make up for it,' " said Frank Conroy, director of the Writers' Workshop at the University of Iowa.
"The word processor saves so much time and drudgery in editing and rewriting." Less Care, Not More?
These advantages ought to result in more polished prose.
There is concern, however, that writers may actually put less thought and care into an electronic composition.
Marcia Peoples Halio of the University of Delaware in Newark touched off a debate on this in 1990 with her observation, printed in the journal Academic Computing, that freshman English students in classes using Macintosh computers wrote papers that were noticeably inferior to papers composed by freshmen of what she described as presumably equal skills using MS-DOS computers.
Ms.
Halio, assistant director of the University Writing Center, said she and several colleagues had noticed that students in the Macintosh-based English classes in general chose relatively trivial essay topics, committed more punctuation, spelling and grammar errors (despite the checking devices) and wrote shorter, less complex sentences.
At the time of her observations, the command systems for PC and Macintosh computers were very different; the Macintosh was much more "user friendly," with mouse-driven point-and-click menus, fancy type fonts and graphics and easier text-manipulation tools, than the DOS-based systems, which functioned as simple electric typewriters.
Many academics dismissed Ms.
Halio's report as unscientific and attacked her methodology.
But in the intervening three years, no academic study has rebutted -- or supported -- her thesis.
Meanwhile, the focus of the debate has shifted away from the Mac-versus-PC controversy -- in part because the two competing platforms are now using similar command systems and have similar capabilities -- and toward the more important issue of whether computers affect the quality of composition.
"The technologies are powerful and change the way we perceive tasks," Ms.
Halio said in a recent interview.
"And while I'm obviously committed to using computers to teach, I want to pay attention to what's happening to the students and their work."
Certainly, writing is a highly personal and in many cases ritualistic act, so whatever tool the writer uses, there will be many compositional styles.
The question becomes, how is a composition affected by technology?
"For beginning writers or tyros, there is the tendency to be prolix, which the machine for one reason or another tends to encourage," Mr.
Conroy said.
"The computer empowers bad writers to more easily churn out a lot of pages." 'Curst Hard Reading'
The 18th-century playwright Richard Sheridan, using a state-of-the-art quill processor, seems to have anticipated this criticism when he wrote: "You write with ease to show your breeding, but easy writing's curst hard reading."
And the humorist Russell Baker, in a New York Times column in 1985, noted the not-so-subtle effect that word processing had on his own writing process.
"It is so easy, not to mention so much fun -- listen folks," Mr.
Baker wrote.
But the difference with electronic composition may go deeper, said John Slatin, director of the English Department's computer research laboratory at the University of Texas in Austin.
"I'm quite sure that if Shakespeare were living in the late 20th century and writing with a word processor," Mr.
Slatin said, "the nature of what he would write would be quite different than what the writer in the 16th or 17th century produced using a quill pen."
Mr.
Slatin was among more than a dozen academicians, representing institutions as diverse as Yale University and Jackson Community College in Michigan, who called for more research on the topic as a result of Ms.
Halio's initial report.
Technology in Culture
Why would there be a difference?
"Because the technology is embedded in the culture," Mr.
Slatin said, "and because it also allows people to do certain things that other technologies don't."
Fred Kemp, director of composition at Texas Tech University in Lubbock, says he believes that computer networks, not just the computers, are helping to create better writers.
"The way to really get writers writing well is to get them engaged and interested, and that means getting them readers," Mr.
Kemp said.
"Networks produce readers for our writers."
The network itself is a publishing medium, even if the "papers" written on it are electronic, Mr.
Kemp said.
A student's writing can be published on a network that can connect different classes, different schools, different states and even different countries.
Networks also allow easy two-way communication, so that writers can get feedback through electronic mail.
"As you teach students to read critically, they are also learning to write," Mr.
Kemp said.
"It's a completely different kind of dynamic."


For Rice, It's Catch as Catch Can
Jerry Rice turned 30 last month, and he is in his eighth pro season.
Rice wants to terrorize defensive backs and offer more thrills for fans for at least nine more seasons.
That would give him 17 years in the National Football League.
Rice reflects for a moment and says, well, maybe he could last for 20.


Princeton Pounds Columbia
Keith Elias ran for 115 yards and three touchdowns on 21 carries to lead Princeton to a 34-7 victory over Columbia yesterday in Wien Stadium at Baker Field in Manhattan.
Elias's yardage enabled him to become the No. 4 career rusher in Princeton history with 1,999 yards, and moved him past the Heisman Trophy winner Dick Kazmaier, whose last season was 1951.


'A Day Away From Tallulah . . .'
To the Editor:
The Tallulah anecdote that Wilfrid Sheed chose, or tried to choose, to introduce his review is a familiar one, told and retold by Bankhead interviewers and biographers.


Two Early Gems From the Graham Trove
In the 1980's, Martha Graham agreed reluctantly to revive some of her early works that had not been performed for half a century.
"Panorama" (1935) and "Salem Shore" (1943) are the latest riches to be unearthed from the trove of this "lost" Graham repertory; their vibrant restagings contributed to the excitement of the Martha Graham Dance Company's splendidly danced season at the City Center last month.
Graham herself was not interested in looking back, and it was thanks to Ronald Protas, the company's current artistic director, that she was persuaded to have past and present company members reconstruct, under her supervision, such recent revelations as "Heretic" (1929), "Celebration" (1934), "Steps in the Street" (1936) and "Deep Song" (1937).
Graham, for her part, was more focused on whatever would be her next work.
At her death in April 1991, at 96, she was still choreographing "The Eyes of the Goddess," which was presented in unfinished form last year by her troupe.


County Workers Face Random Drug Testing
COUNTY EXECUTIVE Andrew P. O'Rourke announced a new drug-free workplace policy for the 9,000 employees of the county government last Thursday.
The policy, which is said to be "broader and more effective" than existing efforts, will require, for the first time, random drug testing for those involved in safety-sensitive positions, like law enforcement, probations and corrections.
A 41-page memorandum describing the program emphasizes "treatment in lieu of discipline." The plan takes effect today, with the drug testing going into effect on Jan. 1.
Employees with drug or alcohol problems have two months to seek help through the county's Employee Assistance Program.
Employees with drug and alcohol-abuse problems who do not cooperate at this time could face disciplinary action later once testing procedures are in operation.


Augmon Has Surgery
STACEY AUGMON of the Atlanta Hawks underwent knee surgery on Friday and is expected to be out as long as two weeks, keeping him out of the season opener against the Knicks Friday night.
During the procedure in Columbus, Ga., two small bone chips were removed from his left knee. (AP)


Bridgeport in Jumbo-Size Rage
Between plant closings and fiscal troubles, residents of this city are used to bad news.
But when someone stole the bronze plaques at the base of the P. T. Barnum statue in Seaside Park, something snapped.
So enraged was Mayor Joseph Ganim that he considered closing all the scrap dealers in the city until the plaques were returned.


Facing AIDS, Some Patients Discover Small Towns
As John Rutherford was growing up gay in a Northern New Jersey suburb, New York gleamed across the Hudson as a city of anonymity, a cosmopolitan Oz where, in his early, tentative days, he could both lose and discover himself.
But by the time Mr.
Rutherford learned three years ago that he had the virus that causes AIDS, New York's anonymity had become his enemy, its harsh edges no longer exciting but grating.
Though he was only 32 years old, his friends had mostly died or moved away.
And the Hamptons, until then summer's playground, became home.


Man, Angered by Egging, Shoots Girl, 12
A young man, angry at a group of children throwing eggs on a busy street last night in Queens, opened fire on the group, striking a 12-year-old girl, the police said.
The girl, who was not identified because of her age, was hit in the leg by one of several shots as she stood with a group of friends who were throwing eggs on Northern Boulevard in Jackson Heights about 8:40 P.M., a police spokesman, Sgt.
Ed Burns, said.


Unpleasant Vibes in the Vicinity of Nirvana
Kurt Cobain, the lead singer of Nirvana, the Seattle rock band, has been accused of leaving a "threatening message" at the home of two journalists working on an unauthorized biography of the band, to be published next year by Hyperion.
Danny Goldberg, a manager of Nirvana, said, "Kurt absolutely denies the notion that he or any member of the band made any such phone calls."


Washington Tears Apart Stanford
They are as relentless as the rain.
The Washington Huskies, allegedly not quite as complete as the group that shared a national championship a year ago, occasionally allow an opponent a glimpse of clear sky.


Donald Meyer, 62, A Longtime Leader Of Doctors' Union
Donald C. Meyer, a longtime leader in New York City's physicians' union, died on Thursday while commuting to his home in Hartsdale, N.Y.
He was 62 years old.
He died of a heart attack, his family said.


Survivors of Fallen Bosnian Town Add to Refugees
By horsecart and on huge plow horses, on flatbeds towed by tractors and packed by the score into rickety trucks, thousands of exhausted soldiers and refugees arrived in this quiet textile town today after the worst military defeat suffered by the Sarajevo Government in the Bosnian war.
An exodus that gathered pace through the night reached full force after dawn, with mile after mile of muddy, weeping people pouring into Travnik along the road from Jajce, the strategic town 30 miles northwest of here that fell to Serbian nationalist forces on Thursday.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Looking Ahead; Clinton Could Claim a Mandate, but It Might Be Hard to Define


Shannon Kaeli Gael de Boissard
Shannon Lloyd Kaeli, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William T. Kaeli of Shrewsbury, N.J., was married in New York last night to Gael de Boissard, the son of Vicomte and Vicomtesse Jerome de Boissard of Paris.
Msgr.
George F. Bardes performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Church of St.
Thomas More.
Mrs. de Boissard, 24 years old, is an associate in the Paris office of J. P. Morgan &amp; Company.
She graduated from Duke University.
Her father is a senior vice president of Noyes Partners, a New York securities company.


Federal Law Changes California Water Policy


An Albee Classic As Potent as Ever
EDWARD ALBEE'S "Who's Afraid of Virginia Woolf?" is receiving a sterling production by the semiprofessional Great Neck Theater Guild at the Parkville School in Great Neck.
Mr.
Albee wastes no compassion on his characters and their problems.
He certainly displays no sympathy for their dreams and fantasies.
He goes after the pretensions of American intellectuals, families, marriages and traditions.


Easier Ups and Downs: Caring for Garage Doors
Garage doors need simple maintenance once or twice a year to keep operating smoothly.
Performing maintenance in the fall helps insure that the door will not be a nuisance in the winter.
Start by lubricating the hinges.
Squirt a few drops of lightweight household oil on the spindles or spray them with a small amount of silicone or Teflon lubricant.
When lubricating the hinges on the sides of the door, avoid putting oil or spray on the rollers in the tracks.
They should remain dry so that they do not accumulate dirt.


Mutual Funds; Bond Funds That Spread the Risk
Investing in bond funds, which on the surface may seem a conservative approach, can prove tricky and laden with risk.
Just witness the collapse of the junk bond market in 1990 and the recent upheaval in European currency markets.
But different types of bonds pose greater risks at different times, and that's the reasoning behind a new breed of fund.
A maxim of the business is that the overall risk of a portfolio is less than the sum of its parts: risks one place offset strength elsewhere.


Beers That Love Food
WEANED ON bland, watery lagers, Americans are often stunned to taste a craft-brewed beer.
Real beer -- with the flowery aroma of hops, the nuttiness of roasted grain and yeasts that produce a somewhat bready, fruity complexity.
This is beer too rich to swill by the six-pack and too noble to spend life as a chaser for nachos and ballpark franks.
The truth is, American craft beers, or microbrews, have enough depth and nuance and range of flavor to complement everything from the most delicate quenelles to an esophagus-scorching vindaloo.
These are beers that will stand up to dishes that would maul a chardonnay or a cabernet sauvignon.


The Executive Computer; H-P Adds Resolution to the Cheaper Laser
In the world of laser printers, 300 dots per inch is good, 600 dots is better.
But until the Hewlett-Packard Company introduced its Laserjet 4 printer last Monday, anyone who wanted the sharper print quality of a 600-d.p.i. printer had to pay extra for it.
The Laserjet 4, the latest generation of the most popular desktop laser printer, has a suggested list price of $2,199, about $150 cheaper than that of the Laserjet 3, the 300-d.p.i. printer it replaces.
And it is likely to sell for about $1,500 at discount retailers. (The Laserjet 3 is to be discontinued, and therefore is likely to be available at very steep discounts in coming months as dealers and stores unload their inventory.)


PEACE DEADLINES UNMET IN SALVADOR
On the date that El Salvador was to conclude the cease-fire to its civil war, the core of the country's guerrilla army remained intact today and the Government continued to oppose any reduction in its own forces.
In the countryside, both sides lurched forward in effecting the peace agreements signed in January.
As the third of five contingents of rebel soldiers turned in its weapons today and on Friday, the Government began handing out farmland to former combatants.


Public &amp; Private; Out of the Kitchen
In the beginning was the word on the street, and the word was that people were hungry.
That was 10 years ago.
Holy Apostles Soup Kitchen in New York City served 35 lunches the first day.
By the end of the week, it was 60.
And when it recently commemorated -- not celebrated, never celebrated -- its 10th anniversary, it was preparing to serve its two millionth meal.
Most days a thousand hungry men, women and children rotate through 69 seats in a small, bright room in the church annex.
About eight minutes chow time per person.
"Eat It and Beat It" is the diners' motto.


Some Chores to Do Before Winter Sets In
With those cherished extra hours of light now gone, the timetable for getting things done is reduced.
Signals are everywhere.
The plant kingdom is winding down.
Deciduous trees have completed their cycle.
The annual foliage display was fantastic this year.
But the leaves are falling and the old get-out-the-rakes-and-blowers ritual has begun.
Even the conifers have completed their cycle and old needles are dropping off at rapid rates.
Plants are on their own, at last, as nature intended.


OCT. 25-31: Somalia; U.N. Representative Quits, Blaming U.N. Foot-Dragging
After five months on the job in Somalia, the special representative to the United Nations, Mohammed Sahnoun, quit, effectively fired for being too outspoken about what he considered the organization's inadequacies.


Emergency Line
To the Editor: I recently telephoned the U.S.Department of State's listed Washington number for its Citizens' Emergency Center for Emergencies Involving American Citizens Abroad (202) 647-5225.
As a concerned father, I was trying to help my daughter who lost her passport en route to the airport in a foreign country.
Not a major emergency, I admit; but the taped response did not know that when it advised callers that "for emergencies regarding United States citizens overseas, call between 8 and 5, Monday through Friday."


TODAY'S SECTIONS
Special Today: Education Life/Section 4A
Special Today: Entertaining/Magazine Part 2


Lowenstein Killer Moves Toward Freedom
Last March, as the 12th anniversary of his most traumatic day ever neared, Thomas Lowenstein heard some profoundly unsettling news.
A New York judge had just granted unescorted daily furloughs to Dennis Sweeney, the man who murdered his father, Congressman Allard K. Lowenstein.
For Thomas Lowenstein, 23 years old, one of three children Allard Lowenstein left behind, the news merely intensified the melancholy that March 14 always brings.
"I was already really sad anyway, and when I learned that Sweeney was out 10 hours a day, I just hung up the phone, sat down, lit a cigarette, and shook," he said.


Louise Whitton, Clifton G. York
Mr. and Mrs.
John R. Whitton Jr. of Chappaqua, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter Louise Boice Whitton to Clifton Gaston York, a son of Janet B. York of New York and the late Dr.
Albert T. York Jr.
A June wedding is planned.
Ms.
Whitton is a television and stage actress in New York.
She graduated cum laude from Middlebury College.
Her father, who is retired, was a vice president of Merill Lynch &amp; Company in New York.


Nancy Abrahams, Gregory Shefrin
Nancy Ellen Abrahams, the daughter of Martin and Catha Abrahams of Stamford, Conn., was married last evening to Gregory Paul Shefrin, a son of David Shefrin of Farmington, Conn., and Betsy Kaufman of West Hartford, Conn.
Rabbi Paul Kurland performed the ceremony at Tappan Hill in Tarrytown, N.Y.
Mrs.
Shefrin, 29 years old, graduated cum laude from Tufts University.
She is a marketing communications specialist at the Teachers Insurance and Annuity Association-College Retirement Equities Fund, in New York.
Her father is a partner in the national office of Coopers &amp; Lybrand, the accounting firm, in New York.
Her mother is the director of the Rape and Sexual Abuse Crisis Center of Lower Fairfield County in Stamford.


This Director's Characters Have an Attitude
In "Simple Men," Hal hartley's hilariously droll third feature, deadpan dialogue becomes a philosophy of life.
The 32-year-old writer-director has been heading there all along, with "The Unbelievable Truth" (1990) and "Trust" (1991), both critical hits on their way to gaining cultish followings.
But his new film offers the purest, funniest view yet of the Hartley world, a place where dialogue is everything though disaster is imminent, where characters speak with utter conviction but drop-dead cool.
There isn't much space for naturalism as the actors dance on some imaginary line between the banal and the deep.
"Tell me about yourself," a young woman named Kate says to the stranger in "Simple Men" who has wandered into her lonely Long Island cafe.
The audience knows his potentially melodramatic story.
Bill (Robert Burke) is on the lam from yesterday's robbery.
He and his college-age brother, Dennis (William Sage), are also searching for their father, a onetime baseball star who was accused of tossing a bomb at the Pentagon in his radical youth and has been on the lam himself for 24 years.


At Hartford Stage, Moliere's 'Tartuffe'
TO Mark Lamos's justly celebrated productions of Moliere at Hartford Stage, add a lilting "Tartuffe." It's not easy to avoid the pronouncement that there's something in it for everyone, but it's hard to believe that there isn't.
With a directorial style made up of a farcical spin, a clownish manner and a musical air, Mr.
Lamos has turned the serious comedy about hypocrisy that offended royalty, religious heads and political leaders in 1667 into a romp indulging in low comedy with no loss of elegance.
As Moliere's complicated satirical thrusts take a plot turn to ruin and disaster, a message from Louis XIV brings on a surge of benevolence, and Mr.
Lamos's ebullient production winds up with a waltz by Johann Strauss.


Topics of The Times; Very Important People
What qualities did the Cuban missile crisis 30 years ago bring out in people?
Some veterans of the New Frontier, reminiscing about those chilling 13 days, recalled fatigue, fear of deadly miscalculation -- and a story of human priorities.


Ideology Wanes for Europe, Leaving Politicians Adrift
EUROPE, disoriented by lingering recession and the end of its division into rival blocs, is adrift in an ideological void that is threatening the future of traditional parties in several countries and fueling the political emergence of extremist groups.
Indeed, the dearth of ideas is such that the American Presidential race looks like an exciting clash of ideologues compared with the mishmash that passes for political debate in Europe.
Where the French used to mock Americans gently for having scant sense of left and right, now it is Europe's political center that seems drably all-encompassing.


Autumn Years, Plum Roles
To the Editor:
For two weeks running, Arts and Leisure offered front-page articles  [ "Playing Against Type and Time," Oct. 11; "The Secret Wendy Wasserstein," Oct. 18 ]  that indulge in strong doses of Hollywood-bashing with regard to the paucity of strong roles for women of a certain age.


Going Nowhere? Then Slow Down
Boomer Esiason symbolized the no-huddle offense that the Bengals sprang on startled opponents during the 1988 season.
That style helped send Cincinnati to the Super Bowl, with Esiason expertly using play-fakes and throwing behind a stalwart offensive line.
But the floundering Bengals -- and Boomer -- have fallen on hard times.
And this week, David Shula, the rookie coach, has dismissed the no-huddle after five straight losses.
The 2-5 Bengals are hosts to the 4-3 Browns today.


A Key for a Macy Comeback
When R. H. Macy &amp; Company presents its five-year business plan to its creditors on Thursday, much of it will be devoted to an unusual new system of allocating merchandise.
Bland as that might sound, the company thinks it will be the cornerstone of its effort to leave bankruptcy behind and emerge as a profitable retailer.
The system, begun successfully in Macy's men's division a year ago and since rolled out in the rest of the company, introduces a new traffic cop, known as a planner, between the merchandise buyer and the store itself.
Tracking sales data compiled each time a clerk rings up a sale in a Macy's store, the planner spots selling patterns store by store and advises the buyer on what to buy and what not to buy for each of the 112 stores.
The planner also advises each store on what and how much to stock.


A Winning Hand In a Winning Cause
THOSE who like to study a deal before reading about it should look at the diagram and decide whether or not six hearts can be made.
It is none too easy, even looking at all 52 cards.
The occasion was a match played in April between two of the best women's teams in the world: Britain and Austria.
Both North-South pairs reached an optimistic six hearts after West contributed a weak jump overcall in spades.


Clinton Holds His Lead
Three new polls show Gov.
Bill Clinton continuing to lead George Bush, though the surveys differ on the size of the margin.
Ross Perot remains in third place.
When the three polls are averaged, Mr.
Clinton has 42 percent, to 37 percent for Mr.
Bush and 16 percent for Mr.
Perot.


Battling British Tradition
TWO young student guides raced through a tour of their school, clearly at home but still a bit in awe at the riches within: computers everywhere, inside classrooms and out.
Breakfast for everybody, offered in a sleek, modern space with wide tables, where students serve themselves.
A library where books are checked out like groceries, with a bar code.
This is the Kingshurst City Technology College, an alternative inner-city high school in Solihull, England, near the industrial city of Birmingham, that is challenging traditional notions of what school should be.


Elizabeth M. Carringto; Volunteer for Charities, 77
Elizabeth Meusebach Carrington, who did volunteer work for a variety of charitable organizations, died yesterday at her Upper East Side home.
She was 77 years old.
She died of cancer of the esophagus, said a daughter, Judith C. Green of Manhattan.


Race Series Struggles Ahead
The American Championship Racing Series announced today that it would operate next year with a nine-race schedule, but with reduced bonuses, and officials of the program conceded they had struggled to keep it from falling apart.
They also reported that the Santa Anita, the Oaklawn and the Rockingham tracks dropped out of the series.
But Gulfstream Park, Hollywood Park and Belmont Park will carry two races each, and Pimlico, Monmouth and Del Mar once each.
The new races in the series will be the Gulfstream Handicap on March 14 and the Californian at Hollywood on April 24.


I Got My Post Through . . .
Psssst!
Want something really hot off the press? Mr. Newspaperman has a deal for you.
The independent home newspaper deliveryman (a.k.a. Ira Friedman) says that if his refined Upper East Side cusomers are too embarrassed to buy The New York Post from a newsstand, he will deliver the tabloid wrapped between the folds of The New York Times so the neighbors won't see.


It May Be Standing Room Only, but the Price Is Right


The Candidates on the Issues
Christopher J. Dodd Democrat ECONOMY AND TAXES: Favors a targeted capital-gains tgax cut aimed specifically at investments that would help create new jobs.
Would seek to restore the provision making contributions to individual retirement accounts tax-deductible.
Supported the plan to cut payroll taxes last year and put the Social Security system on a "pay as you go" basis.
HEALTH AND EDUCATION: Supports the Bentsen bill, which would make health insurance more affordable for small employers but would not impose major Government mandates.
Favors a voucher system that would allow parents to choose among public schools.
Supports voluntary prayer in the schools, but opposes a constitutional amendment guaranteeing it.
BORTION AND CIVIL RIGHTS: Supports abortion rights andopposes restrictions like parental notification for teenagers.
Supports Medicaid funds for abortions for poor women.
Opposes the military's policy of excluding homosexuals from active duty positions.
LAW AND ELECTIONS: Supports the death penalty for more than 50 Federal crimes.
Favors the Brady bill, requiring a waiting period for gun purchases.
Favors voluntary spending limits on Congressional campaigns, but opposes term limits.
MILITARY AND FOREIGN AFFAIRS: Believes troop strength in Europe could be reduced to 100,000, fewer that the 150,000 that President Bush has proposed.
Opposes unilateral military intervention in Bosnia and Herzegovina, but believes the United States could play a role.
Brook Johnson Republican ECONOMY AND TAXES: Favors a constitutional amendment requiring a balanced budget and would seek a cut inthe capital-gains tax on returns from medium-and-long-term investments.
Supports a budget cap tied to the rate of inflation, to reduce the Federal budget deficit over six years.
HEALTH AND EDUCATION: Favors making health insurance fully deductible for self-employed people, and a $3,750 tax credit on medical expenses for the uninsured.
Favors President Bush's plan to give parents vouchers to choose among public and private schools.
ABORTION AND CIVIL RIGHTS: Supports abortion rights, andMedicaid funds for abortions, but favors parental notification for teen-agers, except in cases where the minors are from abusive homes.
Opposes exclusion of homosexuals from military duty.
LAW AND ELECTION: Supports the Brady bill.
Supports the death penalty.
Would support mandatory minimum sentencing for crimes involving illegal firearms.
Favors term limits for Senate and Congress and spending limitations for re-election campaigns.
MILITARY AND FOREIGN AFFAIRS Supports the President's plan to reduce European troop strength to 150,000.
Opposes military intervention in central Europe, but supports a humanitarian relief plan.
Favors financial support to help Russia and other former Soviet republics convert tgo free market economies.


Two Plan to Sue
British weight lifters ANDREW SAXTON and ANDREW DAVIES, now cleared to resume competition, said yesterday they planned to sue because they were barred from the Olympics in Barcelona, Spain.
Prior to the Gams, the two tested positive in Britain for the stimulant Clenbuterol.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Radio Advertising; Ads, Late and Nasty, Rule the Waves
As bleary-eyed Americans hit their alarms yesterday morning, other alarms went off: Gov.
Bill Clinton will steal your job.
President Bush is a liar.
The Democrats will tamper with Social Security.
The Republicans are fanatics.
Even the most facile flip jockeys could not escape the fear and oratory dished out across the radio dial this weekend.
By waiting until the last possible moments to broadcast their nastiest ads, the campaigns could distort the truth while running little risk of getting caught until after Election Day.


November in Paris
JIM COURIER, STEFAN EDBERG and ANDRE AGASSI head the field for the $2.1 million Paris Open, an indoor tournament that begins today.
It is the first time all the Grand Slam winners will be together in an indoor tournament this year.
Courier won the Australian and French Opens, Edberg won the United States Open and Agassi captured Wimbledon.  (AP)


Israel and Jordan Agree They Want Formal Treaty
Israel and Jordan have agreed in writing for the first time that their goal is a formal peace treaty within the framework of a comprehensive Israeli-Arab settlement.
Israeli Cabinet ministers described the agreement today as a breakthrough.
Some officials, providing details of a draft accord reached last week by the two countries' negotiators, said they hoped that it would serve as a model for discussions with others at the Middle East peace talks, especially Syria and the Palestinians.


Voting on Election Day
Tomorrow is Election Day.
Besides the Presidential candidates, voters in New York, New Jersey and Connecticut will elect members of their Congressional delegations.
Voters in New York and Connecticut will also select members of their State Legislatures, and there are ballot questions in all three states.
There are also municipal elections in many communities.
Polls are open from 6 A.M. to 9 P.M. in New York City, Nassau, Suffolk, Westchester, Rockland, Orange, Ulster and Erie Counties, and from noon to 9 P.M. elsewhere in New York State.


Repairs to IRT Force Razing Of New Track
A $9.3 million stretch of new track that was laid along the IRT Flushing line in Queens three years ago will be ripped up and replaced when the New York City Transit Authority begins rebuilding the line's crumbling concrete base this spring, the Transit Authority said yesterday.
Replacement of the track, which is relatively young by subway standards, was criticized by Queens officials and advocates for subway riders, who questioned why the Transit Authority had not repaired the base, or viaduct, when it replaced the tracks in the late 1980's.


Food Piling Up In Somali Port As Many Starve
This small famine-stricken town is a scant half hour by air from thousands of tons of food supplies sent to aid Somalia's starving.
Yet the death rate here is growing, making Bardera a case study of why, although food is so close at hand, people still die in great numbers.
"When we came here in September, 180 people a day were dying," said Bob Allen, the head of the Care relief team in Bardera, noting that the rise in deaths coincided with a rise in new battles between warring factions.
"By Oct. 13, when the fighting started, it was down to 45 to 50. Currently, it's 250 to 300 a day, because for 14 days they received no food. Those in a bad condition on Oct. 13 have died. Food aid was maintaining an equilibrium before. Now we are back to square one." Fighting Blocks Aid
The reasons are complex.
Relief food has started to flow to Somalia to aid victims of the famine, which the Red Cross says is threatening one-third of the nation's people, but the factional fighting that was a primary cause of the disaster has continued.
Bardera illustrates with painful clarity how the persistent fighting keeps the workers and United Nations troops in the aid effort from feeding the hungry.


Jill Friedman, Daniel Zdanoff
Jill Ann Friedman, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Samuel J. Friedman of Irvington, N.Y., was married yesterday to Daniel Brandon Zdanoff, a son of Ruth Zdanoff of Hartsdale, N.Y., and the late Robert J. Zdanoff.
Rabbi Edward Schecter officiated at Tappan Hill in Tarrytown, N.Y.
Ms.
Friedman, who is 30 years old and is keeping her name, is the assistant to the executive director of the National Hemophilia Foundation in New York.
She graduated from Connecticut College and received a master's degree in Soviet and East European studies from the University of Michigan at Ann Arbor.
Her father is a senior partner in the law firm of Hall, Dickler, Lawler, Kent &amp; Friedman in New York.
Her mother, Doris T. Friedman, is the acting village justice of Tarrytown and a lawyer in White Plains.


Caroline Arlen, David L. Kim
Caroline Covington Arlen, a daughter of Ann W. Arlen and Michael Arlen, both of New York, was married yesterday to David Lee Kim, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard E. Kim of Shutesbury, Mass.
The Rev.
Kevin Ogle, a Disciples of Christ minister, performed the ceremony at Oxon Hill Manor in Oxon Hill, Md.
Mrs.
Kim is the editorial makeup assistant at U.S.
News &amp; World Report in Washington.
She graduated from the University of Vermont.
Her father is an author in New York.
Her mother is a photographer there.
The bride's stepmother, Alice A. Arlen of New York, is a screenwriter there.


In Their Own Words
PRESIDENT BUSH
In an interview yesterday on the CNN program "Newsmaker Sunday."
BILL CLINTON
In comments yesterday at the Wilkes Barre-Scranton International Airport.
"Don't forget there have been a lot of charges and countercharges and ups and downs, but when you strip it all away this election is a race between hope and fear, between the courage to change and the comfort of the status quo. Between those who say things are fine and those of us who believe that we can do better, that America deserves better and that starting on Tuesday with your help, it will be a new day for this country."


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Republicans; BUSH AND CLINTON GO NONSTOP IN BATTLING FOR CRUCIAL STATES
Raspy-voiced but outwardly ebullient, President Bush ended the weekend as he began it, banging away at Bill Clinton during a last-shot sweep of states he must win if he is to be re-elected.
In blustery Michigan, before cameras aboard Air Force One and on the airport tarmac in Connecticut, the President leveled new accusations about Mr.
Clinton's position on taxes and his handling of questions about his efforts to avoid military service.


Ondieki's Runaway Effort Reaps a Big Reward
Forget the $20,000 first prize, the shiny new Mercedes-Benz and the $30,000 bonus for breaking the course record.
To Australian-born Lisa Ondieki, the real reward for her runaway victory yesterday in the New York City Marathon is something far more valuable.
"It means," she said through a clenched throat, "that I'll never again have to pick up a magazine and read 'Oh, she's good, but greatness has always eluded her.' "


Chicago Housing Project Basks in a Tense Peace
A group of children laughed and played in the afternoon sunshine as Sharon Thompson and her neighbors indulged a rare luxury: relaxing in front of their homes without fear of being hit by sniper fire.
"This is beautiful," Ms.
Thompson said the other day, as fallen leaves danced across the lawn and the sun glistened in the shards of a jelly jar.
"A few weeks ago you'd probably get shot at sitting in this open space. This feels like a vacation."


Perot Turns Harsher In Attacks on Rivals
In his most negative attacks since he re-entered the Presidential campaign, Ross Perot lambasted both President Bush and Gov.
Bill Clinton.
Speaking to crowd of supporters in Long Beach, Calif., he seemed to question the Democratic candidate's morals because of past use of marijuana.
Article, page A14.


Pop and Jazz in Review
American Music Club
Marquee Chelsea
In the self-conscious sphere of collegiate rock, the acknowledged king of self-torture is Mark Eitzel, the singer and songwriter who leads American Music Club, a band from San Francisco.
On Wednesday night, in a concert that was part of the C.M.J.
Music Marathon, Mr.
Eitzel apologized for his performance, saying he'd had a headache and had been "trying not to drink all day." But the apology was unnecessary; Mr.
Eitzel's melodic groan of a voice and his painfully articulate lyrics were in fine shape.


European Suppliers of Iraq Were Known to Pentagon
Four months before President Bush signed a secret order encouraging closer relations with Iraq, the Defense Intelligence Agency provided rich details of the network of European companies President Saddam Hussein used to buy technology that could upset the balance of military power in the Mideast.
A classified 1989 document illustrates how much information about Mr.
Hussein's military ambitions and methods was available as the Administration was embarking on its policy of courting Iraq.
It shows that United States intelligence knew that British tool-maker Matrix Churchill Corp., which had a branch in Solon, Ohio, played a major role in Iraq's weapons-buying program, yet did nothing to stop its operations.


Stalemate in Dallas
The Dallas Mavericks' No. 1 draft pick, JIM JACKSON, wants a six-year contract for $21 million.
The Mavericks' owner, DONALD CARTER, says he has drawn the line at four years.
And so it stands.


On the Road, 'Guys and Dolls' Is in a Slump
So far, luck has not been a lady for "Guys and Dolls" on the road.
The hit musical, which has broken every box-office record at the Martin Beck Theater in Manhattan, has been underwhelming on its seven-week-old tour across the country.
The road company, which began performances on Sept. 15 and has so far gone to six cities, has lost money in three of them, said Michael David of Dodger Productions, one of the show's producers.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: House Races; G.O.P., Hopeful of Big Gains, Sees Its Chances Fade
A historic partisan shift toward the Republicans might have come from this year's House elections.
But no serious challenge to 38 years of Democratic control has developed, and no state offers better examples of why not than Georgia does.
Not only are Republicans failing to gain as much as they hoped from redistricting, the war in the Persian Gulf and the general anti-incumbency mood.
But this state also displays the unforeseen Democratic advantages that affect House contests nationally.


Pocket Cultural Guide Lists Aids for Disabled
A 160-page pocket guide to the cultural institutions of New York City for people with physical disabilities has been published.
The booklet, "Access for All," was published by WCBS Newsradio 88 and Hospital Audiences Inc., with the help of Lincoln Center.
It reflects the many architectural and structural changes made since passage of the Americans With Disabilities Act in 1990.


New York Courts Deserve Better Than This Shabby Treatment; You Think That's Bad?
To the Editor:
Re Harold Baer's Oct. 1 article about quitting the New York bench:


Abigail Adams Eliot, 100, Dies; Expert in Nursery School Training
Abigail Adams Eliot, a social worker who became a nationally known authority on early childhood education, died Thursday at the New England Deaconess Home, a nursing home in Concord, Mass.
She had celebrated her 100th birthday on Oct. 9.
She died of a heart attack, said Jay Chrepta, a spokesman for Tufts University.


Dance in Review
'Duet'
The Paul Taylor Dance Company taught a wonderful lesson on Thursday night: beware of classifications, especially when they involve such a mercurial choreographer as Mr.
Taylor.
Back in the mid-60's he was often called a modern-dance classicist.
Many of his works at the time emphasized qualities traditionally associated with classical art, like harmony, lucidity and dignity.


Bishops Protest Vatican Advisory Condoning Anti-Homosexual Bias
Two Roman Catholic bishops have joined more than 1,500 Catholics in publicly protesting a Vatican document that said discrimination against homosexuals could be justified in areas like adoption, military service and the hiring of teachers or coaches.
Bishop Walter F. Sullivan of Richmond and Auxiliary Bishop Thomas J. Gumbleton of Detroit were among the signers of a statement challenging the document, which was circulated to American bishops last June.


Review/Harpsichord; Bach, Couperin and Rameau
A respected and influential harpsichordist, Kenneth Gilbert has been especially noted for his recordings of Bach, Couperin and Rameau.
Those composers formed the core of Mr.
Gilbert's New York recital debut last Monday, at Merkin Concert Hall on the opening night of an International Harpsichord Festival presented by the Elaine Kaufman Cultural Center and the Four Nations ensemble.
The program did not, however, meet expectations; while the performer's musical intelligence was never in doubt, the playing seemed strangely diffuse and ill-focused.
Jean Henri d'Anglebert's Pieces in D were a case in point; Mr.
Gilbert brought out the rich texture of this French Baroque tone poem, but often obscured its unifying rhythmic pulse.
The result was a scattered, almost messy sound, difficult to assimilate and organize.
Bach's Partita No. 3 in D (BWV 828) had more definition, but lacked forward-moving energy.
At times Mr.
Gilbert appeared to playing more for his own edification than that of the audience.


More Surveys by J. D. Power. More Power to the Surveys?
THE marketing consultant J. D. Power, best known for automobile surveys, has a name with at least two things going for it.
For one, it has a car-guy ring to it, just about perfect for, say, a Southern stock car driver.
And with J. D. Power and his surveys mentioned in 5,000 newspaper and magazine articles so far this year, he has a good deal of name recognition and credibility.
But can J. D. Power, car guy, become J. D. Power, airline guy?


Candidates Pick Up Papers' Endorsements
Gov.
Bill Clinton was endorsed by the editorial pages of at least nine newspapers yesterday, while President Bush picked up eight endorsements, and Ross Perot got one.
The paper that favored Mr.
Perot was in his wife's hometown.
The Tribune-Review newspaper of Greensburg, Pa., the town where Margot Perot was born, abandoned its tradition of backing Republicans in favor of the independent.


Essay; To Remember After E-Day
Are you ready for the first pre-post-mortem of the '92 election?
Here are some of the late hits and last-minute maneuvers that we can do without next time around.
1.
Polling switches.
The Gallup organization crossed the line from reporting to manipulating when it suddenly changed its methodology in the campaign's final week.
Overnight, "likely voters" rather than "registered voters" became the basis for the closely watched percentages, instantly changing a six-point differential to a two-point gap.


Treasury to Auction Bills
Treasury financings this week are confined to the regular auction of three- and six-month bills normally held each Monday.
By late in the day Friday, the rate on the three-month bill outstanding was 2.95 percent and on a six-month bill, 3.18 percent.


Now for the Election. No, Not That Election.
It was the day after, and A.P.
Indy basked as the leading candidate for Horse of the Year, the juvenile Gilded Time became the early favorite for the Kentucky Derby, two charter flights stood by to return 40 horses to Europe after a week without a victory in America and 56-year-old Lester Piggott sat in his hospital room and watched television replays of racing's rich, but rough, Breeders' Cup championships.
The seven races at Gulfstream Park on Saturday produced three favorites who won and four who did not, and probably produced the Horse of the Year.
But the trainers of Pleasant Tap and the mare Paseana were still not conceding that honor to A.P.
Indy, the star of Saturday's show-stopper, the $3 million Classic.


Reading the Vital Signs at the New Harper's Bazaar
Roma Peletz is a San Franciscan who reads Mirabella and Lear's.
But since September, she has also been buying Harper's Bazaar because she likes the magazine since Liz Tilberis introduced her highly touted revamped version that month.
Ms.
Peletz is not alone.
Retailers and advertising executives generally agree that the new editor in chief has shaken up the troubled fashion magazine, and they point to a number of encouraging signs.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Independent; Perot Assails Rivals as Unfit to Run a Small Business
In his most stridently negative attacks on his Presidential rivals since he re-entered the campaign, Ross Perot lambasted President Bush and Bill Clinton, suggesting that he would not hire either man to run a small business.
He also seemed to question the Democratic nominee's morals because of past use of marijuana.
Speaking before a crowd of supporters at a rally in the Long Beach Arena, Mr.
Perot seemed to go out of his way to criticize and ridicule Mr.
Clinton.
At the beginning of his speech Mr.
Perot turned toward the Dixieland combo that had playing to warm up the crowd and referred to the Arkansas Governor's ability to play the saxophone.


Hasidic Jews Rally to Protest Crown Heights Verdict


After Missile Crisis, Game of Chicken Went On; Closer Than We Knew
To the Editor:
Of all the recent disclosures about the 1962 Cuban missile crisis, one by a Russian general has produced the greatest shock and skepticism.
Last January at a meeting in Havana hosted by Fidel Castro, a high-ranking Russian general stated that the Soviet Union had not only strategic nuclear missiles in Cuba (which could strike Washington or New York), but also shorter-range tactical nuclear missiles, which could be launched against American invasion forces by the Soviet commander in Cuba without Moscow's authorization.


Azinger Uses an Ugly Putter for a Beautiful Victory
Paul Azinger broke out of a death struggle with his own nervous nature and a course that he called the hardest he has ever played by holing a dipping 25-foot eagle putt on the 70th hole today to win the $2 million Tour Championship by three shots.
With Corey Pavin and Lee Jantzen making late runs over subtle but grudging Pinehurst No. 2, Azinger reached the 531-yard par-5 16th hole with a two-shot lead but visibly straining to win his first PGA Tour event in 21 months.


The Sweater Is Gone as Sweating Begins
There was no fanfare and there were no gimmicks at Alumni Hall yesterday as the St.
John's basketball team ran through some basic drills in its first practice as a handful of spectators looked on at the stroke of midnight.
Flash has never been St.
John's style.
But more than most seasons, 1992-93 promises to be a season of basics, fundamentals, of starting from scratch.


Group Sets Another 'Turn Off TV Day'
Organizations representing opposite sides of social and political issues are again squaring off by making the media part of their message.
Americans for Responsible Television, an organization allied with conservative groups like the American Family Association and Morality in Media, is sponsoring its second annual "Turn Off TV Day." The one-day boycott, scheduled for Nov. 13, is intended to protest what the organization considers sexually graphic, violent and vulgar programming.


South African Runs First


D'Amato: On Abrams and Taxes
The D'Amato campaign released a 30-second commercial late Friday night for use in major markets around the state through the remainder of the campaign.
Producer: Russo, Marsh Associates of Sacramento, Calif.
Script: Liberal Bob Abrams wants to raise your taxes.
But millionaire Bob Abrams doesn't pay his own.
The New York Times reported Abrams avoids paying taxes by claiming his bedroom is an office at his Fifth Avenue condominium.
The New York Post revealed Abrams failed to pay thousands in back taxes on his 51-acre country estate.
Now Abrams wants to increase taxes on Social Security, personal income, Medicare, business and more.
Bob Abrams never met a tax he didn't like, except his own.


Dance in Review
'Private Domain'  City Center 131 West 55th Street
"Private Domain," a masterwork of sinister beauty that Paul Taylor choreographed in 1969, has been revived this season with astonishing success.
Like many of Mr.
Taylor's other pieces, "Private Domain" operates on a complex conceptual level with its structural riddles coded over by more direct emotional images.


5 May Bid for First City; Chemical Said to Lead
Banking analysts said yesterday that as many as five bank holding companies might consider bidding for the First City Bancorporation of Houston, which the Federal Government seized Friday night.
The Chemical Banking Corporation of New York, which acquired Texas Commerce Bank of Houston in 1987, seems the heavy early favorite, the analysts said.


Giants 24, Redskins 7? Maybe Ray Must Stay
You figure that the Giants will beat teams like the Los Angeles Raiders and the Los Angeles Rams, and they lose.
You figure they will overrun a team like the Seattle Seahawks, and they win but look awful.
So how do you figure them to beat a good team like the Washington Redskins?
They did it tonight, 24-7, and they did it in style with their best all-round performance of the season.
Jeff Hostetler passed for two second-quarter touchdowns against a defense that never appeared certain what was coming next, and he scrambled for key gains.
Rodney Hampton kept making big runs, and his 23 carries for 138 yards gave him his second 100-yard game of the season.
The offense was imaginative, with pitches, rollouts and new looks.
Dave Meggett played more on offense and made big plays.
The blocking was solid.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Perot Show; Perot, Like 'Twin Peaks,' Started Strong and Went Downhill
Ross Perot, who has conducted his campaign largely by television in the weeks following his post-debate boom, may be a victim of a phenomenon more insidious than real or imagined Republican dirty tricks: the "Twin Peaks" syndrome.
"Twin Peaks" was the ABC television series whose bizarre, at times paranoid, all-American characters and tall, at times hallucinatory tales became a national craze in 1990.
Its lofty Nielsen numbers abruptly plummeted, and cancellation soon followed, however, once subsequent episodes grew glacial in pace and stubbornly refused to answer the pressing plot question, "Who killed Laura Palmer?"


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Democrats; Clinton Rallies Supporters for Final 'Long Walk'
After a year of campaigning at highway rest stops, high school gymnasiums and airport hangars around the nation, Gov.
Bill Clinton made his final joint appearance with Senator Al Gore before Election Day at a raucous rally tonight at the Brendan Byrne Arena.
The rally, capping a day of campaigning in Ohio and Pennsylvania, was part of an effort to cripple President Bush with a daylong drive through Republican areas in crucial industrial-belt states.


If Pollsters Would Visit a Welfare Center
THE Waverly Income Maintenance Center on West 14th Street in Manhattan was not on any Presidential candidate's campaign itinerary.
Nor do pollsters or pundits regularly go there to take the electorate's pulse.
But just one visit to the second floor, where people wait to apply for welfare in an office that suggests the apprehension and pain of a hospital emergency room, would explain why Gov.
Bill Clinton will win tomorrow -- at least in New York.
Particularly if Michael Mathew, Brian Pierce or John Riley were there, as they were the other day.
Waiting with scores of others for some form of benefits, they defied two fundamental stereotypes about welfare.
They had never applied before or even envisioned themselves needing public assistance; they are white.


INSIDE
Early Signs of Iraq's Goals
A classified defense document shows that rich information on Saddam Hussein's military suppliers was available in 1989, when the Bush Administration was embarking on its doomed policy of courting Iraq.
Page A8.
Towns Mourn Slain Sisters
A network of tiny Illinois communities shares memories of five women who ministered to the people of Liberia and lost their lives in the West African nation's civil war.
Page A8.
Angola Forces Pound Rebels
Angolan soldiers pounded rebels in the capital with machine-gun and mortar fire.
Hoping to avert the return of full civil war, the United Nations arranged a cease-fire.
Page A9.


Ellen D. Levy, Daniel Sarnoff
Ellen Denise Levy and Daniel Jay Sarnoff, television executives, were married yesterday in Los Angeles.
Rabbi Jan Goldstein performed the ceremony at the Hotel Bel-Air.
Mrs.
Levy-Sarnoff, 39 years old, is the vice president of development and the executive producer of the "Camp Candy" cartoon series for Saban Entertainment, a television production company in Burbank, Calif.
She graduated from Wesleyan University and received a master's degree in communications from the University of Pennsylvania.


Miami Recruit Injured
The freshman guard STEVE FRAZIER, one of the University of Miami's top recruits, injured his right knee early yesterday just after the Hurricanes opened the 1992-93 preseason with their "Night Court" practice.
Team surgeon Dr.
JOHN URIBE gave a preliminary diagnosis of a torn anterior cruciate ligament.
He said Frazier will undergo arthroscopic surgery later this week.
Frazier was the leading scorer in New York City as a high school senior, averaging 39 points per game for Andrew Jackson High in Queens.
Last year, he led St.
Thomas More Prep School in Oakdale, Conn., to the New England Prep School championship. (AP)


Hussein Foes Create Joint Front for a Federal Iraq
Iraq's opposition groups forged a united front in elections on Saturday and agreed on a federal structure for the country's future.
By the end of the five-day meeting of the Iraqi National Congress in this northern Iraqi town, forces opposed to President Saddam Hussein had elected a Kurd, a Shiite Muslim and a Sunni Muslim to lead their group.


n Anti-Theft Bar Is Turned Into a Weapon by a Carjacker
Usually carjackers use guns or knives to force motorists to relinquish their cars.
The weapon used in a carjacking in midtown Manhattan Saturday night was actually meant to prevent cars from being stolen.
The police said yesterday that a 27-year-old Brooklyn man jumped into a stopped 1992 Lincoln, grabbed a metal anti-theft bar lying on the front seat and brandished it to force the driver from his car.


Anger Over Income Tax Subsides
One year ago this month, 40,000 screaming Connecticut residents were drawn to the State Capitol to protest the state's new income tax, and many of them, in oaths and speeches, repeated a single simple line: 1992.
This was to be the year the voters would get even.


CHRONICLE
MATILDA CUOMO will make the welcoming remarks and HENRY A. KISSINGER will present the honors when GIOVANNI AGNELLI, the chairman of Fiat, and his wife, MARELLA, receive the Hadrian Award of the World Monuments Fund today .
The award, for fostering appreciation and preservation of art and architecture, will be given to the Agnellis at a luncheon in the Pierre Hotel.
Through Fiat, Mr.
Agnelli has helped save such imperiled Italian buildings as the Palazzo Grassi in Venice and the Palazzo d'Azeglio in Turin.
Mrs.
Agnelli spearheaded the development of FAI, a national trust for historically significant buildings and landscapes.


Sincerely, Paul Molitor
PAUL MOLITOR has notified 27 other major league teams by letter that he is "not totally committed to coming back" to the Milwaukee Brewers.
Molitor, 36, filed Friday for free-agency, saying General Manager SAL BANDO hadn't spoken with him about a new contract.


Hertford Journal; His School Days Now Would Tickle Tom Brown
For most of two centuries, England's private boarding schools have struggled to turn generations of young toffs into gentlemen, mixing classics and cricket with a lip-stiffening regimen of hard beds, cold showers and mean discipline, often meted out by a sneering clique of dormitory bullies.
But with the recession and changing attitudes about boarding cutting into their enrollments, many of Britain's best public schools, as they are known here, have embarked on a new and, in its own way, revolutionary strategy to entice fresh recruits to their privileged ranks.
They are marketing themselves as caring, pastoral institutions where cuddles and compassion are supplanting the sometimes cruel punishment of the past.


Accounts
*
Allied-Signal Automotive, Southfield, Mich., to McCann-Erickson Detroit, Troy, Mich., to consolidate the automotive products company's worldwide business-to-business advertising, previously divided among several agencies.
Arnold Fortuna Lawner &amp; Cabot, Boston, which handles Allied's consumer auto aftermarket products, is unaffected by the assignment.
Billings were not disclosed.


CHRONICLE
Once more a musical ensemble will raise its collective voice in song, inspired by the election, when an impromptu group calling itself the Women of Substance Chorale assembles at noon today across from the White House to serenade President Bush with farewell songs.
Or at least they hope it will be farewell.
The effort is an offshoot of the Getting It Gazette, a feminist newsletter distributed at both nominating conventions and three times since.
"They keep saying that the fat lady hasn't sung," said JANE O'REILLY, a founder of the gazette and an organizer of the singing.
"Actually she hasn't sung for about a decade. The fat lady is a feminist and has a voice of her own. She will raise it for all the women candidates who will win on Tuesday."


Rangers Need Evidence And Defense Provides It
When the Rangers had a 7-2-1 record and were outplaying most of their competition, Coach Roger Neilson had a tough time convincing his players that their defense was a little suspect.
After last week, however, it shouldn't be so difficult.


A Saturday of Few Key Upsets but Plenty of Points and Surprises
College football's top teams continued along their victorious paths on Saturday, with only No. 10 Georgia losing among The New York Times computer's top 10 teams.
But there were plenty of stories that emerged from the day's activities:
WILDEST FINISH Rutgers gained a 50-49 comeback victory over Virginia Tech, on quarterback Bryan Fortay's 15-yard scoring pass to Chris Brantley on the final play of the game.


Traders Wary of Growth Signals
There has been enough new economic data recently to suggest that it is time to wonder just how weak the economy is and how long it will stay that way.
If these straws in the wind do portend some growth, then there may be trouble in the bond market.
"There is some anecdotal evidence to say there is some growth," one bond trader remarked last week.
But the economy, he added, "is the last thing on the minds of investors right now, so that is why that could surprise them."


TRANSACTIONS
WEEKEND Football  National Football League
NEW YORK JETS -- Activated Dennis Byrd, defensive end, from the practice squad.
Placed Bill Pickel, defensive tackle, on injured reserve.
TAMPA BAY BUCCANEERS -- Signed Jeff Parker, wide receiver.
Waived Reggie Rogers, defensive lineman.
Signed Darren Anderson, defensive back, to the practice squad.
Hockey


This Court Jester Knows the Score
The clock had passed 1 A.M., and the subdued glitz that had marked Midnight Madness, the first practice of the fall for the University of Nevada-Las Vegas college basketball team, was winding down to the final moments of a forgettable scrimmage between the red and black teams.
Most of the crowd of about 7,000 fans at the Thomas and Mack Center had already headed for the parking lot, and the few remaining fans were stifling yawns.
But on the sideline of the red team, Jim Valvano crouched before his huddled players, diagramming a last-second play on a clipboard as if a national championship were at stake.


Donald Meyer, 62, Founder of Union For City Physicians
Donald C. Meyer, a longtime leader in New York City's physicians' union, died on Thursday while commuting to his home in Hartsdale, N.Y.
He was 62 years old.
He died of a heart attack, his family said.


U.S. as Seen by The Economist's Newest Martian
"In writing about America," says Duncan Campbell-Smith, newly arrived New York bureau chief of The Economist, "obviously the ultimate question, which everybody asks, is: Is it a wounded-beast story?'
"Was the 20th century the American century? And as the century is closing, is it good night, Charlie, for America?"


Mexico's Leader Cautiously Backs Some Big Changes
President Carlos Salinas de Gortari today cautiously endorsed the sort of broad political changes demanded by the political opposition, including regulations on party financing, limits on campaign spending and more equal access to news outlets.
In his annual State of the Nation address, Mr.
Salinas was not specific about what sort of measures he would support.
He also said that "great political changes" were not what Mexico needed.


After Missile Crisis, Game of Chicken Went On
To the Editor:
In "One Minute to Doomsday" (Op-Ed, Oct. 14) Robert S. McNamara writes of the 1962 Cuban missile crisis that "each nation's decisions before and during the crisis had been distorted by misinformation, miscalculation and misjudgment." True enough -- but equally true of the cold war as a whole.


First Convoy of Children's Aid Reaches Sarajevo
The first of several convoys of children's relief supplies Unicef hopes to bring to the region during a temporary cease-fire reached the Bosnian capital today without incident.
The convoy took a circuitous mountain route because of fighting on Saturday that punctuated the eve of the cease-fire with the staccato sounds of automatic weapons and the occasional thud of heavy munitions.
Another obstacle came from Bosnia's Government, which rejected socks, shoes and winter clothing made in Serbia, Bosnian officials and United Nations workers told The Associated Press.


Abroad at Home; Foul Words and False
My father was in the textile business.
When I was perhaps 12 years old, he came home from the office one night looking stunned.
He told my mother this story, and I listened.
Another man in the industry had made a bargain with him.
That day my father discovered that the man had not carried out his promise.
My father telephoned and asked him what had happened.
He said: "So I lied."


Market Place; Hometowns Try To Help Airlines
WHEN America West Airlines received $16 million in loans and other financial incentives from a group of private companies and public agencies in Arizona during August, that provided the green light for foreign investors to provide an additional $45 million in loans.
The foreign investors had wanted to see signs of community support before opening their own wallets.
By the time the financial package was finally in place, America West, which has been in Chapter 11 bankruptcy proceedings since June 1991, had a cash balance of about $40 million and was spending almost $100 million a month.


Dance in Review
'Counterswarm'
Paul Taylor's "Counterswarm," presented on Saturday night, is a small, jewel-like dance.
It doesn't take on the world.
But it succeeds within the limits it sets itself.
Part of that success is attributable to a mysterious score by Gyorgy Ligeti that suggests insects' vibrating communication with one another.
Santo Loquasto's bodysuits and caps, purple for one swarm and red for the other, create the illusion of glowing, preening creatures.
And Mr.
Taylor has supplied a field of shifting groups, bodies that come and go as if in obedience to instinctual commands.
As they go, they leave behind swarm members for duets and solos.
There are suggestions of battle and miscegenation, with the dance ending in a tight clinch.


4,500 Protest Jury Verdict In Stabbing
Venting their frustration and anger, 4,500 people rallied on Eastern Parkway in Brooklyn yesterday to protest the acquittal last week of the man charged with killing Yankel Rosenbaum during the violence in Crown Heights last year.
The rally was peaceful, though large and noisy, and there were no incidents or arrests, said Sgt.
John McCluskey, a police spokesman.
But residents said that tensions between blacks and Jews had heated up -- though were not boiling over -- since Thursday's verdict clearing Lemrick Nelson Jr., a black teen-ager, in the death of Mr.
Rosenbaum, a 29-year-old Hasidic scholar from Australia.


Judith E. Vogel, Martin Scherzer
Judith Ellen Vogel, the daughter of Peter and Ernestine Vogel of Boynton Beach, Fla., was married yesterday to Martin H. Scherzer, a son of Sonia Scherzer of Manhasset, L.I., and the late David Scherzer.
Rabbi Amy Perlin performed the ceremony at the Woodcliff Lake Hilton in Woodcliff Lake, N.J.
Mrs.
Scherzer is an associate with the New York law firm of Kimmelman, Sexter, Warmflash &amp; Leitner.
She graduated from the University of Pennsylvania, as did her husband, and received a law degree from Boston University.


Pro Football; Redskins Waver on Both Sides Of Line
The realization built slowly, but inexorably tonight: the Redskins would not be able to handle the Giants.
It was a victory at once startling, and yet not surprising to the Redskins' players who had been through the Washington-New York wars these past years.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Daisy Chainsaw
Tilt SoHo
Daisy Chainsaw could command center stage in a cabaret of the damned.
With her ragged wedding dress sliding off her shoulder and her Day-Glo orange fright wig tumbling off to reveal her shaved head, Katey-Jane Garside, the English group's maniacal frontwoman, seems like a lunatic running from the gates of bedlam.
Or she could be a devil child, smearing lipstick all over her face and yelping out strange sentiments in girlish abandon.
Miss Garside patches her persona together from scraps of these images, casting craziness as a form of vengeful fun.


The Changing Face of Harassment; Volatile Issue Is Still a Murky One, New York City Case Shows
A year after Anita F. Hill and Clarence Thomas helped redefine sexual harassment as a volatile issue, New York and the rest of the country got an important lesson last week in just how far that redefinition was reaching -- and how murky its consequences can be.
Randy Daniels, whom Mayor David N. Dinkins had appointed as Deputy Mayor, resigned before even officially starting his job because a former assistant had accused him of sexually harassing her in 1987.
Although he denied the allegations by Barbara Wood, Mr.
Daniels said he could not assume the post because it would cause his family unnecessary pain and Mr.
Dinkins an unneeded and damaging controversy.


Before, During and After


Fast Action Called Key For G.M. Board Meets Today To Name New Chief
When the board of the General Motors Corporation meets this morning in New York, directors are expected to entrust John G. (Jack) Smith Jr. with the task of quickly halting the financial bleeding of the auto giant's North American operations.
Whether Mr.
Smith can succeed at that daunting task may well depend on whether the board sets reasonable goals for the company's reorganization and whether he moves decisively to change the way G.M. operates.
Mr.
Smith, who has been G.M.'s president since April, is expected to be named chief executive, replacing Robert C. Stempel, who announced last Monday his plans to resign.
Mr.
Stempel's other title -- chairman -- is likely to be assumed by a director, John G. Smale, who is a retired chairman of Procter &amp; Gamble.


European Suppliers of Iraq Were Known to Pentagon
Four months before President Bush signed a secret order encouraging closer relations with Iraq, the Defense Intelligence Agency provided rich details of the network of European companies President Saddam Hussein used to buy technology that could upset the balance of military power in the Mideast.
A classified 1989 document illustrates how much information about Mr.
Hussein's military ambitions and methods was available as the Administration was embarking on its policy of courting Iraq.
It shows that United States intelligence knew that British tool-maker Matrix Churchill Corp., which had a branch in Solon, Ohio, played a major role in Iraq's weapons-buying program, yet did nothing to stop its operations.


Mtolo Makes Up for Lost Time and Captures the Marathon
The two weaved through New York City for 26.2 miles, fighting head winds in Staten Island, ignoring Hasidic protesters in Brooklyn and resisting the throngs and the tangos in Manhattan that enticed them to run even faster.
Given his chance at long last, Willie Mtolo, a 28-year-old black South African, bided his time, his eyes trained on the runner ahead and his mind calculating a private race.
Lisa Ondieki of Australia took a different route along the same, partitioned streets.
She went out fast, first, early, to rid herself of unwanted company from Russia.


Candidates for Federal Office and New York State and New York City Posts
Candidates in tomorrow's election for Federal and state offices in New York, and for judicial offices in New York City are shown below.
A list of candidates for New Jersey and Connecticut will appear tomorrow. *Incumbent


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Political Pulse -- Ohio; Bush Surges in Ohio, His Big Battleground State
Ohio is one place where George Bush's surge is real.
In the crucial belt of states stretching from New Jersey to Michigan, where his fate and that of Bill Clinton may well be decided on Tuesday, this is the President's best hope.
The struggle for Ohio's 21 electoral votes is very, very close.
It often is.
Harry S. Truman carried the Buckeye State by only 7,500 votes in 1948, and Jimmy Carter won by just 11,000 in 1976.
The state has been closely balanced politically since the Civil War, which is why so many Presidential candidates have come from here.


New York Courts Deserve Better Than This Shabby Treatment
To the Editor:
"Why I Quit the New York Bench" (Op-Ed, Oct. 1) by Harold Baer Jr. should be required reading for all members of the State Legislature.
It's a great loss for New Yorkers when a judge like Mr.
Baer departs the bench.
To be sure, there will be no shortage of ambitious lawyers vying for his place, but truly good judges are hard to find and harder to keep.


O'Brien to the Rescue As Jets Stun Dolphins
With the Jets' quarterback of the future, Browning Nagle, cooling his heels on the sideline because of a sprained left foot, the quarterback of the past, Ken O'Brien, had to take the controls against the Miami Dolphins here this afternoon at Giants Stadium.
So, what's this talk about a youth movement?
In a blast from the past, O'Brien worked his usual magic against the Dolphins, completing 21 of 29 passes (72.4 percent) for 240 yards and three touchdowns -- he also had an interception that shouldn't have been -- to help guide the Jets to a 26-14 victory.
The loss gave Miami a record of 6-2.
The Jets are now 2-6.


Sorrow in an Illinois Convent, Home to Five Slain in Liberia
A few days ago there was still hope, and so the nuns of the Adorers of the Blood of Christ in this tiny village prayed for the safe return of their five sisters, trapped in the heaviest fighting of Liberia's three-year-old civil war.
But today the order's American flag was at half-staff as a steady rain fell from slate-colored skies.
The nuns heard early Saturday that their five sisters had been shot to death in Liberia, perhaps as long ago as a week.


George Bush, Caught in the Loop
Challenged about his role in the arms-for-hostages deal with Iran when he was Vice President, President Bush has been on all sides of the issue.
When the scandal first broke in 1986, he said he supported President Reagan in a diplomatic initiative that went awry.
Soon he was saying he was deliberately kept "out of the loop" and therefore didn't know about the strong objections of the Secretaries of Defense and State.
Now, confronted with mounting evidence that he was very much in the loop and totally aware of the hostage-ransom program, Mr.
Bush comes full circle and returns to the Ronald Reagan defense: It was a diplomatic overture, never an arms-for-hostages deal.


A Millionaire Marxist In German Publishing
A unique piece of postwar German publishing history, the Aufbau publishing house, may be in jeopardy.
And a most unlikely suitor has stepped in to face what may be the insurmountable task of saving it: Bernd Lunkewitz, a Frankfurt real estate entrepreneur and millionaire -- and avowed Marxist.
Since the Berlin Wall fell three years ago, several East German book publishers have closed.
Others were purchased by larger West German publishers, which took their backlists or printing plants and then fired most of the staff.
Some former East German literary publishers are now turning out phone books.


Bridge
For the world at large the Players Club is a piece of plastic.
But for the cognoscenti it is a sociable spot on Gramercy Park in Manhattan, founded more than a century ago.
It was intended to bring together those involved in the theater, on both sides of the footlights, and founding members included Edwin Booth, Mark Twain and Gen.
William T. Sherman.
Today, the Players Club grill is often the setting for an afternoon bridge game.
William Thom reports the diagramed deal played there recently, in which South held a freakish distribution.
A player can expect a seven-card suit, a six-card suit and two voids about once in 18,000 deals.


Pointed Distinctions; Final Encounter Puts a Sharp Edge On Contrast of D'Amato and Abrams
In the last encounter of their corrosive campaign, Alfonse M. D'Amato and Robert Abrams crystallized in a single hour of free television yesterday all the arguments they've paid millions of dollars to make in commercials for weeks -- and in the same contrast of sly and stolid styles.
Senator D'Amato -- an ultra-cool underdog in a medium that betrays the slightest glints of flame -- painted his Democratic challenger as a millionaire limousine liberal with a fancy Fifth Avenue apartment and "a 51-acre estate," who pays his own taxes late but wants to raise taxes on everyone else, who would put waitresses and bartenders out of work and "sticks you with the check."


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Campaign Trail; For Those Who Yearn for More Polls
President Bush talks a lot about "nutty" polls.
It is hard to say what the margin of error is on that assertion, but now that the end of the trail is in sight, here is a final sampling of surveys that never made the front page.
*A souvenir stand at Washington's Union Station has sold more than 20,000 campaign buttons thus far this year.
The breakdown in sales: 44.5 percent for Gov.
Bill Clinton, 38.5 percent for Mr.
Bush and 17 percent for Ross Perot.


Stop the Parade of Judges Without Justice
To the Editor:
Amid all the campaign rhetoric, there has been practically no discussion of the primary reason to vote for Gov.
Bill Clinton:


RESULTS PLUS
GOLF Aaron Wins First Tournament Since 1973  Tommy Aaron won his first tournament since the 1973 Masters when he rallied from three shots behind and birdied the final hole yesterday to take the Senior Tour's Kaanapali Classic in Hawaii.
Aaron's closing round of seven-under-par 64 gave him a total of 15-under 198 and the winner's check of $75,000, his biggest ever.
One shot back was Dave Stockton, the second-round leader, who shot a 67.
In third was George Archer, who closed with a 66 for a 201 total.
The 57-year-old Aaron, who joined the Senior Tour in 1987, lost twice in playoffs earlier this year, once to Mike Hill and once to Archer.
Aaron made a 20-foot birdie putt from the fringe on the 18th hole put him a shot ahead of Stockton, who was playing one group behind.
Stockton faced a birdie putt of 15 feet on No. 18, but left it just short of the hole. (AP) Andrews Leads U.S.: Americans from the Ladies Professional Golf Association Tour, buoyed by Donna Andrews's five-under-par 67, won 10 of 16 matches and beat their Japanese counterparts by 11 points to extend their dominance in the Nichirei International tournament in Azumamura, Japan.
Andrews beat Junko Yasui, who shot a 76 on the 6,081-yard Tone Golf Club course.
In 15 other matches yesterday, the Americans won 9 and tied 3, giving them 11 1/2 points to Japan's 4 1/2 for the day and a final score of 21 1/2-10 1/2.
It was the United States team's 12th victory in the tournament, including the last eight in a row. (AP)


Pop and Jazz in Review
Faith Healers
Knitting Factory SoHo
One-chord wonders held the stage on Thursday night, in a C.M.J.
Music Marathon showcase featuring bands that record for the Too Pure label in England.
About 15 minutes of an E chord, frantically strummed on guitar above a jackhammer drumbeat, was the finale of the set by the Faith Healers, while Stereolab also had long stretches of unmoving harmony with busy guitarists.


Equity Issues This Week
The following equity offerings are expected this week:
Books-a-Million Inc., Birmingham, Ala., initial public offering of 2,275,000 common shares.
Robinson-Humphrey.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Emergency Broadcast Network
Kitchen 512 West 19th Street Chelsea Through Sunday
Sound bites and barrages of images, illogical juxtapositions and obstinate repetition -- the techniques of commercial television -- are exactly what Emergency Broadcast Network uses to inoculate its audiences against believing the mass media.


Dodd and Johnson Reach Out in Very Different Directions
Wrapping up the final weekend of campaigning, Senator Christopher J. Dodd and his opponent, Brook Johnson, reached out to widely differing constituencies, as Mr.
Dodd visited the low-income residents in this city and Mr.
Johnson toured the state's more affluent towns.
Attending morning services at black churches in Bridgeport's East End, Mr.
Dodd met people whose concerns ranged from violence and drugs to unemployment and lack of educational opportunities.
His schedule also included lunch with Democrats in Norwalk and rallies with supporters in Ansonia, Middletown and Hartford.


Steelers Rally To Defeat Oilers
Steelers 21, Oilers 20
PITTSBURGH, Nov. 1 (AP) -- Neil O'Donnell bounced back from a touchdown-producing fumble to connect with Adrian Cooper and Eric Green on fourth-quarter scoring passes today and the Pittsburgh Steelers rallied to beat the Houston Oilers, 21-20, and take over first place in the American Conference Central Division.
Al Del Greco, who had kicked two field goals earlier, missed a potential game-winning 39-yard field goal with six seconds left after the Oilers had driven from their 14 to Pittsburgh's 22 in the final four minutes of play.


Sports of The Times: Pro Football; L.T.'s First Sack of His 'Last Tour'
IN the misty cauldron of R.F.K.
Stadium last night, L. T. stood for more than Lawrence Taylor's initials.
The letters aso stood for his Last Tour, the beginning of the 33-year-old linebacker's last time around the rival cities of the National Conference East that he has terrorized for more than a decade.
But as L. T. strip-sacked Mark Rypien into fumbling early in the final quarter of the Giants' 24-7 upset victory, there were no violins, no harps, no recording of Tommy Dorsey's trombone playing "I'm Getting Sentimental Over You."


Given His Chance, And Lucky Charms, South African Wins
Willie Mtolo, a 28-year-old Zulu who works for a bank in Durban, South Africa, when he's not winning marathons, had his birthright carved onto his face with a tribal knife when he was only a year old.
The scars still show, and he is proud of them.
But for so many years, Mtolo, who ran away with the New York City Marathon yesterday once he reached the hilly terrain of Central Park, was a victim of apartheid because of his heritage, and also because of the international sanctions against South Africa.


Review/Theater: Texts for Nothing; Beckett's Short Lesson in Lifelong Misfortunes
Rising from a crouching position, the tramp surveys his surroundings, a mysterious environment of overlapping planks, and wonders where he is.
As Samuel Beckett's "Texts for Nothing" unfolds (at the Joseph Papp Public Theater), we can sense that the man is trapped in limbo.
Perhaps the last man on earth, he is hanging on for life while waiting for a "desinence," a Beckettian word meaning an end, as in the end of a sentence.
He has no idea when it will come.
But until it comes, he is "a prisoner, frantic with corporeality." As he says: "I can't stay. I can't go," and adds with curiosity, "Let's see what happens next."
This prose piece, 13 terse chapters of a fiction, followed onstage by a coda extracted from the novel "How It Is," is a distillation of the author's art and philosophy.
Therefore it is fitting that the dramatization of "Texts for Nothing" is given an astonishing performance by Bill Irwin, a clown in an intense tragicomic mode.


NEW YORK CITY MARATHON: Sports of The Times; Fred and Grete Win All of New York City
HE could not leave it alone.
Simply could not leave it alone.
He did not get it, that this New York City Marathon was all about him, all about Fred Lebow and Grete Waitz running together, to celebrate his 60th birthday earlier this year and his defiance of brain cancer.
The 25,000-plus other runners were stretching and going to the bathroom and jumping in the morning chill and Finding that core of concentration that is mandatory for the marathon.
But Fred Lebow always has that force pounding away inside him, so he did not need to retreat.


Caught in the Crossfire of Trade War
The main warehouse of the Banfi Products Corporation here is stuffed with nearly half a million cases of wine and distilled spirits, but Michael A. Sciallo, the warehouse director, found room today to stow 150 more cases of Cognac.
The shipment was just the latest crammed into a warehouse as big as two football fields.
Mr.
Sciallo said he and 10 workers had handled the operation without any extra staff.
"We did it ourselves -- I'm still feeling it," he said.


Elyse L. Wollman, David U. Simon
Elyse Lauren Wollman, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Drew Wollman of Sharon, Mass., was married yesterday to David Uriah Simon, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
James F. Simon of West Nyack, N.Y.
Rabbi George Stern performed the ceremony at the Spring Valley Country Club in Sharon.
Mrs.
Simon, 26 years old, is a merchandiser in international product development at Liz Claiborne Inc. in New York, the women's clothing manufacturer.
She graduated from the University of Vermont.
Her father is the owner of D. W. Associates in Sharon, a manufacturers' representative for industrial foam products.
Her mother, Linda Wollman, is a special-education teacher at the Arnone School, a public elementary school in Brockton, Mass.


Review/Television; Behind-the-Scenes Look At Jelly Roll on Broadway
Tonight's "Great Performances" presentation of "Jammin': Jelly Roll Morton on Broadway" -- at 9 on Channel 13 -- is, on one level, a very effective hourlong commercial for the original-cast album of the Broadway musical "Jelly's Last Jam." Much of the program takes place in a recording studio.
But there's a lot more to this documentary, not least an interview with George C. Wolfe, the show's writer and director, who describes in detail what he set out to do.
Opinions may vary about the extent of his success, but there can be no doubting the intelligence behind the effort.
Born in New Orleans around 1890, Ferdinand Le Menthe (Jelly Roll) Morton was the son of a middle-class, racially mixed Creole family, very much part of a rigid class system that looked down its nose at ordinary, dark-skinned blacks.
Raised on French opera and classical piano lessons, Morton drifted early on to the city's French Quarter with its African street rhythms and brothel blues.
Banished from his family, he absorbed the sounds that later would emerge in his own music.
He would always claim that he "invented" jazz.


Pop and Jazz in Review
The Bats Knitting Factory SoHo
Pop from New Zealand maps out territories akin to the landscapes of magical realism.
Like the literary genre, the music made by groups like the Bats, the Chills and the Verlaines explores what occurs when unfathomable things happen to ordinary people.
The Bats work this fanciful ground particularly well.
Layering delicate chords around a core of insistent rock rhythm, the quartet rebuilds the elusive stuff of imagination and melancholy into sweetly memorable music.


Legal Tangle Puts 24 Malaysians in Boston Jails
They came as tourists, but they ended up in jail.
Twenty-four Malaysians in the middle of a world tour have been detained for 11 days here in a painful and perplexing legal tangle, held as witnesses while the Federal Government prosecutes their tour leader on charges of trying to smuggle two of them into the country.
Malaysian Government officials and lawyers for the tourists -- 18 men and 6 women -- have expressed outrage at the detentions.
They say a number of the tourists have been threatened by agents for the Immigration and Naturalization Service and kept from speaking to Malaysian consular officials.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-9  ANALYZING GERMANY'S BAD DREAM
From assaults on Gypsies in Rostock to the beating of a Jewish journalist in Frankfurt, rightist violence is on the rise across Germany.
Most citizens are disturbed by the attacks, but polls show nonetheless that resentment of foreigners is rising.
A1


Dividend Meetings
Following is a partial list of dividend meetings for the week of Nov. 1:


The Talk of Hollywood; As Hollywood Palpitates, Films (and Heads?) Roll
The town has a bad case of the jitters.
For one thing, everyone has been talking all weekend about the presidency. No, not
that
one. The presidency of Paramount. And possibly 20th Century Fox.


Laurie J. Woog, Jay M. Goldring
Laurie Jean Woog, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James K. Woog of Westport, Conn., was married there yesterday to Dr.
Jay Marshall Goldring, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Norman Goldring of Chicago.
Rabbi Robert Orkand performed the ceremony at Temple Israel.
Ms.
Woog, who is 32 years old and is keeping her name, is an associate at Lawton &amp; Cates, a law firm in Madison, Wis.
She graduated from Harvard University and received a law degree from Northeastern University.
Her father is the executive vice president of Propp &amp; Company, a securities brokerage in New York.
Her mother, Josephine Woog, is a retired piano teacher.


A Venture Capitalist and His Politics
The receding New York involves things like egg creams and memories of organ grinders.
The new city -- the one that could as easily be Zurich or Tokyo -- is a world financial center defined only by the lightning-fast movement of money and ideas.
Alan Patricof grew up playing stickball on the streets of the Upper West Side and selling The Saturday Evening Post in the subway.
He remembers organ grinders.


No Headline
"There's been a little panic in Little Rock, because I think the goal that Bill Clinton has seen ever since he was studying away in Oxford might be slipping away from them." -- PRESIDENT BUSH.  [ A12:5. ] "I may have lost my voice, but with your help on Tuesday, we will win a new day for America." -- GOVERNOR CLINTON.  [ A1:3. ]


Assault Case Renews Debate on Rape Shield Law
Just two weeks after the start of the Glen Ridge sex-assault case, the mildly retarded young woman at its center has hardly any privacy left.
Although her name has not been publicized outside the courtroom, her gynecological records have been discussed by defense lawyers in court, and she has been portrayed as a sex-crazed teen-ager who delighted in seeing boys naked.


Topics of The Times; Mr. Foley Keeps a Pledge
The search for a new administrator of the House of Representatives dragged on for months.
But with the naming of a 34-year Army veteran with extensive management experience, Lieut.
Gen.
Leonard Wishart 3d, Speaker Thomas Foley has made good on his pledge to install a nonpartisan professional manager by the opening of the 103d Congress in January.
Mr.
Foley moved to create the new post last April, after the House bank scandal dramatized the poor management of House affairs.
In a nod toward bipartisanship, he gave the House minority leader, Robert Michel, veto power over the administrator's selection.
Last month the House adjourned with the two leaders still pondering.


Times Pact Ratified By Mailers Union
The New York Mailers Union No. 6 ratified a contract with The New York Times yesterday, and the agreement is expected to hasten the operation of a new $450 million newspaper printing plant in Edison, N.J.
The mailers, who bundle newspapers for delivery, voted 254 to 81 in favor of extending their contract by seven years, the union president, George E. McDonald, said.


Rocket Is Staying Put
ROCKET ISMAIL said yesterday that although he would like to play in the National Football League, he plans to fulfill the remaining two years of his contract with the Canadian Football League's Toronto Argonauts.
"I definitely intend to fulfill the rest of my contract there," Ismail said in an interview aired during CBS' "NFL Today."


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Campaign Almanac; Clinton Edges Further Ahead
Three new nationwide polls have found Gov.
Bill Clinton still leading President George Bush, with Ross Perot in third place.
When the three polls are averaged, Mr.
Clinton leads with 43 percent, Mr.
Bush has 37 percent and Mr.
Perot has 17 percent.


An Odd Aircraft's Tenacity Shows Difficulty of Cutting Arms Budget
For years the Defense Department has denounced the V-22 Osprey, an aircraft that takes off like a helicopter but flies like a plane, as impractical and unaffordable.
Two of the five prototypes have crashed.
But the department continues to finance the plane anyway.
And now with the election approaching, both President Bush and Gov.
Bill Clinton, along with members of Congress, have committed themselves to building this hugely expensive plane -- illustrating how maddeningly difficult it is for the nation to cut its military spending.
Though the cold war is over, new weapons like the Osprey, the giant C-17 transport plane or a proposed new aircraft carrier seem to have taken on lives of their own.
If these weapons go into full production, they will add tens of billions of dollars in the 1990's to the military budget, now nearly $290 billion a year.
Business as Usual
It is, in many ways, business as usual despite the changed times, as the maneuvering behind the Osprey seems to make clear.


Party's Over, So Hit the Road
After celebrating his 60th birthday yesterday, Coach Al Arbour is beginning a month that may age him beyond his chronological calendar.
During November, his Islanders will play only three games at home and eight on the road, including three in four days in Western Canada.


Major Races to Watch in Tomorrow's Elections in New York State
U.S.
Senate The Candidates ROBERT ABRAMS, 54.
Lawyer, State Attorney General since 1979.
Elected Bronx Borough President, 1969.
First won office as Assemblyman from the Bronx, 1965.
Had raised about $5.4 million as of Oct. 15 and will spend all that and more.
ALFONSE M. D'AMATO, 55.
Lawyer, United States Senator since 1981.
Presiding Supervisor, Town of Hempstead, L.I., 1977-80; Supervisor, 1971-77; Receiver of Taxes, 1969-71.
First office, Nassau County Public Administrator, 1965.
Had raised $9.4 million as of Oct. 15 and will spend it all.
The Issues
The candidates have sharp differences on almost every important topic.
Mr.
D'Amato opposes abortion; Mr.
Abrams is a longtime supporter of abortion rights.
Mr.
D'Amato supports the death penalty; Mr.
Abrams opposes it.
Mr.
Abrams wants to cut $280 billion from the military budget over the next five years; Mr.
D'Amato wants to cut $80 billion.
Mr.
D'Amato opposes national health insurance or any higher taxes; Mr.
Abrams favors ending all private health insurance in favor of a Government plan backed by higher payroll and corporate taxes, and higher taxes on liquor and cigarettes.
Analysis:
Recent statewide polls have shown Mr.
Abrams holding an edge, with a lead ranging from 3 to 11 points.
But one-quarter or more of voters were undecided as of last week, so the race remains volatile.
Mr.
Abrams, a popular vote getter for years, should have a strong natural advantage, since registered Democrats outnumber Republicans about 3 to 2 in the state, Bill Clinton has a double-digit lead over President Bush and Mr.
D'Amato's reputation has been tarnished by years of official inquiries into his ethical conduct in office.
But Mr.
D'Amato has shrewdly promoted his reputation as a "Senator Pothole" who gets things done, a rancorous Democratic primary left Mr.
Abrams wounded and struggling to raise money and polls show much of the public unhappy with both candidates.
U.S.
House of Representatives 3d DISTRICT: NASSAU COUNTY The Candidates PETER KING, 48, Republican.
Served as Hempstead Councilman from 1978 to 1981 and has been Nassau County Comptroller since then.
The public has long identified him as an opponent of abortion.
He has taken part in demonstrations against abortion organized by the Roman Catholic Diocese of Rockville Centre.
STEPHEN A. ORLINS, 42, Democrat.
A newcomer to the district making his first run for public office.
He has spent the last two decades building a brokerage business, which he sold to Shearson Lehman Brothers Inc. in 1985.
He is now a consultant to American Express.
The District
The redrawn District has a population of 580,337, 91.7 percent white, with 150,000 registered Republicans, 87,000 Democrats 60,000 independents and a small percentage of voters divided between the Right to Life and Liberal parties.
It stretches along the South Shore from East Rockaway through Long Beach, Merrick, Bellmore, Seaford, Massapequa, Farmingdale, Hicksville and north through Locust Valley, Brookville, Glen Cove and Glenwood Landing on the North Shore.
The Issues
Mr.
Orlins, who strongly supports a woman's right to abortion, describes Mr.
King as a zealot and extreme opponent of abortion.
Mr.
King describes Mr.
Orlins as a carpetbagger who has lived in Manhattan for the last several years and rented a house in Manhasset this summer to run for Congress.
Mr.
Orlins says he grew up in the district and had his basic values formed there.
Both candidates insist that the economy is the major issue.
Mr.
King says he blew the whistle on Nassau County's fiscal crisis.
Mr.
Orlins says Mr.
King, as Comptroller, was part of the fiscal problem rather than part of the solution.
Analysis
While Republicans have held the district for the last 20 years with the repeated election of Representative Norman Lent, who decided not run again this year, the Democrats, riding a wave of anti-incumbency sentiment, have a strong chance.
Although it is Mr.
King's first race for Congress, he is seen by many voters in the district as part of the Republican establishment that has governed the county for several decades.
Two other candidates are in the race and are expected to draw about equal votes from Mr.
King and Mr.
Orlins.
Louis P. Roccanova, 27, is running on the Right to Life ticket, while Ben-Zion J. Heyman, 59, is on the Liberal Party line.  4TH DISTRICT: NASSAU COUNTY The Candidates DAVID A. LEVY, 38, Republican.
A lawyer and former radio reporter, he is a member of the Hempstead Town Board and is also a staff political strategist and spokesman for the Nassau County Republican Committee.
PHIL SCHILIRO, 36, Democrat.
A lawyer, he has spent more than 10 years in Washington as a staff aide to Democratic members of Congress.
He is on leave from his job as chief aide to Representative Henry Waxman, a California Democrat and chairman of the House Health and Environment Subcommittee.
The District
The Fourth District was enlarged earlier this year to include most of what had been the Fifth Congressional District, and Raymond J. McGrath, a Republican who had represented the Fifth District for five terms, decided not to seek re-election in the new district.
The Fourth District covers roughly the southwestern two-thirds of Nassau County.
Nearly 76 percent of its 580,338 residents are white, 14.3 percent are black and 7 percent are Hispanic.
The district is wealthy, with a median household income of $52,000, compared with $32,965 for New York State.
Registered Republicans outnumber Democrats, 147,000 to 87,000, with 52,000 Independents.
The Issues
Both candidates' positions conform roughly to those of their parties but reflect the moderate views on some social issues of a wealthy, well-educated and religiously diverse constituency.
Mr.
Levy, who opposes the use of Federal Medicaid funds for abortion, nonetheless rejects the official Republican Party position and supports a woman's right to an abortion during the first trimester of pregnancy.
Mr.
Schiliro describes himself as ardently "pro-choice," supports the use of Medicaid funds for abortion and is seeking to appeal to women by offering greater Federal involvement to combat the high incidence of breast cancer on Long Island.
On economic issues, Mr.
Levy favors a cut in capital-gains taxes and an income-tax credit for first-time home buyers.
Mr.
Schiliro supports more Federal funds for rebuilding the nation's infrastructure and for education.
Analysis:
No polls have been taken, but the race appears close.
Both candidates are seeking national office for the first time, and voters must decide between professional politicians with sharply different backgrounds.
Mr.
Levy brings strong support from within the Nassau County Republican organization and years of experience dealing directly with voters in the Town of Hempstead.
But his allegiance to the county's Republican establishment is criticized by many here -- including Mr.
Schiliro -- who say Nassau has been dominated and hurt by its Republican machine.
Mr.
Schiliro brings a decade of experience in Congress, where he has analyzed national policy on health and the environment.
His campaign has raised much more money than Mr.
Levy's, much of it from political-action committees outside Nassau.
But Mr.
Schiliro may be vulnerable because he has spent all of his adult life outside the district he hopes to represent, residing mainly in Washington and its suburbs, and returned to his family's home in Baldwin only last spring, when his campaign began. 13TH DISTRICT: BROOKLYN, STATEN ISLAND The Candidates SAL F. ALBANESE, 43, Democrat.
City Councilman since 1982 representing a Brooklyn district that covers some of the most conservative neighborhoods in the city, including Bensonhurst, Dyker Heights and Bay Ridge, where he lives.
Former public-school teacher whose family immigrated to Brooklyn from Italy when he was a child.
SUSAN MOLINARI, 34, REPUBLICAN.
Former City Councilwoman and third generation of a well-known Staten Island political family.
In 1990 she was elected to the seat that had been held by her father, Guy V. Molinari, now Staten Island Borough President.
Known for her support of abortion rights.
Lives in New Dorp, Staten Island.
The District
The redrawn 13th District covers all of Staten Island and then zig-zags through southwest Brooklyn.
The population is mostly white and nearly 1 in 3 voters are Republicans, making this district one of the most conservative in the city.
Two-thirds of the electorate live in Staten Island, the rest in the mostly Italian, Irish and Greek neighborhoods of Brooklyn, including Bay Ridge, Bensonhurst, Fort Hamilton and Dyker Heights.
The Issues
The candidates differ on who would best address voters' concerns about reducing the $5 toll on cars crossing the Verrazano-Narrows Bridge from Brooklyn to Staten Island, the Fresh Kills landfill, health care and the environment.
They both support a woman's right to an abortion.
Analysis
Ms.
Molinari's Staten Island roots and her name recognition have afforded her the clear advantage in this race.
But her strong ties to the Bush Administration and her status as an incumbent may pose problems.
She faces stiff competition from Mr.
Albanese, who has based his campaign on his record as a maverick on the City Council and his reputation for strong constituent service.
A third-party candidate, Kathleen Murphy, 53, a lawyer running on the Right to Life line, describes herself as the "only true conservative" in the race and is expected to draw some voters from Ms.
Molinari.
14TH DISTRICT: MANHATTAN, BROOKLYN, QUEENS The Candidates  CAROLYN MALONEY, 44, Democrat.
Worked as a public-school teacher, an administrator for the City Board of Education and an aide in the State Assembly and the State Senate before being elected to the City Council in 1982.
Has served as chairwoman of the Contracts Committee for the last year.
BILL GREEN, 63, Republican.
Former administrator of Region 2 of the Federal Department of Housing and Urban Development before being elected to the House of Representatives in 1978.
Serves on the House Appropriations Committee and is one of the wealthiest members of the House.
The District
District 14 is known as the Silk Stocking District because it comprises some of the richest areas in Manhattan.
It takes in a good chunk of the East Side, stretching from Grand Street north to 106th Street and also zigzags into the West Side.
The lines were redrawn this year so that the district now includes the West Side from 89th to 103d Streets; Greenpoint, Brooklyn; Astoria, Queens, and Roosevelt Island.
These areas tend to be heavily Democratic, and Democrats outnumber Republicans in the district 3 to 1.
The Issues
Mr.
Green has a well-established reputation as a progressive Republican in the Jacob Javits mold, a persona perfectly suited to this area of monied Democrats, and in Congress he has tended to vote against the Administration more often than not.
He and Ms.
Maloney agree on most social issues, including abortion -- both support a woman's right to choose -- and gay rights, and both describe themselves as champions of the environment.
Mr.
Green disparages the City Council's work, saying that the Council has not been particularly effective, while Ms.
Maloney has sought to cast her opponent as a big-spending tool of special interests who has sided with the Administration on economic matters harmful to the city.
Analysis
Mr.
Green is extraordinarily popular in the district and has staved off heavyweight challenges in the past from the likes of Bella Abzug, Andrew J. Stein and Carter Burden.
He is also outspending Ms.
Maloney more than 3 to 1 in this race.
But he faces several problems this year: a possible landslide by Gov.
Bill Clinton in the district; Ms.
Maloney's anti-incumbency, year-of-the-woman campaign, and new district lines that have added heavily Democratic neighborhoods, where Mr.
Green has little name recognition, to the district.  18TH DISTRICT: WESTCHESTER COUNTY, BRONX, QUEENS The Candidates NITA M. LOWEY, 55, Democrat.
A volunteer community advocate in such organizations as the Parent-Teacher Association until 1975, when she became an official of the New York State Department of State.
Served as the state's Assistant Secretary of State from 1985 to 1987.
First elected to Congress in 1988 when she unseated her current opponent, Joseph J. DioGuardi, a conservative Republican who served two terms in Congress, winning election in 1984 and 1986.
JOSEPH J. DIOGUARDI, 52, a certified public accountant and a former partner of Arthur Andersen and Company.
Served two terms in Congress.
Besides the Republican line, Mr.
DioGuardi has the Conservative and Right to Life designations.
The District
Snaking through central Queens, parts of the Bronx and southern Westchester County, 43 percent of the voters in the 18th Congressional District are registered as Democrats and 32 percent as Republicans.
The Issues
The race, a classic battle between a liberal Democrat and a conservative Republican, has been portrayed by some as one of the sharpest ideological conflicts anywhere in the country this year.
Mrs.
Lowey has described her opponent as a "far-right, radical, former failed member of Congress" and said that his stance against abortion made abortion rights "a defining issue" in the race.
Mr.
DioGuardi portrayed Mrs.
Lowey as a "100 percent certified public liberal," who has been anti-business and weak in her support of Israel.
Analysis
In the final days, the campaign, which had been marked throughout by harsh attacks by both candidates, became extremely bitter with each side accusing the other of ethics and campaign-finance violations.
Although Mr.
DioGuardi has said he doesn't expect Mrs.
Lowey to benefit from the Democrats' enrollment edge, new lines for the district have brought in areas of the Bronx and Queens that traditionally have heavy Democratic turnouts.
New York State Senate
The elections for the 61 seats in the New York State Senate, where Republicans have been in the majority for the last 27 years, are marked by two overarching questions: Will the Democrats pick up the five seats they need to take control of the chamber?
And even if they fail, will Ralph J. Marino, the majority leader and most powerful Republican in state government, be returning to Albany?
The odds would appear to favor the Republicans in each case, in part because they controlled the Senate redistricting this year and in part because the G.O.P. is way ahead in fund raising for the Senate races.
But in a state where Democrats outnumber Republicans nearly 3 to 2 and where the Presidential ticket may draw a huge Democratic turnout, the sheer force of numbers could yield some upsets.
Mr.
Marino is locked in a tough race in his Nassau-Suffolk district with James F. Gaughran, a Democrat whose campaign has been aided by a fierce anti-Marino advertising blitz by a conservative anti-tax group.
Mr.
Marino has poured money and campaign workers into the race, and his party holds a clear edge in registration in the district.
But the race is still considered up in the air, in part because a large turnout for the Clinton-Gore ticket could give Mr.
Gaughran a major boost.
Another race that could be especially close is in Queens, where redistricting has pitted two popular incumbents, Jeremy S. Weinstein, a Democrat, and Frank Padavan, a Republican, against each other, .
The Democrats are concentrating on several other districts where they say their challengers have a real shot at unseating Republican incumbents.
Among the major challenges to Republican incumbents in the metropolitan region are:
-- District 6, Nassau County, where the incumbent, Kemp Hannon, is running against Barbara I. Amster, the Democratic challenger, a college professor.
-- District 7, Nassau County, where Senator Michael J. Tully Jr., faces Michael J. Siris, a lawyer.
-- District 38, Rockland and Orange counties, where Senator Joseph R. Holland is running against Diana Hess, a former utility executive.
The Ballot Question Proposal 1: The Jobs for the New New York Bond Act
Voters in New York State will be asked whether they want to support the proposed jobs bond act, under which the state would borrow $800 million to invest in infrastructure projects like roads and sewer hookups, to create jobs and to attract businesses to the state.
Analysis
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo says the proposal would create more than 35,000 immediate jobs, mostly in construction, and result in 122,000 permanent ones when businesses were attracted to the state.
His administration has released a list of more than 350 projects around the state that would be eligible for funding if the bond act passed.
Opponents of the plan say that with the state already carrying $24 billion in tax-supported debt, it can ill afford to take on $1.7 billion more (the cost of the bond issue plus interest).
And they question its usefulness in creating long-term jobs.


Topics of The Times; Destructive Diplomacy
As the Serbian butcher Slobodan Milosevic rushes to finish carving up Bosnia, he's getting plenty of help from his Croatian apprentice, Franjo Tudjman.
Mr.
Tudjman is selling out his nominal allies in Bosnia, snatching scraps for himself.
And his henchmen are adopting the technique of ethnic cleansing to consolidate control over the bits of Bosnia they've seized.
In these circumstances, President Bush's choice of Mara Letica to be the next American Ambassador to Croatia is startling for its destructive bias.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Political Memo; In an Odd Mood, People Tolerate Perot Spending
Americans are occasionally outraged over political interlopers trying to buy governorships, or seats in Congress.
But the spectacle of a billionaire businessman trying to purchase the Presidency hardly seems to stick in the national craw.
There are a lot of reasons: from the fact that Ross Perot does not seem to be succeeding, to the fact that the public has a long agenda of other political sins to get burned up about, many of which Mr.
Perot gripes about, too.


Cowboys Finish at the Top of the Seesaw
The Philadelphia Eagles -- through three quarters today -- kept finding ways to respond to each challenge by the Dallas Cowboys.
Dallas got a field goal; Philadelphia got one, too.


Review/Dance; Appliances As the Basis Of Movement
David Hurwith's "Appliance Meditations," performed on Friday night at the Bessie Schonberg Theater, promises to be one of the most unsettling events of this season.
A program of two pieces said to have been inspired by appliances and their use, the evening started with "Imaginary Prefab," a carefully plotted piece for nine dancers that was set to a sound-and-music score by Gordon Minette and Dan Cameron.
Program notes described the second dance, "Crisis Village Episodes," as an improvised dance inspired by Stendhal's "Charterhouse of Parma."
Both pieces were filled with extra-dance ideas.
Mr.
Minette's score was a grab bag of once-fashionable dance devices.
In the second piece, the four performers talked as they moved, engaging in a telephone conversation with Mr.
Minette that was followed by the composer's videotaped race through Manhattan and into the theater for a last few moments onstage, his journey visible on a monitor at the side.


A Shot Not Heard Confuses Runners
The starting procedures for the New York City Marathon unraveled yesterday and confusion reigned at the foot of the Verrazano-Narrows Bridge on Staten Island.
No one was sure just exactly when the trek of 26 miles 385 yards began, and complaints were numerous.
"A fiasco," said Tom Bowmaster, a veteran marathoner from Morristown, N.J.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Belly
Marquee Chelsea
Friday night's quadruple bill, featuring bands mostly associated with England's 4AD label, proved just about nothing about alternative music except that the dress code among bohemian bands requires torn clothes. 4AD is best known for the bands the Pixies and Lush, and for feeding its bands, which usually like enveloping, billowing music, to major labels; the headliner, Belly, is already with Warner Brothers.
And in the variety of music, from the maudlin Red House Painters to the sly and almost cheery Belly, 4AD is probably wider in its taste than most people think.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Television; Projected Network Loser In Presidential Race: CBS
The Presidential race will not be decided until tomorrow, but among the networks vying for political advertising revenue, the returns are already in.
The winners included ABC, NBC and CNN; the loser is CBS.
The intense interest in this year's Presidential election has many more people watching television news and talk shows and has generated far more revenue from political commercials than any network executive expected before the year began.


Lowly Cardinals Snap 49ers' 5-Game Streak
Cardinals 24, 49ers 14
TEMPE, Ariz., Nov. 1 (AP) -- Phoenix knows how to win big, even if it doesn't know how to win often.
The Cardinals, who beat the Super Bowl champion Washington Redskins for their only other 1992 victory, got three touchdowns passes from Chris Chandler today to defeat San Francisco, 24-14, only the second loss of the season for the 49ers.


Ellen Trachtenberg, David Campbell
Ellen Pamela Trachtenberg, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Stephen Trachtenberg of Wynnewood, Pa., was married there yesterday to David John Campbell, a son of Mary Gismervik of Massapequa, L.I., and Michael J. Campbell of New York.
Rabbi Patrice Heller performed the ceremony at the Evviva restaurant.


Review/Dance; Belgian Original Stretches the Bounds Of Choreography
In an international dance scene filled with experimentalists, most choreographers tend to act like auteur film directors: they provide an individual point of view but do not change the nature of their art form.
The 32-year-old Belgian choreographer Anne Teresa de Keersmaeker is one of the few today who make audiences see dance in a new way.
She opens doors, even batters some down; in short, she is a major artist.
Her 1990 work "Achterland" ("Hinterland"), which had its New York premiere on Friday night at the Brooklyn Academy of Music, stretches the very definition of dance.
The viewer encounters something unfamiliar in terms of movement and the context in which it is placed, especially in relation to music, and yet recognizes profoundly that the whole has some relationship to life as it is lived.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Velocity Girl
CBGB Lower East Side
The youngest school of tadpoles to start swimming up the alternative music scene is characterized by shyness and some fear of individuation.
Produced in the bedrooms and basements of undergraduate white America, this gentle form of rock is typified by whispering vocals and sleepy rhythms.
Call it rainy music, because it seems to dissolve the outside world and demand a moment of revery.
Velocity Girl, from Washington, is an emerging talent on this scene, and in a C.M.J. showcase on Saturday night, the band demonstrated the streaks and limitations of this appealing musical style.


Puerto Rican-Born Favorite Treated Like Outsider
Growing up in Yabucoa, P.R., Nydia M. Velazquez watched roosters fitted with metal spurs rip each other to death in the cockfighting pit owned by her father.
She loathed the violence, but it was preparation of a sort for another blood sport: New York City politics.
Although she is virtually assured of being elected the nation's first Puerto Rican Congresswoman tomorrow, Ms.
Velazquez has hardly had a chance to savor her Democratic primary victory over Steven J. Solarz, the nine-term incumbent, and four Hispanic candidates.
While she has flown to Washington twice to lobby for her future -- one time asking House Speaker Thomas S. Foley for appointment to the powerful Appropriations Committee -- she has also been busy defending herself against slurs, revelations about her personal life and allegations of political misconduct.


Desmond W. Hall, 82, Author and Ex-Editor
Desmond Winter Hall, an author and former magazine editor and owner, died Wednesday at the Methodist Hospital in Brooklyn.
He was 82 years old and lived in the Park Slope section of Brooklyn.
He died of pneumonia, said his daughter, Katherine Hall Ryan of Park Slope.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Campaign Watch; In Final Hours, Battling For a Luring Sound Bite
On Monday, Gov.
Bill Clinton is planning to visit eight states.
President Bush is hitting eight states in two days, and even Ross Perot ventured forth from Dallas over the weekend to attend rallies in four cities.
At each stop, the candidates shake hands and thank the crowds.
But don't let the autograph signing and the baby kissing fool you.
The candidates are not there for their supporters.
They are there for the local reporters.


Elmer K. Timby, 86, Helped in Designing Golden Gate Bridge
Elmer K. Timby, an engineer who worked on major projects like the Golden Gate Bridge in San Francisco and the Bronx-Whitestone Bridge in New York, died on Wednesday at St.
Mary Hospital in Langhorne, Pa.
He was 86 years old and lived in Newtown, Pa.
He died of pneumonia, his wife said.
For 21 years Mr.
Timby taught civil engineering at Princeton University and retired as chairman of the department in 1949.
From 1950 to 1968 he worked for Howard, Needles, Tammen &amp; Bergendoff, a national engineering firm, as a partner and president of its international subsidiary.


Organ-Donor Laws Badly Need Revision
To the Editor:
Re "Long Waiting Lists for Organs Make Ethical Calls Tough" (The Week in Review, Oct. 18):


Corrections
A picture caption on Saturday with the Pop and Jazz in Review column misidentified the singer shown.
She is Iris DeMent, who appeared at the Bottom Line.


Vote for Ross Perot?
Citizens who prefer Ross Perot have every right to vote for him.
But hard realities suggest that their votes will almost certainly be wasted if their hope is to catapult Mr.
Perot to the White House.
These votes will be little more than heartfelt gestures of protest.
Worse, they won't even be wise votes.
Whatever his virtues, Mr.
Perot is ill suited to govern.
And a vote for him may confuse the contest between the only real choices, thus weakening the winner's mandate.


Would Clinton Have to Fight Greenspan Over a Stimulus?
Gov.
Bill Clinton and Alan Greenspan have been circling each other warily for weeks now.
If the Democratic nominee becomes the President-elect, they might start wrestling.
Then again, they might not.
Many people who make it their business to parse the Fed's every move see inevitable conflict between a Clinton drive to turbocharge the economy and the central bank's mandate to keep inflation in check.


Dolphins Watch Game Become History Lesson
It's not that the Miami Dolphins were shocked at how easily they were handled by the Jets this afternoon.
History has shown that when these two American Conference East rivals get together, strange things just happen.
"We just played a poor first half and the Jets were excellent," said the Dolphins' coach, Don Shula.
"We couldn't convert on third downs and we couldn't stop them. They took that big first-half lead and then when we got back in the game with a chance to get the football again, they took it and controlled it for the next eight minutes.


Will O'Brien Sit or Will He Start?
For Ken O'Brien it was a satisfying conclusion to what he described as a strange week.
Now, things will get interesting.
Starting in place of Browning Nagle, who was out with a sprained left foot, O'Brien threw three touchdown passes in the Jets' 26-14 victory over the Dolphins.


In Arkansas Toxic Waste Cleanup, Highlights of New Environmental Debate
A fence and barbed wire are all that separate this working-class city from the rusted tanks and tons of toxic wastes at the abandoned Vertac Chemical Company pesticide plant.
For more than 30 years, Vertac's operators scattered thousands of steel barrels on the 93 acres surrounding the plant, each barrel filled with the byproducts of a panoply of agricultural poisons now outlawed as unsafe: the insect killers DDT, aldrin, dieldrin and toxaphene and the defoliants silvex, 2,4,5-T and Agent Orange.


Un-Presidential Speech
To the Editor:
I never thought I would see and hear a President of the United States calling his political opponents "bozos," "ozone man" and other derogatory names on national television.
This type of behavior is childish.
How degrading to the office of President of the United States.
PAUL J. HARDER  Encino, Calif., Oct. 30, 1992


World Economies


A Welcome New Choice for Women
American women are among the most fortunate in the world -- but not when it comes to contraceptives.
Their choices are limited, and the consequences of that narrowness are broad.
Of 19 Western democracies, a 1988 study reported, only two had a higher pregnancy rate than the United States, and only one had a higher abortion rate.
Two years ago, however, the Food and Drug Administration approved Norplant, a surgically implanted contraceptive; it was the first major new contraceptive to be introduced in this country in three decades.
And this week it approved another: Depo-Provera, an injectable drug that prevents pregnancy for three months.


METRO DIGEST
METRO DIGEST  ABRAMS AND D'AMATO NEAR END OF RACE
In the final hours before tomorrow's election for United States Senate, Robert Abrams and Alfonse M. D'Amato engaged in their last televised debate and plunged into the New York City suburbs to campaign.
Mr.
Abrams, the State Attorney General and Democratic nominee, and Mr.
D'Amato, the Republican incumbent Senator, replayed elements of their rancorous campaign, arguing over health care, taxes and the economy.
But the outcome of the election may depend less on either candidate's performance than on Gov.
Bill Clinton's projected margin of victory in the state.
A1.
Pointed contrasts in a final debate.
B7.


Nets Come Undone vs. Heat
It wasn't a game to send the fans back in East Rutherford, N.J., rushing to the box office for season tickets.
In a 108-102 loss Saturday night to the Heat, the Nets (3-5 for the exhibition season) displayed the fuzziness of purpose and the lack of intensity that too often marked their play last season.
None of that augurs well for the new season, which begins Friday in Philadelphia, where the Nets, under their new coach, Chuck Daly, face the 76ers.
Daly was obliged to watch his Nets come unglued in the final 2 minutes 15 seconds against the Heat.


A Million-for-One Shot
For most golfers, a hole-in-one would be thrill enough.
For JASON BOHN, it's a million-dollar memory.
Bohn, 19 years old, of State College, Pa., sank a hole-in-one in a charity golf tournament in Tuscaloosa, Ala., yesterday and received $1 million.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Voters; Perot Backers Weigh Risk of Wasting a Vote
They do not like it.
They resent it.
They mourn it.
All the same, most of them believe it: Ross Perot cannot win.
Here in the heart of Perot country, a gleaming Dallas suburb with a get-down-to-business ethos, many of his supporters say they find themselves torn between idealism and realism as Election Day nears.


Daniel L. Klayman; Chemist, 63
Daniel L. Klayman, the longtime head of the organic chemistry section of the Walter Reed Army Institute of Research in Washington, died on Thursday at Holy Cross Hospital in Silver Spring, Md.
He was 63 years old and lived in Chevy Chase, Md.
He died of a heart attack that he suffered at home, said a cousin, Arnold Nachmanoff.


Patents; A Skin Patch To Increase Testosterone
MAYBE it was inevitable.
Thousands of smokers now wear nicotine patches, which allow controlled amounts of nicotine to seep through the skin, to help them quit cigarettes.
Nitroglycerine patches protect people who suffer from angina.
Scopalamine patches help prevent motion sickness.
Estrogen patches help women cope with menopause.
And now?
The testosterone patch, for males who suffer from a shortage of the male hormone associated with everything from sexual activity to competitive instincts.


Topics of The Times; Rocking the Vote
Twenty-one years ago, Congress passed the 26th Amendment giving 18-year-olds the right to vote.
Unfortunately, younger voters haven't had much impact on Presidential politics since then.
In the last election, only a third of all those 18 to 24 voted.
The music channel MTV, the Public Broadcasting System and the Fox network therefore deserve praise for their innovative efforts to build registration among young voters.
MTV alone has registered 100,000 young people with its "Choose or Lose" campaign.
It has also interviewed candidates, discussed issues of concern to younger voters, explained the electoral process and offered a political primer on terms like "spin doctor" and "flesh pressing."


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Campaign Almanac; Countdown to Election Day
GEORGE BUSH
President Bush continued to fire away at Bill Clinton's character, as aides said the oratory on both sides was likely to get even uglier in the final two days of the campaign.
His voice was weakened but Mr.
Bush appeared upbeat as he swept through a string of states he must win if he is to return to office.
While his language was tougher than usual, he tried to blunt the impression he has dropped into a last-ditch, fiercely negative campaign.
At a rally in Michigan, the President told 5,700 party workers that the name "Slick Willie" was not his invention.
"We tell the truth, and they think it's hell," he said.
"So be it." BILL CLINTON
Suffering from laryngitis, Gov.
Bill Clinton could barely speak as he began a two-day press into Ohio, Pennsylvania and New Jersey, as part of a strategy to strike at President Bush in Republican areas of critical industrial states.
His voice was so weak that his attacks on Mr.
Bush had to be severely curtailed.
The Governor's wife, Hillary, did most of the speaking throughout the day, and at one stop Mr.
Clinton managed to talk only 21 seconds.
But at an airport in northern Pennsylvania, he warned a crowd about the Republican assaults to his character and promised to restore economic optimism and fairness to the Presidency.
ROSS PEROT
Ross Perot launched the most blistering attacks of his campaign, turning the main force of his fire from President Bush to Mr.
Clinton.
At a rally in California, Mr.
Perot seemed to go out of his way to criticize Mr.
Clinton, questioning his morals because of his experimentation with marijuana, ridiculing his record in Arkansas and even dismissing his ability to play the saxaphone.
Mr.
Perot did not entirely halt his attacks on the President.
"As you're sitting there watching all this stuff," Mr.
Perot said, "say, If I ran a small business, if I had a small business, would I hire either one of these guys to run it?"


Books of The Times; A Life of Hemingway, The Esthete and Loner
Hemingway  A Life Without Consequences  By James R. Mellow  Illustrated. 704 pages.
Houghton Mifflin Company. $30.
Is there really a need for yet another biography of Ernest Hemingway?
After all, we already have Carlos Baker's "Ernest Hemingway: A Life Story" (Scribner's, 1969), Jeffrey Meyers's "Hemingway: A Biography" (Harper &amp; Row, 1985) and Kenneth S. Lynn's "Hemingway" (Simon &amp; Schuster, 1987), among other biographies, not to mention memoirs and specialized studies too numerous to mention.


Lawrence H. Clayman, Dentist, Is Dead at 82
Dr.
Lawrence H. Clayman, a retired dentist who had taught at several universities, died on Thursday in Boynton Beach, Fla.
He was 82 years old and lived in Great Neck, L.I.
He drowned, his son-in-law, Dr. Jonathan Ferencz, said.


D'Amato Matching Blows With Abrams In Campaign Flurry
After trading invectives in their final televised debate of the United States Senate race yesterday, Robert Abrams and Alfonse M. D'Amato plunged into the pivotal New York City suburbs in the final hours before an election that may depend less on either candidate's performance than on Gov.
Bill Clinton's projected margin of victory in the state.
The national and local campaigns have generated hundreds of thousands of newly registered voters in New York who could jeopardize the Republican majority in New York's State Senate and threaten other incumbents, Mr.
D'Amato included.
He has spent more in this campaign than any other candidate for United States Senate in the nation -- in excess of $10 million -- to overcome political handicaps that might have discouraged a less tenacious candidate and which a bolder challenger might have exploited more.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
General Motors' directors are to meet this morning and are expected to entrust Jack Smith with the task of quickly halting the financial bleeding of North American operations.
Whether Mr.
Smith can succeed at that daunting task may depend on whether the board sets reasonable goals and whether he moves quickly and decisively to change the way G.M. operates.  [ Page D1. ]


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Behind The Scenes; On the Trail, the Contradictory Sides of Bush
In the blue caboose where he was sipping tea to soothe his worsening cold, the President was somber.
It was Saturday morning at the start of a scenic train trip through Wisconsin.
Barbara Bush was talking to two grandchildren, Sam and Ellie, and looking at presents from supporters.
And Mr.
Bush was speaking to Ron Kaufman, an aide who had come back to give him new poll numbers indicating that his surge was flattening after a day of news reports suggesting that he was more in the loop on the Iran-contra scandal than he had yet allowed.


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Monday  Construction Spending . . .
Sept.
Purchasing Managers' Report . . .
Oct.
Tuesday  Leading Indicators . . .
Sept.
Wednesday  Factory Orders . . .
Sept.
Auto Sales . . .
Oct.
Thursday  Productivity . . . 3d Qtr.
Weekly Jobless Claims  Friday  Employment . . .
Oct.
Consumer Credit . . .
Sept.


Shunning Risks, Spassky Gets a Draw
Bobby Fischer and Boris Spassky, playing as though they suspected each other of preparing secret tricks, carefully agreed to a draw yesterday in Game 28 of their exhibition match in Belgrade.
The score remains Fischer 9, Spassky 5.
Fischer needs only one more victory to gain the match and the $3.35 million prize, but he has gotten bogged down, having lost Game 26 and drawn Game 27 and this one.
The remainder of the $5 million purse will go to the loser.
If Spassky produces a 9-9 miracle, he and Fischer get $2.5 million each.


Pop and Jazz in Review
The Bats Knitting Factory SoHo
Pop from New Zealand maps out territories akin to the landscapes of magical realism.
Like the literary genre, the music made by groups like the Bats, the Chills and the Verlaines explores what occurs when unfathomable things happen to ordinary people.
The Bats work this fanciful ground particularly well.
Layering delicate chords around a core of insistent rock rhythm, the quartet rebuilds the elusive stuff of imagination and melancholy into sweetly memorable music.


Judith Schwartz, Michael Brizel
Dr.
Judith W. Schwartz, an obstetrician and gynecologist in New York, was married yesterday to Michael A. Brizel, an associate general counsel for The Reader's Digest Association Inc. in Chappaqua, N.Y.
Rabbi Michael Shmidman performed the ceremony at the Burden Mansion in New York.
Dr.
Schwartz, who is keeping her name, graduated from Barnard College and received an M.D. from Mount Sinai School of Medicine.
She is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Fred Schwartz of Fairfield, Conn.
Her father, now retired, was the owner of the Ideal Plumbing and Heating Company, a plumbing contractor in Fairfield.


Review/Opera: McTeague; A Musical Slice of Grim American Life
There is an almost painful yearning in American musical life for a healthy operatic tradition, one that would combine the energy of the Broadway musical with the ambitions of European opera, one that would merge vernacular styles and a cultivated esthetic.
That yearning was palpable here this weekend, when the Lyric Opera of Chicago presented the world premiere of William Bolcom's "McTeague."
This work is Mr.
Bolcom's first full-scale opera and the first commissioned by the company since 1976.
It is part of an admirable decadelong project conceived by Ardis Krainik, the Lyric's general director, to consolidate the achievement of American opera, partly by presenting an American work each season until the year 2000.
Mr.
Bolcom confronted the desire for a new American style head-on.
He combined exuberant hints of barbershop quartet with pained expressionist modernism, robust turn-of-the-century street music along with extended classical forms like the passacaglia.
The results were as mixed as the styles, but the event had a celebratory quality.


Getting a Grip, Just Not Right Now
THIS is a column that should have been written weeks ago.
But with everything else going on -- the vernal equinox and new fiscal year, all these rainy days, falling leaves and Christmas catalogues, the Brooklyn incinerator fight, Bosnia and the mysterious construction that closes one lane of the Tappan Zee Bridge so workers can park their truck and toilet and climb over the side -- it's just been an impossible time to write an entire column on such a serious issue.
This column concerns a major social problem that strikes virtually every American without warning.
The problem hasn't been fully researched because, quite simply, we're too busy with other things.
We'll get to it later.


G.M. BOARD MAKES SWEEPING CHANGES IN EXECUTIVE SUITE
The board of the General Motors Corporation, led by a group of independent directors, swept away a generation of top managers yesterday and installed a new management system to try to halt the No. 1 auto maker's pronounced decline.
Yesterday's moves strengthened the board's powers over a new and younger team of executives, several of whom led the turnaround of G.M.'s troubled European operations in the 1980's.


Century South Banks Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Royal Apology to Brett
EWING KAUFFMAN, who owns the Royals, publicly apologized yesterday to GEORGE BRETT, who said last week that someone in the Kansas City organization was pressuring him to retire.
"The Royals want him to play," Kauffman said during a news conference.
"George has earned the right to do what he wants to do. If he wants to play, the Royals are happy to have him."


OHM Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Chittenden Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Major Races to Watch in Today's Election in New Jersey
U.S.
House of Representatives 2D DISTRICT: ATLANTIC, BURLINGTON, CAPE MAY, CUMBERLAND, GLOUCESTER, SALEM The Candidates WILLIAM J. HUGHES, 60, a Democrat.
The incumbent, he has represented the district for 18 years.
Was an assistant prosecutor in Cape May County for a decade before that.
FRANK LoBIONDO, 46, a Republican.
Elected as State Assemblyman in 1987.
Had been a Cumberland County Freeholder for 3 years.
Operations manager for a family-owned trucking business.
The District  The Second is the state's largest congressional district, sprawling over six counties, from the Delaware River to the Atlantic Ocean.
The vast majority of residents are white, and among voters, Republicans outnumber Democrats, 82,000 to 65,000.
But the largest group of voters -- more than 138,000 -- are unaffiliated.
The Issues  Gun control has become a significant issue in the race because the two men have very different views.
Mr.
Hughes, a gun-control advocate who has written several major anti-crime bills as chairman of the Judiciary subcommittee on crime -- he has since switched to the subcommittee on courts, intellectual property and judicial administration -- has emphasized Mr.
LoBiondo's support from the National Rifle Association, which despises Mr.
Hughes and applauds Mr.
LoBiondo for his sponsorship of a measure to repeal Gov.
Jim Florio's ban on assault weapons in the Legislature.
Mr.
LoBiondo has assailed Mr.
Hughes for votes against the balanced budget amendment to the Constitution and in favor of the Congressional pay raise, as well as his acceptance of such Congressional perks as a taxpayer- provided automobile.
Analysis  Mr.
Hughes's self-effacing popularity and attention to the district -- he has spent few weekends in Washington during his long tenure -- have made him all but unbeatable.
Despite Mr.
LoBiondo's aggressive campaign, the incumbent's roots in the district give him the edge. 6TH DISTRICT: MONMOUTH, MIDDLESEX The Candidates FRANK PALLONE JR., 40, Democrat.
Lawyer and former Long Branch City Councilman and state legislator.
Elected to Congress in 1988.
JOSEPH M. KYRILLOS JR., 32, Republican.
A State Senator and former member of the General Assembly.
Manager of business standards and ethics for the Mid-Atlantic Health Group, a hospital management company in Rumson.
The District
The new Sixth District is an amalgam of two areas: the northern half of Mr.
Pallone's old Third District along the Jersey Shore, and southern and central Middlesex County from the old Sixth District, which was represented for the last 12 years by Bernard J. Dwyer, who has retired.
The southern end of the district begins in Sea Girt, an affluent oceanfront town, and heads north and then west into industrial Middlesex County, which makes up 58 percent of the district and gives it a blue-collar and Democratic cast.
The Issues
Mr.
Kyrillos has been basing his campaign on voter frustration over the economy and the resulting anti-incumbency mood.
He said he recognized that much of the anger was aimed at President Bush, whom he supports, but that voters should remember the role of Congress.
He characterizes Mr.
Pallone, who attracts many large donations from political action committees, as "the ultimate insider."
Mr.
Pallone calls himself a "maverick" and repeats that he was the only member of the New Jersey delegation to vote against the last Congressional pay raise in 1989.
He has won the support of national and state environmental organizations for his sponsorship of clean-water legislation in the State Legislature and Congress.
Both men support abortion rights, although Mr.
Pallone was a strong opponent of abortion before changing his position three years ago.
Analysis
Mr.
Pallone has raised five times more money over the last two years than Mr.
Kyrillos, who entered the race only last spring.
The edge in financing and the strong showing of Gov.
Bill Clinton in the Presidential race have helped install Mr.
Pallone as the favorite.
With Mr.
Bush closing the gap in recent days, Mr.
Kyrillos has been attracting new support and exhibiting increased enthusiasm as the race ends.
Still, a Kyrillos victory would be considered an upset. 7TH DISTRICT: ESSEX, MIDDLESES, SOMERSET, UNION The Candidates
ROBERT D. FRANKS, 41, Republican.
A member of the Assembly since 1979.
Twice served as chairman of the New Jersey Republican State Committee.
LEONARD R. SENDELSKY, 58, Democrat.
A house builder who founded his own company in 1958.
Has never run for office.
One of the state's major fund-raisers for Democratic candidates.
The District
The newly redrawn district, for 20 years the fief of Representative Matthew J. Rinaldo, a Republican, stretches across northern New Jersey and is one of the most ethnically diverse in the state.
The Issues
Neither candidate has found a specific issue to exploit.
Instead each has focused on portraying himself as a Washington outsider intent on reforming Congress, while painting his opponent as a political insider.
Analysis
Representative Rinaldo surprised everyone when he announced his retirement just days before the filing deadline for the election.
With no incumbent and a new district, this is one of the most unpredictable races in the state.
After winning the Democratic nomination, Mr.
Sendelsky spent much of his effort compiling material for a race against Mr.
Rinaldo.
Nearly all of it became useless.
Mr.
Franks's campaign had a late start.
Each candidate has claimed to hold a slight edge, while worrying about the outcome. 8TH DISTRICT: ESSEX, PASSAIC The Candidates JOSEPH L. BUBBA, 54, Republican.
He was elected to the State Senate in 1981.
He also served as Passaic County Freeholder and Passaic County Republican chairman in the mid 1970's and early 80's.
HERBERT C. KLEIN, 62, Democrat.
A lawyer, he served in the State Assembly from 1971 to 1976 when he was defeated in his bid for a third term.
As executive director of the Passaic County Democratic Committee, he has remained politically active.
He is also one of the biggest fund-raisers for Democratic candidates and causes in the state.
The District
With the voting-age population almost equally divided between urban and areas, blue-collar bedroom communities and wealthy mountainside suburbs, the 8th is one of the most varied political districts in the state.
Democrats outnumber Republicans, 92,000 to nearly 55,000.
But in recent national and statewide elections, an unaffiliated bloc of voters, now numbering about 125,000, have given the edge to Republican candidates.
About 70 percent of residents are white, with large blocs of second-generation immigrants.
Blacks make up about 15 percent of residents, with most concentrated in two cities, Paterson and Passaic.
The Issues
Mr.
Bubba, a conservative who prides himself on never having voted for a tax increase in 11 years in Trenton, has attacked Mr.
Klein for voting for the state income tax when he was a member of the Assembly in 1976.
Mr.
Bubba also highlights his tough stance in the Legislature against crime.
Mr.
Klein argues that he is "not a career politician who has lost touch with ordinary people." He also assails Mr.
Bubba for accepting contributions from the National Rifle Association and supporting the overturn of the state's ban on assault firearms.
Analysis
When Robert A. Roe, a very popular Republican, announced he would not run again after 22 years in Congress, the district turned into a battleground for the first time in two decades.
Mr.
Bubba has the edge in name recognition, and is thus favored, but the race at this point is considered too close to call.  13TH DISTRICT: HUDSON, ESSEX, MIDDLESEX, UNION The Candidates ROBERT MENENDEZ, 38.
Mayor of Union City since 1986.
Was serving his second term in the State Assembly when selected to fill a vacant State Senate seat in February 1991; was elected to a two-year term in the Senate in November.
FRED G. THEEMLING JR., 48.
Lawyer and former assistant Hudson County prosecutor.
Tried unsucessfully to unseat the retiring incumbent Congressman, Frank Guarini, in 1988 and 1990.
The District
The 13th was drawn after the 1990 Census, when New Jersey lost one seat, and comprises working-class, urban areas.
Was drawn to maximize Hispanic voter strength; about 43 percent of the district is Hispanic.
The Issues
Both candidates have focused on jobs, the economy, health-care costs and crime.
Mr.
Menendez's "urban agenda" would focus on tax incentives for new development and job-training in urban areas.
Both candidates favor urban enterprise zones; Mr.
Theemling would also grant tax breaks to companies that hire new workers and raise taxes on businesses that lay off workers to make a profit.
Analysis
Mr.
Menendez, the Democrat, is the heavy favorite in a district where Democrats far outnumber Republicans.
Besides outspending Mr.
Theemling by more than 15 to one, he has received all the major endorsements.
He is a Cuban-American and many Cuban-American voters in the district, who tend to vote Republican, are expected to support him.
He would become New Jersey's first Hispanic representative in Congress.
Mr.
Theemling's hope is that the anti-politician, anti-incumbency sentiment in the district will work in his favor.


One Man Dies In Gun Battle; 2 Are Injured
One man was killed and two men were critically wounded on a Queens street last night when more than a dozen bullets were fired into their car by at least four gunmen, the police said.
The Queens District Attorney, Richard A. Brown, who rushed to the scene of the shooting, described it as an "apparent mob hit," but the police said late last night that they had not determined a motive.
The suspects, who had not been arrested or identified last night, fled the scene in a stolen station wagon that they later abandoned several blocks away, the police said.


FPI Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


New York Democrats' Hopes Tied to Clinton Coattail Effect
Democratic candidates labored furiously yesterday to capitalize on the strong victory they expect Gov.
Bill Clinton to capture today in New York State, while Republicans in a variety of races worked just as hard to avoid being swept away in a local Democratic landslide.
From a United States Senate race that has become the costliest and possibly the nastiest in the nation, to the struggle for control of the State Legislature in Albany, the Democrats' expected strong showing at the top of the ticket was having a marked impact on campaigns all the way down the ballot.


Commercial Federal reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Nortek Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 26


Guilty Plea in Fraud That Led to Boston Slaying
In a surprise move, Matthew Stuart pleaded guilty today to taking part in an insurance-fraud scheme with his brother that led to the 1989 shooting death of his brother's pregnant wife, Carol Stuart.
Mr.
Stuart's unexpected plea ended a case that had heightened racial tensions in Boston and attracted nationwide attention.
But it shed no new light on the incident and suggested that there would never be a full explanation of Mrs.
Stuart's killing.
Authorities have said they believed that Charles Stuart shot her shortly after the couple left a childbirth class on Oct. 23, 1989.


Classical Music in Review
Leonid Kuzmin  Pianist Alice Tully Hall
Leonid Kuzmin seems almost bored by the astonishing sounds he can summon at the keyboard.
His recital on Sunday evening was perplexing and frustrating -- the case of a tremendously gifted young man in a hurry, heading toward no visible destination.


Sports of The Times; Magic's Collision Course
IT is hoped that Magic Johnson retired from basketball yesterday for the right reasons.
It is hoped that he is not ill.
And it is hoped that, as he said in his telephone call yesterday morning to his former Laker coach, Pat Riley, now coach of the Knicks, one of the major factors in Johnson's decision was his "genuine concern about the genuine concerns of the other players in the league."
Almost one year to the day in which he had previously retired from basketball because he had tested positive for H.I.V., the virus that leads to AIDS -- it was Nov. 7, 1991 -- Magic Johnson said yesterday that he was retiring "for good."


To Sleep, Perchance to Learn: Neural Links to Memory
To learn a complex skill like typing, driving a car or scuba diving most effectively, scientists offer this advice to students of all ages:
Go to bed and dream about it.
The newest study demonstrating a link between dreams and memory was presented here last week at the annual meeting of the Society for Neuroscience.


Jets Thank O'Brien for the Victory but Give the Nod to Nagle
Less than 24 hours after Ken O'Brien turned back the clock and guided the Jets to a 26-14 victory over his old nemesis, the Miami Dolphins, Coach Bruce Coslet decided to go back to the future.
Coslet said second-year quarterback Browning Nagle, who sat out the game Sunday against the Dolphins because of a sprained left foot, would start next Sunday against the Broncos in Denver, provided Nagle is healthy enough to practice this week.


Review/Theater; Robert Wilson Tackles the French Revolution
Ever since Robert Wilson graduated from his devoted New York ensembles of disciples and started, in 1979, to direct theater and opera all over the world, he has created a huge body of work.
And "created" is the proper word, for any Wilson production of a text by someone other than himself is still a Wilson work: not only does he direct, design and light the productions, he also reshapes the original text into something that counts as both his and the author's.
At their best, these productions become conversations across time, juxtapositions of his own very individual, very (post-)modern sensibility with another's from the past.
At their worst, they cannibalize the original, allowing mannered superficiality, gimmicks and half-thought-out quirks to replace true dramatic insight.


Avnet Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 2


The Chess Column
During the exhibition match between Bobby Fischer and Boris Spassky, the Tuesday chess column by Robert Byrne will not appear.
The column will resume after the match.


Imutec Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Luxottica Group SPA reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


U.S. SAYS 3 TRIED TO SMUGGLE ALIENS
An attempt to smuggle Chinese aliens into New York was broken up in September when the Coast Guard responded to a distress signal from a fishing trawler off the North Carolina coast and discovered 150 people crowded in the hold, immigration officials said yesterday.
In a complaint filed yesterday in Federal District Court in Manhattan, two New York businessmen, George Huang and William Chen, were charged by the Immigration and Naturalization Service with masterminding the smuggling attempt.


New York Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Election Night: TV; What to Watch for as the Networks Start Predicting
Like Super Bowl Sunday, Election night is one of those semi-national holidays when many Americans have a reason to celebrate while many others -- sometimes even the majority -- are plunged into mourning.
When will you know what group you belong to?
This, of course, depends in large part on how close the vote is.
But there are certain signs that are available early to help canny voters get a jump on the competition.


Peoples Energy reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


CMS Enhancements reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Riley and Players Taken by Surprise
When Magic Johnson phoned Pat Riley this morning before practice, Riley never expected Johnson to say he had decided to retire.
"He sounded a little bit down, but he has given it a lot of thought," Riley said of Johnson, a close friend whom he coached for nine seasons with the Los Angeles Lakers.
"I was surprised. He has faced everything, so I was a little surprised that he wouldn't carry through with it. But I understand it. Other people are concerned, and he has genuine concern for that. Now that players have begun to voice concerns, he's beginning to wonder."


Ambac Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


35,000 Join the Depressing Roll of Bosnia Refugees
The streets of this small town north of Sarajevo were filled today with thousands of confused and often desperate refugees, five days after the worst military setback yet suffered by the Bosnian Government sent 35,000 people, virtually the entire population of the fallen town of Jajce, fleeing in terror down a narrow mountain road.
But families that clustered together in muddy tracts around the town -- many after spending several nights in the open air and surviving heavy shelling of their evacuation route by Serbian nationalist troops -- were only the most recent and visible symptom of the growing human disaster that has beset this former Yugoslav republic.


Undermining the Right to Vote
Public contempt for politicians has reached the point where proposals to limit their terms score as high as 75 percent in some polls.
But the surface allure is deceptive.
Term limits actually make matters worse.
Term limitation is on the ballot in 14 states today.
It is billed as the sure way to throw the rascals out -- automatic ejection from office after a set number of years.
In truth, it's the sure way to throw the baby out with the bath water, ejecting valuable, experienced leaders along with the ordinary and the bad.
Worse yet, it denies voters their fundamental freedom to vote for anyone they choose.


Review/Dance; A Tale With Overtones of Goya and Garcia Lorca
In "Andalusian Green," his new work for the Paul Taylor Dance Company, Christopher Gillis does something surprising for a choreographer who grew up in an age when plot was out rather than in.
That is, he tells a story and tells it well.
Mr.
Gillis's premiere, with its strong emotional impact, will startle those who follow fashion rather than their hearts.
"Andalusian Green," presented by the Taylor troupe on Sunday night at the City Center (131 West 55th Street), shows Mr.
Gillis in a linear mood, working very differently from the way he did in the past.


Lancaster Colony reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Heart Technology Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Panel Opposes Allowing Women To Choose Combat Voluntarily
A Presidential panel said today that if combat roles were opened to women, it should not be on a purely voluntary basis.
Rather, the 15-member commission said the military services should adopt policies that enable military officials to assign qualified personnel to any position open to them regardless of sex.


Athlone Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Thomaston Mills reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 3


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
8.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
5.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.18
3.04
4.94
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.05
2.95
4.73
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.27
3.18
4.78
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.45
6.34
7.15
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.65
7.62
7.95
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.62
8.65
8.92
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.68
6.68
6.82
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


The Poll Findings Converge
At the end of the campaign there is striking agreement among the polls.
Mr.
Clinton's support was identical in five surveys -- 44 percent -- and in a sixth it was 43 percent.
Mr.
Bush's support ranged by only three percentage points, from 35 percent to 38 percent.
Mr.
Perot's support was between 14 percent and 17 percent.
When the polls are averaged, Mr.
Clinton has 44 percent, Mr.
Bush 36 percent, and Mr.
Perot 16 percent.


Value Health Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Cloud Over the Election
It would be no surprise tonight at about 9:01 Eastern time if many voters sputter with irritation.
That's when TV quite conceivably will declare the winner of the Presidential election.
The winner?
What about the millions of people in the West who will not have voted yet?
If they should then decide not to vote, democracy would be damaged in two ways.
These discouraged voters, at least theoretically, could be decisive in
other
races.
And in any case, their sense of public participation will suffer a bruising kick.


Data-Design Laboratories Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Western Resources reports earnings for 12mos Sept 30


Susquehanna Bancshares Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Hampton Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


First Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Maxco Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Curative Technologies reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Harassment or Flirting? Europe Tries to Decide
For all their sniggering at American hang-ups over sex, Europeans are following the United States example of clamping down on sexual harassment in the workplace, drawing a line for the first time between old-fashioned flirting and outright abuse.
In October, France became the latest European country to adopt legislation banning sexual harassment; anyone using a position of authority to demand or exact sexual favors will be subject to a year's imprisonment and a $2,000 fine.


Tejas Gas reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Liberty Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


By Design; Style Without a Long Skirt
Perhaps you like to be in step with a new fashion but have been defeated by the long skirt.
Your reaction may not be as dramatic as that of a fashion editor who arrived at a recent Paris fashion show wearing old velvet leggings and a grin that stretched from ear to ear.
"At last, I'm free!" she exclaimed, kicking her legs in the air.
"I thought of taking off that long, tight skirt in the middle of the Place Vendome and burning it as a symbolic gesture."
Dealing with the snug fit and accouterments -- especially clunky shoes -- that make the long skirt work has driven lots of stylish women to drop the whole thing.
Yet, there is no question that a hemline conspicuously above the knee now looks demode.


Chiles Offshore Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Knowledge House reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


1990 Letter Adds New Questions On C.I.A. Role in Iraq Bank Case
The Central Intelligence Agency told the Agriculture Department in a January 1990 letter that the Rome managers of an Italian bank had taken part in a multibillion-dollar fraudulent loan scheme involving Iraq, a copy of the letter shows.
But the letter was not shared with the Justice Department, raising new questions about the C.I.A.'s cooperation with Federal prosecutors investigating the matter.
What the C.I.A. knew about the fraud, when it knew it and whether it passed the information on to the Justice Department have become the focus of investigations by the department, the C.I.A. and Congress into the United States Government's handling of one of the largest bank scandals in history.


Telus Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Review/Fashion; Blass and Herrera Skip By Lightly
Carolina Herrera led off the week's fashion action on Seventh Avenue yesterday soon after 9 A.M.
Bill Blass followed a little after 11 A.M.
Both emphasized light and lively clothes -- playing with hemlines, focusing on pants and using color to signal the upbeat mood for spring.
Bodies were veiled in sheer fabrics, midriffs were bared and jackets were opened up or cut away to show there was nothing underneath except perhaps a bra.
The New York spring shows were off to a strong start.
Both presentations took place in the designers' showrooms, not in hotel ballrooms as in the past, and thus had a more intimate scale.
The designers said they were pleased with the change.


Lufthansa Ends Plan for Continental
Lufthansa German Airlines has decided not to make a bid to take over Continental Airlines.
In making the decision, which was disclosed in Germany over the weekend, the carrier's supervisory board overruled its own management, people familiar with the bidding said.
By refraining from the auction for Continental, Lufthansa will not pursue a course similar to that taken by some of its leading European rivals to form alliances with big United States airlines.


Marine Midland's No. 2 Appointed to Top Post
James H. Cleave, the No. 2 executive at the Marine Midland Bank, was named yesterday to become president and chief executive on Jan. 1.
Mr.
Cleave, a 50-year-old Canadian who has been Marine Midland's executive director since June, will succeed John R. H. Bond, 51, who has headed Marine Midland since June 1991.
Mr.
Bond will become group chief executive of HSBC Holdings P.L.C., the Hong Kong company that owns Marine Midland, which is based in Buffalo.


Vikings Bear Down With a Midway Romp
When the Minnesota Vikings hired Dennis Green as their head coach before this season, they called him the new sheriff in town.
Now the Vikings are the new bullies in the National Football Conference Central Division.
Minnesota completely outplayed, and eventually decimated, the Chicago Bears in a 38-10 victory tonight at Soldier Field before a crowd of 61,257.
The Vikings are now 6-2, two games ahead of second-place Chicago (4-4), and have swept the Bears this season, having won in Minnesota by 21-20 in Week 5.


Chiquita Brands International reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Regency Health Services reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Rising Sea Levels
The quantity of glacial melting that contributes to the known rise in global sea level is approximately half as much as was previously estimated, according to a study published in a recent issue of the journal Science.
Whereas previous studies found that the seas rise more than a millimeter per year for each Kelvin degree increase in temperature, the recent results show only a half-millimeter increase under the same conditions.


Canadian Roxy Petroleum reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Society, Not Science, Has Failed TB Victims; Origins of Resistance
To the Editor:
"Tuberculosis: A Killer Returns" (Oct 11-15), your excellent five-part series on tuberculosis, particularly the problem with the drug-resistant strain of the disease, deals comprehensively with a public health concern of the highest immediate importance.
But a small inaccuracy recurred in several unrelated contexts and was repeated in "Shameful Tuberculosis Epidemic" (editorial, Oct. 16).
This inaccuracy attributes the resistant strains of TB to patients who "failed to complete the full 6-to-24-months course of medication."
Patients who receive the correct combinations of antituberculosis drugs and take their medications faithfully as prescribed, but who abruptly discontinue treatment too soon, may thereafter relapse.
But they do so with infecting organisms fully susceptible to and treatable with the same chemotherapeutic regimen.


As Siege Ends, Croats Return to Ruined City
Thirteen months after it invaded and 10 months after it began promising United Nations officials that it would withdraw from Croatia completely, the Serbian-run Yugoslav Army has abandoned its siege of this ancient walled city and the neck of Croatian territory on which it sits.
The bells tolled from Dubrovnik's Renaissance and Baroque churches on Thursday, and Croatia's President, Franjo Tudjman, proclaimed "liberation" on the boarded-up main square.


Norcen Energy Res reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Masco Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


The N.B.A. Discovers It Can't Outleap Reality
A professional sports league with a long history of being at the fore of social issues could not, finally, hold up against the weight and power of AIDS.
The National Basketball Association tried its best, put on its happiest face, but ultimately shrank when confronted with a disease that divides and kills.
The league descended from the height of the gold-medal pedestal at the Summer Olympics in Barcelona, Spain, last summer to a world of understandable fear, unavoidable back-room sniping and, regrettably, ignorant, needless speculation about a man's sexual choices.


N.B.A.'s TV Is Left in Cold
Magic Johnson's abrupt re-retirement yesterday quashes any made-for-television melodrama that seemed inherent in his expected return.
Now the N.B.A. will have to live without Johnson and Larry Bird on TV and build even more around Michael Jordan, Charles Barkley, Patrick Ewing and younger stars like Shaquille O'Neal.
"Life goes on," said TNT analyst Hubie Brown.
"Now it's up to the new stars to step out and become leaders in their own right." His TNT colleague, Doug Collins, added: "There are great players in new markets just waiting to be tapped by the N.B.A."


A Deafening Blast, Then Raining Chaos
Wilhelmina Anderson was sitting with her shoes off, watching the evening news, when her apartment collapsed.
Suddenly, gusts of fire were blowing through her ninth floor windows and her kitchen wall crumbled in a deafening explosion.
"I thought it was a war," she said, still shaking, an hour after her nephew helped her walk, still shoeless, from her building to safety.


Foreign Ship Subsidies Erode U.S. Jobs
To the Editor:
Contrary to "U.S. Shipyards Cost Too Much" (letter, Oct. 7) by a Chevron Shipping Company representative, United States shipbuilders are not pacing the halls of Congress seeking protectionist legislation.
Rather, we have been seeking free trade in the construction and repair of ships by getting foreign governments out of the business of subsidizing and dumping commercial ships on the world market.


Senate Candidates Barnstorm Around New York Last Times; In Party Unity Effort, Abrams Sees 'New Era'
Robert Abrams bumped across a relentlessly gray upstate landscape through intermittent rain, sleet and snow yesterday in a final appeal in areas where polls show a tight race for the United States Senate, then raced back to heavily Democratic Manhattan to stir enthusiasm at a union rally in Harlem and at a handshaking stop on the Upper West Side.
Sounding a theme of party unity and pounding away at the need for change in Washington, the Attorney General spoke repeatedly of a "new era" in American politics and stressed that Bill Clinton, if elected, will need another vote on the Senate floor if he is to overcome Washington gridlock.
He also contended that Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato, his Republican opponent, had joined with two Republican administrations to draw jobs and money away from the state.


Corrections
An article last Tuesday about a referendum on modifications to the Canadian Constitution referred imprecisely to the status of Quebec.
It signed the Constitution Act of 1867, but did not sign the Constitution Act of 1982, when the authority to amend the document was formally taken away from the British Parliament.


Prof. Karl W. Deutsch Dies at 80; An Innovator in Political Science
Karl W. Deutsch, a leading political scientist, died Saturday at his home in Cambridge, Mass.
He was 80 years old.
Professor Deutsch died of cancer, a daughter, Mary Edsall, said.


American Pacific Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Del Laboratories reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


NSC Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Observer; Gabby Doctor Tells All
Dr.
Harold J. Liverworth, world-famous expert, makes some startling confessions in his newest book, "Stop My Head Before It Talks Again."
"It was greed and vanity that made me a talking head," his book begins.
Before conquering these vices, the doctor was talking on as many as eight television shows every Sunday.


COLLEGE SOCCER REPORT
Women
The National Collegiate Athletic Association yesterday awarded 12 bids for its Division I tournament.
The final four championships will be staged at the campus of one of the semifinalists.
The semifinals will be played Nov. 21, with the championship game being Nov. 22.
The N.C.A.A. instituted the women's Division I tournament in 1982 and North Carolina has captured the title every year except 1985, when George Mason upset the Tar Heels in the championship game.


Airgas Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Horace Mann Educators reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


CPAC Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Amwest Insurance Group reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


First Source Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Election Day Choices
Here is a summary of our recommendations for noteworthy races.
Polls are open in New York State from 6 A.M. to 9 P.M., in Connecticut from 6 A.M. to 8 P.M. and in New Jersey from 7 A.M. to 8 P.M.
PRESIDENT AND VICE PRESIDENT Bill Clinton and Al Gore (D-L) NEW YORK STATE


Just Like Starting Over for Lakers
An hour into Magic Johnson's second November retirement, the Los Angeles Lakers fielded "maybe 30 calls" from fans demanding their money back.
What seemed like a championship-caliber team over the weekend is now rated second-best in its own city.
There will be no refunds, and when the Lakers open their season down the freeway Friday night against the Clippers, the first guard off the bench will be a rookie and the up-tempo offense they perfected in preseason will be null and void.


Parking Rules
Because of the election, alternate-side parking rules are suspended in New York City today.
Other regulations remain in effect.


High Court Rejects an I.R.S. Appeal
The Supreme Court was unmoved today by a warning from the Internal Revenue Service that requiring it to deliver tax deficiency notices to taxpayers' correct addresses would "virtually paralyze the service's enforcement efforts."
Without comment, the Court turned down the I.R.S. appeal of a lower court's decision invalidating a notice of deficiency that was mailed to a couple's old address and never forwarded, despite the couple's instructions to the Postal Service.


Manufacturing Grew By a Little Last Month
After sliding into a decline in September, the nation's manufacturing economy posted minuscule growth in October, according to a survey of the nation's purchasing managers.
Economists saw little heartening news in the figures, saying that the rate of growth in the manufacturing sector was too slight to be considered significant.
The National Association of Purchasing Management said yesterday that its index of economic activity rose to 50.6 percent, from 49 percent in September.
A reading above 50 percent indicates that the nation's manufacturing economy is expanding while a reading below 50 percent indicates economic contraction.


Washington National reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


North Fork Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Treasuries Fall on Eve Of Election
The pre-election swoon in the bond market continued yesterday, with prices taking one last tumble before the voting.
The 30-year Treasury bond fell almost half a point, pushing its yield up to 7.65 percent, the highest since July.
Prices on Treasury notes fell even more sharply, and the discount rates on Treasury bills jumped.
Trading was thin.


Insteel Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Slovaks Finish Much-Criticized Dam on Danube
Bucking a storm of criticism and threats from several nations, the Slovak republic is digging in to defend its nationalistic energy policy -- a policy that has diverted the Danube River and has apparently preserved two large nuclear reactors that many Western experts say should be dismantled.
As Hungary reviles Slovakia in terms that once might have started a war, Slovak officials stand firm.


Atlantis Group reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Critic's Notebook; The Election Winner: TV Audiences
Whatever the fate of your favorite candidate today, television audiences have had a relatively good campaign.
In most ways -- news coverage, interviews, commercials and debates -- it has been more open, more informative, more fun and less dispiriting than the 1988 encounter.
But even while showing what it can do, television also showed its ingrained limitations.
To begin on a happy note, the nightly news programs, though upstaged by giddier forums, plugged away at the issues more conscientiously than ever and managed to fight off a sometime reliance on those dreaded photo ops and sound bites.
In that regard, the network-news departments kept the promises they made after the last campaign not to be the servants of handlers, spinners and media manipulators.
They scrutinized the candidates' claims night after night and tried to make some sense out of conflicting and confusing figures. (PBS and CNN and other cable networks also contributed to the cause for their smaller audiences.)


Horn &amp; Hardart reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 26


Cable Becomes New Player in Political Ad Game
For two minutes every hour, between "Murder, She Wrote" reruns on the USA Network, "The Days and Nights of Molly Dodd" on Lifetime and station breaks on premium sports channels, a quiet revolution is flickering across cable television systems here and around the country.
Local and state politicians are using cable more than ever before to advertise their campaigns, peppering a wide range of cable networks with their messages at a cost comparable to that of radio and far less than that of broadcast television stations.


PanCanadian Petroleum reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Independent; Perot Wraps Up His Campaign Where He Mostly Ran It: on TV
On the last day of his quixotic Presidential campaign, Ross Perot made his final live pitch, to supporters in a mostly empty hall.
But the main forum for his appeal today was not that appearance but the medium that sired and nurtured his independent campaign: television.
For an election eve video blitz, Mr.
Perot paid nearly $3 million for two hours of television time tonight in the form of 30-minute blocks on ABC and CBS and an hour block on NBC.


BancFlorida Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Interstate Power reports earnings for 12mo Sept 30


Wolverine World Wide reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 5


Pop and Jazz in Review
Ann Blyth and Bill Hayes
Rainbow and Stars 30 Rockefeller Plaza Through Nov. 21
Where has Ann Blyth been all these years?
When the star of "The Great Caruso," "Kismet" and other 1950's movie musicals stepped onto the stage last Tuesday evening, she seemed so physically unchanged from her 1950's image that it was possible to imagine she had been frozen for the last 30 years and had thawed herself out for the occasion.


CT Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


JSB Financial Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Brock Exploration Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Classical Music in Review
Olivier Baumont  Harpsichordist Merkin Concert Hall
The fascinating contrasts at Thursday night's harpsichord recital by Olivier Baumont came at the beginning, when eight pieces by Rameau, all in the key of E, were put next to five more by Couperin.
The first were festive, annunciatory, full of ceremonial flourish.
The Couperin items -- they comprise the "Vingt-cinquieme Ordre" -- were personal, contemplative, direct and often profoundly private.
In this juxtaposition, Rameau played peacock to Couperin's nightingale.


Scientists Ponder Saving Planet From Earth-Bound Comet
THEORETICIANS of doom, who have long pondered the odds of cosmic bombardment and whether a way might be found to save the planet from destruction, always dabbling in abstractions, suddenly have a real case study on their hands with the rediscovery of a large comet now calculated to have roughly a 1-in-10,000 chance of hitting Earth.
While low odds of disaster rule out a sense of urgency, as does the distant date of potential collision, Aug. 14, 2126, doomsday scientists are nonetheless having a field day as they envision ways to track and divert the icy interloper, cheerily hoping against hope that they can ride to the rescue with their rockets and nuclear warheads.


Citing 'Controversies,' Johnson Retires Again
Magic Johnson, just four days away from resuming the hectic pace of professional basketball, today announced his retirement for a second time, a decision apparently affected by emerging concern from other players.
Johnson, who had played in five exhibition games for the Los Angeles Lakers, is not suffering from health problems related to his being infected with the virus that causes AIDS, according to his personal physician.


Commercial Bancorp of Colo. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Montana Is Put on Hold
JOE MONTANA, on the advice of team doctors, yesterday canceled plans to throw and will wait until later this week before trying to resume his comeback from an elbow injury.
Montana, who remains on the San Francisco 49ers' injured-reserve list, told reporters Sunday that his condition had improved and that he intended to test the surgically repaired passing elbow yesterday for the first time in more than a month.
But a club spokesman, RODNEY KNOX, said that the team physician, Dr.
MICHAEL DILLINGHAM, convinced Montana to wait until at least later this week. (AP)


Cabot Oil &amp; Gas reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Seymour D. Lewis, 79, An Antitrust Lawyer
Seymour D. Lewis, a lawyer who specialized in antitrust litigation and was also active in Jewish community affairs, died on Sunday at Beth Israel Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 79 years old and lived in Larchmont, N.Y.
He died of pneumonia, said his brother-in-law Max Freund.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: News Analysis; Year of Political Changes Voters Impose Discipline on the Candidates As Perot Finds a New Way of Campaigning
There was a common complaint after the 1988 election, a sense that for all the maneuvering, all the nastiness, all the millions of dollars and hours of television time, surprisingly little actually happened.
The campaigns rarely dealt with the big issues of the day and never carried the country very far beyond the politics of the 1980's.
This is not a complaint likely to be heard about the election of 1992.
From the New Hampshire primary on, the voters provided a merciless reality check on the candidates; those who strayed from the economy for very long were quickly punished.


Sex Assault Trial Delayed as Psychologist's Actions Are Questioned
Testimony in the Glen Ridge sex assault trial was postponed until Wednesday because of defense lawyers' questions about the ethical conduct of a psychological expert testifying for the prosecution.
The psychologist, Dr.
Susan Esquilin, asked today to be excused from further cross examination until she consulted with a private lawyer.
Defense lawyers have complained that she treated the mildly retarded young women at the center of the case as a private client after evaluating the woman's mental capacity for the prosecution in 1989.


No Headline
It has become obvious that the various controversies surrounding my return are taking away from both basketball as a sport and the larger issue of living with H.I.V., for me and the many people affected. -- MAGIC JOHNSON.  [ B9:5. ]


Familiar Dinosaurs May Take New Shape
NEW fossil discoveries in Wyoming show that paleontologists, and all those vivid images in museums and books, could be wrong in one very visible respect about the appearance of the hulking sauropods, one of the most familiar groups of dinosaurs.
The long tails of these huge reptiles, it now seems, were not smooth and unadorned.
In at least some fossil specimens, a row of spines ran along the top ridge of the tail, raising speculation that the spines continued along the top of the body and neck as well.


Cubs Release Jim Frey
The Chicago Cubs yesterday severed their relationship with former manager and general manager JIM FREY.
The Cubs issued a one-sentence statement saying Frey will not be rehired as senior vice president and special player consultant.
Frey was named to those roles last fall after he was replaced as general manager by LARRY HIMES. (AP)


Montreal Trustco reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


United Companies Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


James Rowley, 84, Who Headed Secret Service and Reorganized It
James J. Rowley, the former head of the United States Secret Service who reorganized the agency after the assassination of President John F. Kennedy, died Sunday at his home in Leisure World, Md.
He was 84 years old.
The cause of death was congestive heart failure, his family said.


Classical Music in Review
David Shea  Composer Roulette 228 West Broadway TriBeCa
In some composing circles, creative energy is going less into format and design and more into sounds for their own sake.
Here, basic materials cease to be the raw data from which a message is formed and become the message itself.
David Shea's six compositions on Saturday night -- featuring seven musicians, recorded sounds and various interactions -- carried the idea even further.
Synthesizers, samplers and other recording devices, once the agents of such explorations, were often their object.
Indeed, a great deal of Mr.
Shea's recorded material came from records themselves.


Nature Food Centres reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 27


EAB reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Chaus (Bernard) (N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Horizon Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Senate Candidates Barnstorm Around New York Last Times; In Party Unity Effort, Abrams Sees 'New Era'
Robert Abrams bumped across a relentlessly gray upstate landscape through intermittent rain, sleet and snow yesterday in a final appeal in areas where polls show a tight race for the United States Senate, then raced back to heavily Democratic Manhattan to stir enthusiasm at a union rally in Harlem and at a handshaking stop on the Upper West Side.
Sounding a theme of party unity and pounding away at the need for change in Washington, the Attorney General spoke repeatedly of a "new era" in American politics and stressed that Bill Clinton, if elected, will need another vote on the Senate floor if he is to overcome Washington gridlock.
He also contended that Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato, his Republican opponent, had joined with two Republican administrations to draw jobs and money away from the state.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-9  CHAOS AND CONFUSION IN BOSNIA As recent Serbian conquests push the number of homeless in Bosnia to 1.5 million, United Nations officials are growing increasingly anxious about the fate of the refugees as the Balkan winter descends.
A3


DeVry Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Kenan Transport Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Cellular Technical Serivices reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Winfield Is Added To Free-Agency List
DAVE WINFIELD, whose Game 6 hit brought Canada its first World Series championship, became a free agent yesterday, but he isn't necessarily abandoning the country or its No. 1 team, the Toronto Blue Jays.
OZZIE SMITH, who was Winfield's teammate in San Diego many years ago, also filed for free agency after 11 years with St.
Louis.
LOU WHITAKER, a 15-year member of the Detroit Tigers, added his name to the list, as did CRAIG LEFFERTS and PAT CLEMENTS of Baltimore and BILLY HATCHER of Boston.
The list now has 115 names.


Financial Federal Corp. reports earnings for Year to July 31


Pop and Jazz in Review
Royal Trux and Come
Knitting Factory SoHo
As recently as the mid-1980's, rock was still reverent about its blues and country roots.
No more, at least not in the realm of alternative rock, where guitar noise and a growing distaste for the baby-boom legacy are actively corroding rock's memory of its roots.
Royal Trux and Come, two bands that performed on Friday night in a C.M.J.
Music Marathon showcase, both invoke rock's primordial stomp and twang, but only to warp and deface what's left of them.


Just Toys reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Lincoln Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Progress in Trade Talks With Europe
For the first time since talks broke down 12 days ago, American and European negotiators made some progress today toward a sweeping deal to reduce farm subsidies and to break a deadlock in world trade talks aimed at reducing barriers to global commerce and stimulating the world economy.
The two negotiating teams, led by Agriculture Secretary Edward R. Madigan and Ray MacSharry, the European Community's Agriculture Secretary, announced late this afternoon that they would work into the night and possibly on Tuesday morning in pursuit of a breakthrough.
Mr.
Madigan, a former Representative from central Illinois, had been scheduled to spend this afternoon campaigning on behalf of President Bush but canceled all his appearances to continue negotiating.


Dataflex Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Heartland Partners L.P.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Times Appoints 2 Editors
Appointments to two editing positions at The New York Times have been announced by Max Frankel, the executive editor.
Jan Benzel, who has been an editor in the media news department and for the Arts and Leisure section, becomes deputy editor of the style department.
She will report to John Montorio, editor of the department, which produces the Living and Home sections, Styles of The Times and coverage of life styles for all sections of the paper.


Lawson Products reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Pioneer Savings reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Cheesecake Factory reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Portsmouth Bank Shares reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Court to Weigh Law Forbidding Ritual Sacrifice
To Ernesto Pichardo, a Santeria priest and devotee of the warrior god of thunder Chango, the occasional sacrifice of a goat or chicken is a religious rite sanctioned by the Constitution and centuries of tradition.
But to the city of Hialeah, the practice is a public health hazard that is cruel to animals and violates local zoning laws.
For five years, ever since Mr.
Pichardo tried to open the Church of the Lukumi Babalu Aye Inc. on a used-car lot a few blocks from City Hall, municipal officials and Santeria followers have been debating the issue, first in the chambers of the City Council and then in a succession of courtrooms.
On Wednesday, the dispute will go before the United States Supreme Court; a ruling, experts say, could clarify the extent to which the state can regulate religion, and on what ground.


Aflac Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Rangers Come Through Late in 3d, Early in Overtime
The Rangers did nothing at Madison Square Garden last night to erase doubts about their vulnerability on defense.
They had all kinds of trouble containing Buffalo even though the Sabres played without Pat LaFontaine for two periods.
But the Rangers did earn some points for their resilience and their offense.
They scored with 32 seconds left in regulation to tie the game and then 58 seconds into the overtime for a 7-6 victory after they had trailed three times by two goals.


Top Congressional Races to Watch in Connecticut
U.S.
Senate The Candidates CHRISTOPHER J. DODD, 48, Democrat.
Elected in 1980, Connecticut's senior United States Senator.
Served six years as Representative of the 2d District.
Has raised $3.2 million and expects to spend all of it.
BROOK JOHNSON, 46.
A textile executive and a political neophyte.
Unknown to voters and seasoned politicians alike, he won the state's Republican primary, although his opponent was the party's endorsed candidate.
Has spent about $2 million so far, all but about $300,000 of it his own money.
The Issues
The main issue in this race, as in the House races, has been jobs.
Mr.
Dodd has promised that his first priority in a new term would be defending jobs in Connecticut while working to restart the economy nationwide.
Echoing Gov.
Bill Clinton, the Democratic Presidential nominee, he has sharply criticized the Bush Administration, particularly for offering aid and trade concessions to Russia, China and Mexico while doing nothing to end the recession at home.
Mr.
Johnson, who generally does not take a highly partisan line, says the economy has turned sour and the Federal deficit has grown because the Government, controlled by special interests, does not act like a business.
Analysis
Mr.
Dodd, who has been in Congress for 18 years, has tried to portray himself as a capable, experienced legislator, whose seniority alone has been an asset for Connecticut.
Mr.
Johnson, on the other hand, has emphasized his background as a businessman, saying that is what is needed to control Congressional spending and to revitalize the economy.
This contest has been the most expensive Senate race in Connecticut history -- with Mr.
Johnson spending more money than any single individual before him -- but Mr.
Dodd holds a seemingly insurmountable lead in the polls.
U.S.
House of Representatives 2D DISTRICT: EASTERN CONNECTICUT The Candidates SAM GEJDENSON, 44, Democrat.
A six-term Democrat from Bozrah.
Has served on the House Foreign Affairs Committee.
Also running on the A Connecticut Party line.
EDWARD W. MUNSTER, 51, Republican.
A biostatistician and State Senator from Haddam.
Won the primary against an opponent endorsed by the party.
The District
The district, which covers the eastern half of the state, is home to many defense-oriented manufacturers and, consequently, has high unemployment these days.
The Issues
Mr.
Gejdenson has found himself on the defensive over checks he bounced at the House Bank and criticism that he has lost touch with the district.
In an effort to rebut his critics, he takes credit for bringing contracts, money and jobs to his district.
Mr.
Munster has campaigned on a platform that calls for cutting perks for members of Congress and limiting terms to 12 years.
He has also called for economic diversification, including retraining workers, and support for companies that specialize in new technologies.
Analysis
In the last two years the district has been devastated by the recession, with dramatic job lossess from reductions in the nation's defense budget.
Few public polls have been done on the race, but Mr.
Munster is thought to be more of a threat to Mr.
Gejdenson than any of his other recent opponents.
Mr.
Munster stresses his status as a moderate Republican when he appeals to voters' concerns over the region's economic trouble.
Although vulnerable, Mr.
Gejdenson expresses confidence that his record will carry him to re-election. 3D DISTRICT: SOUTH-CENTRAL CONNECTICUT The Candidates ROSA DELAURO, 49, Democrat.
A freshman Representative from New Haven who in 1990 narrowly beat Tom Scott, now her opponent once again.
TOM SCOTT, 34, Republican.
A former State Senator, he now heads the Connecticut Taxpayers Committee, an anti-tax lobby founded two years ago.
The District
The district runs along the coast, from Stratford to Clinton and includes New Haven.
Like most areas in the state, it has been badly hit by the recession with its layoffs and slowed economy.
The Issues
Ms.
DeLauro has campaigned largely on her record, which includes support for the highway jobs bill and efforts at improving health care.
She also sought a tax cut for the middle class during her first term, but the bill was vetoed by President Bush.
A former cancer patient, Ms.
DeLauro has also urged more research and programs to deal with women's health problens, including breast and ovarian cancer.
Mr.
Scott, a staunch conservative, has been a consistent and vocal opponent of the state's personal income tax, the first in Connecticut history.
He also opposes additional taxes, as well as abortion rights Analysis
The race is a repeat of the candidates' contentious campaign in 1990.
After losing to Ms.
DeLauro by just 7,332 votes, Mr.
Scott remained in the political spotlight as the leader of the revolt against the state income tax.
He maintains that the public attention will translate into enough votes to win a second time around.
Ms.
DeLauro's supporters point to her effectiveness in her first term, but the race is likely to be close. 5TH DISTRICT: WESTERN CONNECTICUT The Candidates GARY FRANKS, 39, Republican.
Elected in 1990, the only black Republican in Congress.
JAMES LAWLOR, 49, Democrat.
A probate judge from Waterbury.
LYNN TABORSAK, 49, independent.
A plumber and state representative.
The District
The district is a bat-shaped swath of western Connecticut that includes wealthy towns like Walton and depressed ones like Ansonia, as well as Waterbury.
The Issues
Mr.
Franks's campaign has consisted largely of defending himself against charges from his opponents that he is not sympathetic to the needs of the district.
Even supporters describe his first term as inauspicious.
Mr.
Lawlor considers himself a moderate, but his opposition to abortion, among other stances, has earned him a reputation as a conservative.
He has vowed to take immediate steps to create jobs with government subsidies and training programs.
Ms.
Taborsak views herself as a political rebel, but in spite of her independent candidacy, she says she is the best Democrat in the race.
She favors public-works projects and tax credits for investment in industry to create jobs, as well as more Federal support for education and cities.
Analysis
Despite a lackluster first term that included a staff shakeup and personal financial crises, Mr.
Franks has drawn support from national Republicans, including campaign help from Henry Kissinger and the Commerce Secretary, Lynn Martin.
Mr.
Lawlor narrowly defeated Ms.
Taborsak in the Democratic primary.
Ms.
Taborsak decided to continue her campaign as an independent, endorsed by A Connecticut Party, founded by Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr.
Her campaign is generally considered to have eroded support for Mr.
Lawlor and sent some voters reluctantly scurrying to the incumbent.


Candidates' Spots Are Not Created Equal
VOTERS weary of watching political commercials should take heart that at long last, the mud stops here.
The Bush, Clinton and Perot camps seemed to have forgotten that advertisements typically work best when they try to deliver persuasive sales messages rather than denigrate the competition.
Nevertheless, negative commercials, which political operatives smarmily delight in calling "comparative advertising," abounded.
Though some landed wounding blows on their intended targets, over all they served only to wound the political process.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
The board of General Motors swept away a generation of top managers and installed a new management system to try to halt the auto maker's decline.
The moves strengthened the board's powers over a younger team of executives.
The directors also halved the common stock dividend.  [ Page A1. ]  In naming John F. (Jack) Smith Jr. as chief executive, the G.M. board chose a career manager who is as much an outsider as G.M. could get without actually hiring from the outside.
During his 31-year career at G.M., he has spent relatively little time in Detroit.  [ D5. ]
Joe Roth resigned as chairman of 20th Century Fox to form an independent production company at the Walt Disney studios.
He will be replaced at Fox by Peter Chernin, president of the Fox Entertainment Group.  [ C13. ]  In Hollywood, insiders were surprised by the announcement, but on Wall Street investors shrugged off the changes.
Market Place.  [ D1. ]


Acme Electric reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 2


Gamma Biologicals Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Imatron Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


COMPANY NEWS: Driving the New York Marathon; Mercedes Battery Car Is True Pacesetter
Thousands came to the New York City Marathon on Sunday to better their previous year's performance.
That includes the pace car.
The car was a Mercedes-Benz 190 that runs on electricity.
The same vehicle, painted fire-engine red, was used to lead and time the runners last year, but this year it had more stamina, with a battery that is supposed to withstand repeated recharging for two years instead of one.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Election Night: Polls; Why Forecasts By Newscasters Will Be Similar
After decades of battling to be first to declare winners, the networks for the first time in a Presidential race tonight will rely on the same voter survey to make their projections.
By pooling their resources into one cooperative that is interviewing voters as they leave the polls in every state, ABC, CBS, NBC and CNN are saving millions of dollars apiece.
The networks each paid an estimated $3 million to take part in the collective during the 1990 and 1992 elections.
Nearly 100 newspapers, including The New York Times, and local stations are paying smaller sums for more limited use of the data.
A Mixed Record


Silicon Valley Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


2d Asia Link Considered By A.T.&amp; T.
Three days after announcing that it would help build a $1 billion telecommunications network linking the United States and Japan, A.T.&amp; T. said yesterday that it would solicit investor interest in another $1 billion network linking America and 11 other Asian countries, including South Korea and Taiwan.
The expansion of phone service would increase the United States-Asia calling capacity by five times and lay undersea cable 10 times the length of the Roman Empire.


Corrections
A picture caption in Weekend on Friday with the "On Stage, and Off" column referred incorrectly to the actress shown.
She is Anna Deavere Smith.


Society, Not Science, Has Failed TB Victims
To the Editor:
"Tuberculosis: A Killer Returns" (Oct. 11-15), your valuable series on the resurgence of tuberculosis as a major public health problem, could have given more emphasis to the role of social and economic factors.
As the series indicates, tuberculosis was the health scourge of the late 19th century, but had become a problem of negligible importance by the 1950's.
Medical care had very little to do with this decline, however.


Madison Gas &amp; Electric reports earnings for 12mos Sept 30


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Republicans; President's Furious Quest Has Bittersweet Note
Win or lose, George Bush finished on his feet today, throwing roundhouses, angry and battered, defiantly unbowed.
Striving to overtake the Democratic rival whose very name he ignored until August, Mr.
Bush plowed through five final campaign stops with force and fury.


Dofasco reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Armchair View of Election
COMPUTERS and elections have been wired together since 1952, when a behemoth named Univac forecast a victory by Dwight D. Eisenhower over Adlai Stevenson.
While Univac required a support team of white-coated technicians to change its vacuum tubes and interpret its flashing lights, a PC user in 1992 can probably do just as well from an easy chair.
Using a computer and a modem to tap into the various newswire services, including the Associated Press election wire, armchair election watchers can get the news as quickly as the newscasters do.
For voters, the computer also provides a last-minute way to research candidates and issues before entering the voting booth.


American Waste Services reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Datum Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


New Valley Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Evergreen Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Amoskeag Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Our Carrier in Asia
To the Editor:
The suggestion in "Looming Discord in Asia" by Leon V. Sigal (Editorial Notebook, Oct. 15) that the United States Navy can remove an aircraft carrier from our forces in Asia is both economically and strategically shortsighted.
Maintenance costs for our only aircraft carrier in Asia, the Independence, based in Japan, are almost completely paid for by our Japanese allies -- not American taxpayers.
The Indy's 80 aircraft provide our Commander in Chief with many military options to meet potential threats from North Korea to Iraq in the Persian Gulf.


Caspen Oil Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Society, Not Science, Has Failed TB Victims; Workers at Risk
To the Editors:
You are to be commended for the five-part series "Tuberculosis: A Killer Returns" (Oct. 11-15).
The in-depth coverage and front-page treatment you've given this frightening phenomenon helps tremendously in alerting the public to the danger.
However, your series is seriously flawed when you discuss the threat to those who work in hospitals, prisons and nursing homes, as exemplified in your Oct. 12 headline, "Doctors and Patients Are Pushed to Their Limits by Grim New TB."
You neglected to talk with many of the real workers who administer 80 percent of the patient care in hospitals and nursing homes or to their unions.
Had you talked with anyone at the Service Employees International Union, for instance, you would have discovered our 400,000 health care members are solidly behind the new Occupational Safety and Health Administration regulations that you describe as having "stunned the medical world."


Candidates in Today's Elections in Connecticut and New Jersey
Candidates in today's election for Federal and state offices in Connecticut and Federal offices in New Jersey are shown below.
There are no statewide elections, other than ballot questions, in New Jersey. *Incumbent CONNECTICUT ACP - A Connecticut Party AFP - American for Perot BI - Bristol Independent CC - Concerned Citizens I - Independent L - Libertarian NAL - New Alliance PC - Petitioning Candidate (no party designation) TTR - Tax the Rich UT - Unmited Taxpayers U.S.
PRESIDENT George Bush,*
R Bill Clinton, D Ross Perot, AFP Andre Marrou, L Lenora B. Fuliani, NAL U.S.
SENATE Brook Johnson, R Christopher J. Dodd,*
D Richard D. Gregory, CC Howard A. Grayson Jr., L U.S.
HOUSE District 1 Barbara B. Kennelly,*
D Philip Steele, R District 2 Sam Gejdenson,*
D Edward Munster, R District 3 Rosa DeLauro,*
D Tom Scott, R District 4 Dave Schropfer, D Christopher Shays,*
R Al Smith, ACP District 5 James Lawlor, D Gary Franks,*
R Lynn Taborsak, ACP District 6 Eugene Slason, D Nancy Johnson,*
Shousd the General Assembly be permitted to change voting laws so that anyone out of state or abroad temporarily could register to vote in Connecticut in abstentia.?
QUESTION TWO
Should the state Constitution be amended to impose a cap on state spending?
New Jersey AFP - America First Populist I - Independent IFC - Independent for Change J - 6 Million Jobs LIB - Libertarian NAL - New Alliance NLP - Natural Law SWP - Socialist Workers TAX - Taxpayers WL - Workers League U.S.
PRESIDENT George Bush, *R Bill Clinton, D Ross Perot, I Andre Marrow, LIB Drew Bradford, I James (Bo) Gritz, AFP Ron Daniels, I James Warren, SWP Helen Halyard, WL Lenora B. Fulani, NAL Howard Phillips, TAX Lyndon H. LaRouche Jr., J John Hagelin, NLP U.S.
REPRESENTATIVES DISTRICT 1 Robert E. Andrews,*
D Lee A. Solomon, R DISTRICT 2 William J. Hughes,*
D Frank A. LoBiondo, R DISTRICT 3  Timothy Ryan, D Jim Saxton,*
R Anthony J. Verderese, O DISTRICT 4 Brian Hughes, D Christopher H. Smith,*
R DISTRICT 5 Marge Roukema,*
R Frank R. Lucas, D DISTRICT 6 Frank Pallone Jr.,*
D Joseph M. Kyrillos, R DISTRICT 7 Bob Franks, R Leonard R. Sendelsky, D DISTRICT 8 Herbert Klein, D Joseph L. Bubba, R Gloria J Kolodziej, IFC DISTRICT 9 Robert G. Torricelli,*
D Patrick J. Roma, R DISTRICT 10 Donald M. Payne,*
D Alfred Palermo, R DISCTRICT 11 Dean A. Gallo,*
R Ona Spiridellis, D DISTRICT 12 Frank Abate, D Dick Zimmer,*
R DISTRICT 13 Robert Menendez, D Fred J. Theemling, R PUBLIC QUESTIONS QUESTION ONE
Shhould the state appropriate $345 million for the Green Acres, Clean Water, Farmland and Historic Preservation Bond Act, to acquire and preserve farmland and recreational areas.?
QUESTION TWO
Should the state Constitution be emended to shift the cost of the Superior Court system to the state?
QUESTION THREE
Should the state Constitution be amended to allow the death penalty for defendants found guilty of purposely or knowingly causing death or purposely or knowingly causing serious bodily injury resulting in death.?
QUESTION FOUR
Should the state Constitution be amended to give the Legislature addional powers to review rules and regulationa issued by the executive branch?


Comparing the Finances of the Candidates
Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato has portrayed himself as a "regular guy" doing battle against a "millionaire," as he characterizes his opponent, Attorney General Robert Abrams.
Here is how the personal finances of the candidates stack up:
According to their Federal tax filings, Mr.
Abrams and Mr.
D'Amato reported incomes in the same general range last year.
But Timothy Gilles, a spokesman for the Attorney General, said that when the share of a family trust belonging to Mr.
Abrams's wife, Diane, is added to Mr.
Abrams's assets, the couple's worth would no doubt be more than $1 million.


Macy (R.H.) &amp; Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 1


Kaneb PipeLine Partners reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Yugoslav Lawmakers Set Back Moderate Premier
The Serbian nationalists who control the Yugoslav Parliament inflicted a serious political setback on the moderate Prime Minister tonight when the lower house approved a motion of no confidence in his efforts to resolve the Balkan war and end his country's international isolation.
The chamber also accused the Prime Minister, Milan Panic, and the Federal President, Dobrica Cosic, of having acted without consulting it to improve ties with Croatian and Muslim Albanian minorities in Serbia, the larger of the two republics that make up the truncated Yugoslav federation.


Schultz Sav-O Stores reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 3


IDEC Pharmaceuticals reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Horsehead Resource Development Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Senate Candidates Barnstorm Around New York Last Time; Just 'Regular Guy,' D'Amato Hones Attack
In a final campaign sprint to seven upstate cities today, Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato reclaimed the message of class resentment that helped elect him in 1980, appealing one more time to his base of blue-collar and conservative voters.
In his Election Eve whirlwind to the upstate areas where he is locked in a close race against State Attorney General Robert Abrams, his Democratic opponent, Mr.
D'Amato styled himself as the true hero of the forgotten middle class.
Over and over he painted himself as the "regular guy," pitted against a "millionaire" who drives limousines and uses fancy lawyers to avoid paying taxes on "his fancy Fifth Avenue condominium."


Ramsay-HMO Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Corrections
An article in Business Day yesterday about the failure of the First City Bancorporation of Texas misidentified the chief financial officer of the Chemical Banking Corporation.
He is Peter J. Tobin; Joseph G. Sponholz, who formerly held the post, is now Chemical's merger implementation manager.


Autotrol Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Spy-Satellite Unit Faces A New Life in Daylight
For more than 30 years it was the Government's golden agency, with seemingly limitless budgets and a mandate to develop the nation's most dazzling spy technology.
But few people outside Washington even knew about it.
So secret was the agency, hidden in the Pentagon, that even its name and very existence were classified information until six weeks ago.
No more.
The National Reconnaissance Office, which develops and operates America's constellation of spy satellites, is coming in from the cold to a not-so-warm welcome.


Green Mountain Power reports earnings for 12mo Sept 30


USBancorp Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Market Place; Few Concerns on Wall St. Over 20th Century Fox Shift
In Hollywood, where stardom extends even to studio executives, movie industry insiders were gasping after yesterday's announcement that Joe Roth was leaving 20th Century Fox and would be replaced by Peter Chernin, a Fox television executive.
But on Wall Street, many securities analysts and investors shrugged off the changes.
The American shares of the News Corporation, the Australian parent of 20th Century Fox, closed down only 50 cents a share yesterday, to $36.25, on the New York Stock Exchange.
Lately, they have been trading near their 52-week high of $36.875.


Corrections
An obituary on Friday about William Cole, a freelance writer, credited some work to him erroneously.
Mr.
Cole wrote short stories and magazine articles, but he was not a poetry anthologist.


Showboat Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


COMPANY NEWS
ALCO STANDARD CORP.  announced that it had acquired Weiss Bros.
Miquon Inc., West Point, Pa., a paper and plastics retailer, for an undisclosed amount of cash.


Laser Industries Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Daka International reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 26


GenCare Health System reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Spelling Entertainment Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Voting on Election Day
Today is Election Day.
Voters in New York, New Jersey and Connecticut will vote for President and for members of their Congressional delegations.
Voters in New York and Connecticut will also select members of their State Legislatures, and there are ballot questions in all three states.
There are also municipal elections in many communities.
NEW YORK STATE: Polls are open from 6 A.M. to 9 P.M.
New York City voters with questions may call the city's Board of Elections at (212) VOTE-NYC or the New York Public Interest Research Group's Election Day hotline, (212) 349-6986.


Piper Jaffray Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 25


HoloPak Technologies reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Comtech Telecommunications reports earnings for Year to July 31


Classical Music in Review
Clarion Concerts  Merkin Concert Hall
The program presented by Clarion Concerts under its music director, Newell Jenkins, on Wednesday evening was some eight years in the preparation.
It centered on music written for various ceremonies connected with the construction of the Church of Santa Maria Della Salute in Venice, begun in 1631, and the end of the great plague shortly thereafter.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Campaign Trail; After Months of Running, Advice for a Winner Named Clinton
Wrapping it up at the end of the trail.
It was 1 A.M. yesterday and his voice was down to a whisper, but Bill Clinton was still pumped up.
So he went to the Garden State Race Track in Cherry Hill to address still another gathering of the faithful -- and to meet a 2-year-old thoroughbred named Bubba Clinton.


GERMAN CITY AIDE IN A SLUR ON JEWS
Seeking to improve their city's image after a series of brutal attacks against foreigners over the summer, politicians in the eastern German port city of Rostock instead revealed the depths of misunderstanding today.
At a news conference that had been intended to cap a visit by Ignatz Bubis, the head of the Central Council of Jews in Germany, the chairman of Rostock's city committee on internal affairs, Karlheinz Schmidt, stunned his guest by asking:


A Downgraded Detroit Cries Foul
The hard-luck city of Detroit has absorbed its share of insults over the years, but none more gratuitous or less deserved, the city's partisans say, than the dropping in July of its credit rating to noninvestment grade by Moody's Investors Service.
Moody's lowered the city's rating on its general obligation bonds from Baa to Ba1, a move that could harm Detroit's ability to attract investors and that certainly does not help its blighted image.
Instead of evaluating the current credit of the city, its supporters say, Moody's has judged its future and declared Detroit null and void.
"Admittedly, Detroit does face significant issues," said J. Chester Johnson, president of Government Finance Associates in New York and one of Detroit's financial advisers.
"But for a ratings agency to say the city is financially and structurally unviable is unprecedented."


METRO DIGEST
METRO DIGEST  THE CLINTON FACTOR
Democratic candidates labored furiously to capitalize on the strong victory they expect Gov.
Bill Clinton to capture in New York State, while Republicans in a variety of races worked just as hard to avoid being swept away in a local Democratic landslide.
From a United States Senate race that has become the costliest and possibly the nastiest in the nation, to the struggle for control of the State Legislature in Albany, the Democrats' expected strong showing at the top of the ticket was having a marked impact on campaigns all the way down the ballot.
A1.
On the ballot in New Jersey and Connecticut.
B3.
Key races to watch around the region.
B4.
NEW YORK CITY


United Wisconsin Services reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Democrats; CLINTON AND BUSH IN A SPRINT AS RACE FOR WHITE HOUSE ENDS
On the last lap of a Presidential race notable for its hard, harsh language, Gov.
Bill Clinton took the high-minded tone of a man ahead in the polls, avoiding the mention of George Bush's name to focus on promises of better times.
Winging around the country in 30 hours of ceaseless campaigning, Mr.
Clinton made a final, grueling effort to generate a high turnout at the polls with a 4,106-mile trip, from the East Coast to western Texas.
For this last push, he chose to touch down for brief airport appearances in nine states, ending at home in Arkansas on Tuesday morning.


Books of The Times; How a Family Story Describes Europe
Black Dogs  By Ian McEwan  149 pages. Doubleday. $19.50.
The black dogs that give Ian McEwan's new novel its evocative title come from the name that Winston Churchill once bestowed on his depressions.
As used by Mr.
McEwan's heroine, however, they signify something larger and more menacing: evil, darkness, irrationality, "civilization's worst moods." They give Mr.
McEwan a metaphor by which he can turn a fictional family memoir into an elliptical meditation on Europe's past and future.


Doctor, I Have This Funny Pain . . .
THE Clinical Computer is a doctor on your desk, an infinitely patient one who will listen to you for hours.
The program interviews you, asking as many as 175 health-related questions.
The exact number of questions asked depends on the answers to previous ones.
The first questions are demographic; that is, name, age and sex.
The succeeding questions are in the categories of heredity, or family health history; environment and life style; occupation; past medical history; dietary supplements; nutrition; signs and symptoms; male-female issues, and stress analysis.
The Clinical Computer requires you to select a password, so that no one else can read the information.


European Perspective for Detroit
In naming John F. (Jack) Smith Jr. to turn around General Motors, the auto maker's board has chosen a career G.M. executive who is as much an outsider as G.M. could get without actually hiring from the outside.
During his 31-year career at G.M., he has spent relatively little time in Detroit, giving him what many believe is a fresh perspective on G.M.'s ills in North America.
"Smith is the right guy at the right time" is the refrain echoed over and over in the last week from G.M. executives and industry experts.


Blast In Harlem Kills at Least 2 And Injures 34
A roaring explosion tore open the upper floors of a 12-story apartment building in Harlem late yesterday afternoon, killing at least two people and leaving at least 34 injured, three with severe burns.
It set off fires on four floors and rained debris on the streets below -- concrete chunks that flattened or damaged a dozen cars, a windstorm of flying glass from shattered windows, and a collection of towels, sheets and clothing that hung in the trees.
Residents reported smelling gas before the explosion but authorities said the cause was not immediately determined.


Astrex Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Supreme Court Roundup; Justices to Rule on Right To Challenge Searches
The Supreme Court agreed today to decide whether partners in crime have the right to challenge the legality of police searches of one another's cars, homes or other possessions.
Ordinarily, the rights guaranteed by the Fourth Amendment's prohibition against unreasonable search or seizure may not be asserted vicariously.
The Supreme Court has ruled in several contexts that one person does not have standing to invoke the Fourth Amendment rights of another person.


Business Scene; Season of Plenty Has Hurt Farmers
WITH the leaks in his barn roof getting worse, Scott Nevin, who farms 165 acres in Maryland, found himself forced to make repairs.
The bill was $5,000 and to pay it, Mr.
Nevin sold 25 head of cattle, well before they were fully fattened for slaughter.
"We did not even try for a bank loan," he said.
Prices for livestock and for most other farm produce have begun to slide and Mr.
Nevin feared that he could not keep up payments on a loan.
For the first time since the great drought of 1988, an American farm crisis might be in the making.
So far, the pain is not as traumatic as it was in the 1980's, when foreclosures and bankruptcy were commonplace.
The hardship today is more subtle.
Like so many other Americans, farmers are watching anxiously as their incomes begin to decline.
And like Mr.
Nevin, they are pulling back, expecting the hard times to persist.


On My Mind; What Did We Learn?
A strange thing happened to the Presidential campaign of 1992 on the way to Election Day.
The November surprise is that the campaign turned out to be unlike so many others -- only strings of cliches and epithets strung together like sausages, giving us nothing to think about except the bellyache.


INSIDE
Lufthansa Ends U.S. Bid
Lufthansa German Airlines has decided not to make a bid to take over Continental Airlines.
Page D1.
Hal Roach Dies at 100


In Scramble for New Jersey Congressional Seats, Heated Contests Wind Down
Incumbency its advantages and its abuses -- has been an issue in New Jersey congressional races this year.
But even before the campaigning began, the most significant unseating of incumbents took place when four members of Congress chose not to run.
Because of redistricting, New Jersey has 13 congressional seats, one fewer than it had in 1990.


Bills' Talley Arrested
Buffalo Bills linebacker DARRYL TALLEY was arrested yesterday for drunken driving, 12 hours after the Bills' victory over New England.
The police pulled Talley over about 4 A.M. after seeing his car swerving from lane to lane and veering into oncoming traffic, investigators said.


Frontier Adjusters of AmericaInc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Valley Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Mining Services International reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Hal Roach Is Dead at 100; A Pioneer in Film Comedy
Hal Roach, the writer, producer and director who was a leading pioneer in shaping American film comedy, died yesterday at the UCLA Medical Center in Los Angeles.
He was 100 years old and lived in Bel-Air, Calif.
He died of pneumonia, said a friend, Richard Bann.


I.N.S. Plans to Release 5 Tourists It Detained
Five of 24 Malaysians jailed without criminal charges last month by Federal immigration officials will be allowed to return home as soon as arrangements can be made, a judge ruled today, but the fate of the other 19 was unclear.
The 19 Malaysians remained entangled in a legal case against their tour guide charged with smuggling 2 people into the country.


F.N.B. Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Theory on a Plateau And the Climate Gains
DID the rise of the Tibetan Plateau over the last 40 million years cause the climatic changes and cooler temperatures that shape weather patterns prevailing today?
The idea has found a growing acceptance since 1989, when Dr.
William Ruddiman and Dr.
Maureen Raymo first proposed it.
The two researchers published a review article last month in Nature magazine that brought together findings from several scientific fields lending support to the Tibetan Plateau theory.


Bulls Gain Go-Ahead From Courts
If Harry Caray had been sitting beside Antonin Scalia and Sandra Day O'Connor on the Supreme Court yesterday, the Chicago Cubs' barker-in-chief could have roared: "Bulls win! Bulls win!"
Not only did the Bulls win, they defeated the National Basketball Association on the eve of the 1992-93 season.


If Your Son Were a Killer, What Would You Do?
As they turn page after suspenseful page in Rosellen Brown's best-selling novel "Before and After," tracing the discovery of the body, the manhunt and the murder trial of a teen-age boy accused of bludgeoning his girlfriend to death in a small New Hampshire town, readers feel a tug even greater than the mystery of how it all will end.
Fairly early on, they learn that indeed young Jacob Reiser did kill Martha Taverner in a fit of passion after a lovers' quarrel.
They also know that Jacob's father, Ben, found and destroyed evidence that would clearly implicate his son and then concocted a story to shield him from the law.
They also know that Jacob's mother, Carolyn, refused to go along with the lie.


Decision Disappoints AIDS Experts
Magic Johnson's decision to retire from professional basketball was not precipitated by a change in his health but by the controversy surrounding his comeback with the Los Angeles Lakers, one of Johnson's doctors said today.
Johnson is infected with H.I.V, the virus that causes AIDS.
Several National Basketball Association players have expressed concern about playing against the 33-year-old star, who disclosed that he had H.I.V. when he retired a first time a year ago.


Transactions
Basketball  National Basketball Association
CHARLOTTE HORNETS -- Waived Mark Baker, guard, and Kevin Roberson, forward.
HOUSTON ROCKETS -- Waived David Wesley, guard.


Joe Roth Leaving Fox For a Deal With Disney
Joe Roth, the chairman of 20th Century Fox since 1989, and one of the most successful studio chiefs in town, announced today that he was leaving the job to form his own independent production company at Walt Disney Studios.
Rupert Murdoch, the chairman of Fox Inc., promptly announced that Mr.
Roth, who is 44 years old, would be replaced by Peter Chernin, the president of the Fox Entertainment Group, the programming arm of the Fox Television network.


O'Charley's reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 4


Georgetown Journal; Doggedness? Toppled in '53, He's Top Dog Again
In 1953, Winston Churchill moved to prevent the loss of Guyana, a fantastically rich land that Anthony Trollope once described as "the one and true utopia of the Caribbean," by jailing Cheddi Jagan, the colony's newly elected Marxist Prime Minister.
The United States later repeatedly joined efforts with Britain to deny office to Mr.
Jagan, an unabashed Stalinist, who, tapping his people's hurts from slavery and indentured servitude, was among the first leaders of the third world to hoist a Marxist banner.


Old Stone reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Wackenhut Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 25


Hill, Holliday's Tie With Hyatt to End
The Hyatt Hotels Corporation in Chicago and Hill, Holliday, Connors, Cosmopulos Inc. in Boston said yesterday that after five years they had mutually decided to terminate their relationship.
The announcement of the split, effective on Feb. 1, followed weeks of speculation in trade publications that the lodging chain was considering such a change.
Separate statements from agency and client supplied identical reasons for the breakup.
One was that "both parties respectfully have fundamental, philosophical disagreements over the future direction of the national advertising." Since 1987, Hill, Holliday has created national campaigns for the company carrying the theme "Feel the Hyatt touch."


Rodman Shows Up
Detroit Pistons forward DENNIS RODMAN, the National Basketball Association's leading rebounder last season, showed up for his first practice yesterday.
Rodman, who recently was divorced, had said he was unmotivated and was threatening to quit the N.B.A.
He has been the N.B.A. defensive player of the year two of the last three seasons.
In addition to the divorce, Rodman had said he felt betrayed after his former coach, CHUCK DALY, resigned and later took a job with the New Jersey Nets.
Rodman had been close to Daly.


Snyder Oil Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


OSB Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Seaboard Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


FHP International Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


American Funeral Services reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 27


CHRONICLE
It's a daunting prospect to perform before an audience that is distracted by television monitors in addition to cocktails, dinner and dancing.
That is the task that faces RHONDA ROSS tonight when she sings at an election-night party being given at Tatou, on East 50th Street, by the Students Human Rights Exchange.
The organization helps students in developing countries work for human rights.
Ms.
Ross, the 21-year-old daughter of Diana Ross, is a senior at Brown University.
She has been singing for a year and a half in clubs in the Providence, R.I., area.
"I do mainly jazz standards, lots of Duke Ellington, Cole Porter, Irving Berlin, things like that," she said yesterday.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Julie Wilson and William Roy
Russian Tea Room 150 West 57th Street Through Nov. 21
Watching the veteran singer Julie Wilson and her accompanist William Roy perform together is rather like visiting happily married friends whose rapport sheds a glow on everyone around them.
Their collaboration feels less like work than a rarefied kind of play they relish sharing with others.
And at the Russian Tea Room, where they are appearing Thursday through Saturday nights, a spark of impish delight jumps between them as they trot out one witty number after another.


Despite Lapse, Hypertension Guide Is Expected to Have Wide Influence
IT was one of those simple, well-meaning recommendations aimed at improving the health of children: a doctor should check the blood pressure of every child 3 years old and older every year.
But it is turning into an embarrassment because the Federal officials who made it in a report last Friday now say there was scant scientific evidence for benefits from such frequent checkups.
Nevertheless, other recommendations in the new report, such as those dealing with drugs, are likely to strongly influence the way doctors detect and treat high blood pressure in adults because they have a more solid scientific grounding than the one aimed at children.


Alco Standard reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Comtrex Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Computer Language Research reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Johnson And Dodd Go To Strengths
The two Senate candidates in Connecticut spent their last campaign day appealing to some of their strongest bases of support, as Christopher J. Dodd shook hands at a factory gate and visited a city day-care center, while Brook Johnson ended the day greeting Fairfield County commuters stepping off trains from New York.
With his lead widening in the latest Courant/Connecticut Poll, Mr.
Dodd, a Democrat seeking a third term, spent 30 minutes today wooing future voters, at the Shepherd Center Day Care.
Traditional Stops
Mr.
Dodd, who counts a child-care subsidy law he wrote as one of his proudest achievements, spoke in Spanish with Ivette Rodriguez, the head teacher, and then was given some instruction by the 3-, 4- and 5-year-olds in her care.


International Recovery reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Handley Pulls Up the Bandwagon
In the aftermath of the Giants' upset of the Super Bowl champion Washington Redskins, Coach Ray Handley could have presented his typically stoic demeanor today.
After all, the 24-7 victory Sunday night merely brought his Giants to .500 at the halfway point of their 1992 season.
Instead, Handley was virtually euphoric.
Indeed, he even stayed seven minutes longer than he had planned to at today's news conference.


John Alden Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Increasing Plants' Yields With Sun and Diluted Methanol
CROP plants sprayed with diluted methanol, or wood alcohol, showed significantly greater yields while requiring less water than a comparison group of plants, two researchers say.
The crops in Arizona were sprayed under the brightest summer sun by Dr.
Arthur Nonomura, a botanist turned farmer, and Dr.
Andrew Benson, professor emeritus at the Scripps Institution of Oceanography.
They found that cabbages doubled in size, wheat seeds doubled in weight and number, and the water needs of cotton crops dropped by half.
Likewise, tomatoes grew faster and were significantly sweeter, roses grew faster and produced more flowers, and strawberries, eggplants and watermelons gave better yields.


Cunningham Will Stay Seated
This could be an eventful week in Philadelphia.
It certainly got off with a big bang yesterday.
Saying that his regular quarterback needed to "back off" and "take some of the pressure off himself," Coach Rich Kotite of the Eagles benched Randall Cunningham for next Sunday's game against the Los Angeles Raiders in Philadelphia, naming Jim McMahon the starter.
Kotite said that Cunningham would start the following week when the Eagles visit the Green Bay Packers.


Gilead Sciences Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Patterns
Relaxed
Fashion shifts its focus to Seventh Avenue this week, and it looks as if there will be more of the 70's mania that swept the spring shows in Milan and Paris.
Bare midriffs, bell bottoms and long straight hair won't be the whole picture, but there is a trend to soft fabrics and lines.
Even a designer like Richard Tyler, known for hard-edge tailoring, has loosened up.
Mr.
Tyler, an Australian-born designer with headquarters in Los Angeles, recently opened a New York showroom in a Murray Hill town house with bedrooms upstairs where he and his wife, Lisa Trafficante, and her sister Michele Trafficante can stay when they are working here.


Classical Music in Review
Earl Wild  Pianist Carnegie Hall
Earl Wild will be 77 years old in a couple of weeks, and at an age when a number of people are slowing down, the American pianist was on the stage of Carnegie Hall on Friday night playing some of the most horrifyingly difficult piano music ever written.
Mr.
Wild began with three Rachmaninoff pieces: the "Corelli" Variations, his own transcription of the Vocalise and the B-flat-minor Sonata.
He ended with Chopin's Opus 25 Etudes and the B-minor Scherzo.


Yonkers Integrates Warily, but Not Fearfully
To the Editor:
Your Oct. 15 article on whites and blacks in Yonkers comes as a disappointment to my office and the people of our city who worked hard to make the integration order a success.
While you accurately state that the relocation of public housing residents to the east side of Yonkers has gone smoother than expected, your initial focus on one of the five sites where communication between longtime residents and newcomers has not yet developed misleads the reader.
The overall impression is skewed.


Fortis Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Galveston-Houston reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


First United Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


BRIEFS
Debt  *
City of Lansing, Mich., is tentatively offering $25 million of Tax Increment Finance Authority general obligation bonds, with a maximum yield of 6.2 percent for a bond due in 2004, through Hutchinson, Shockley, Erley &amp; Co.
The remaining serial bonds are priced to yield from 3.7 percent in 1994 to 6.1 percent in 2003.
The tax-exempt issue is rated A-1 by Moody's Investors Service Inc. and AA+ by Standard &amp; Poor's Corp.
*
Tiphook Finance Corp. is offering $150 million of 10 3/4 percent senior notes due in 2002 at par through Salomon Brothers.
The noncallable notes are rated Ba-1 by Moody's and BBB- by S.&amp; P. and are guaranteed by Tiphook P.L.C., a British shipping container company.


Tracor Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


RESULTS PLUS
Lizeality by a Neck  Lizeality wore down favored Fortunate Charmer in the final strides to win by  a neck yesterday in Aqueduct's $27,000 Cee Zee purse.
The winner carried 115 pounds, with Nick Santagata aboard, in the race for older fillies and mares.
The winning time was 1:242/5 for seven furlongs.
The victory was the second in six  starts this year for Lizeality, who earned $16,200 for Derby Hill Stable and returned $11.60, $3.60 and $2.80 for $2 across the board. (AP) TENNIS Americans Advance
David Wheaton and Derrick Rostagno, two Americans who have fallen sharply out of the top 20 since the beginning of the year, scored first-round victories at the Paris Open yesterday.
Wheaton, who has dropped from his 1991 ranking of No.  17 to No. 58, beat 39th-ranked Javier Sanchez of Spain, 7-6 (7-3), 7-6 (7-4), and Rostagno, who has fallen from No. 13 to No. 97, beat 87th-ranked Nicklas Kulti of Sweden, 6-4, 6-3.
Jim Courier, ranked No. 1, will play Andrei Chesnokov today.
Third-seeded Stefan Edberg will face 18-year-old Andrei Medvedev, who has risen to No. 24 with three clay-court tournament victories this year.
In other matches, Amos Mansdorf, the 1988 Paris Open winner, beat Carl-Uwe Steeb, 6-3, 3-6, 6-3; Wally Masur was a 6-3, 6-4 winner over Marc Rosset, the Olympic gold medalist, and Emilio Sanchez beat Andrei Cherkasov, 7-6 (7-4), 6-4.  (AP)
HOCKEY


National Healthcorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Industrial Training Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Political Memo; Populist Media Forums And the Campaign of '92
Imagine the possibilities:
Presidential press conferences are replaced by Presidential call-in sessions on "Oprah." The President goes on the Arsenio Hall show to give the State of the Union address and sells his Agenda for Change with an MTV campaign called "Rock the Deficit." When another Middle East potentate gobbles up a neighbor, the White House and Congress set up competing 800 numbers to find out if the public thinks this should stand.
Can-do millionaires, from Ted Turner to Brooke Astor, are besieged by volunteers brandishing ballot petitions.


Tucson Electric Power reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Trimble Navigation Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Cigna Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Society, Not Science, Has Failed TB Victims; Medicare Won't Pay
To the Editor:
It is common knowledge that there is an epidemic of tuberculosis in New York City.
What is not widely known is that Medicare will not pay its "allowed" fee of $9.06 for a tuberculin skin test.
DAVID R. MUSHER, M.D.
New York, Oct. 9, 1992


Upper Peninsula Energy reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Countdown to Election Day
GEORGE BUSH
The President plowed through five final campaign stops with force, punching every political button hard in speeches in New Jersey and Philadelphia, and at hasty airport rallies in Louisville, Akron and Baton Rouge.
He invoked his tax-cutting pledge, his success in easing nuclear terror, his victory over Iraq, his Navy combat record and even his wife Barbara's visits with AIDS babies.
"We are going to pull off one of the biggest surprises in political history," he said.
BILL CLINTON


Magna Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


North Side Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


HemaCare Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


TNP Enterprises reports earnings for 12mos Sept 30


Bridge
An old Latin maxim insists that the law does not concern itself with small things.
But that does not apply to bridge players, who must worry about small cards and small scoring advantages.
The player who throws away an imp or two usually escapes unpunished, but once in a while a small lapse has a big impact.
A recent playoff match between junior squads -- players under 25 -- decided whether Australia or New Zealand would represent the South Pacific zone in the 1993 World Junior Team Championships.
New Zealand won by just one imp, 321-320, and the Australians went home disconsolate, worrying about the many deals on which they could have saved an imp or two.


Iran Offers a Higher Reward For Assassination of Rushdie
Iran said today that a reward for killing the British author Salman Rushdie had been increased beyond $2 million.
Hojatolislam Hassan Sanei, head of the state-run Panzdah Khordad Foundation, said the decision was reached "in response to German press reports about the cancellation of Salman Rushdie's death sentence."


Q&amp;A
New York Chill
Q.
I recently moved to New York from Aomori, Japan, which I am told is at about the same latitude as New York City.
Why does it seem so much colder here?
A.
The main reason is the source of the cold air that reaches New York City, said Lee M. Grenci, a meteorologist at Pennsylvania State University.


First Essex Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Wisconsin Public Service Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Political Week; History Made and History Repeating
In many ways, the tumultuous 1992 Presidential campaign has been unique.
Never before have so many major figures in the "out" party declined to seek the White House, which is one reason that Bill Clinton, a small-state governor who had never previously sought national office, stands where he does today.
Had the Democratic big boys run, he would have had precious little chance of victory.


Executive Changes
AETNA LIFE AND CASUALTY CO., Hartford, appointed Mary Ann Champlin senior vice president of human resources, Elizabeth Krupnick senior vice president of corporate affairs and Vanda Bruce McMurtry senior vice president of Federal Government relations.
HARNISCHFEGER INDUSTRIES, Brookfield, Wis., an industrial products holding company, named John A. McKay senior vice president and chief operating officer.


Corrections
An obituary yesterday about Daniel L. Klayman, head of the organic chemistry section of the Walter Reed Army Institute of Research in Washington, omitted a survivor.
He is a brother, Leon Klayman of Manhattan.


Lawyers Title Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


New York Doesn't End At the City Limits
To the Editor:
"How to Keep Business in New York" (editorial, Oct. 21) praises Mayor David N. Dinkins for his administration's successful efforts in keeping the Morgan Stanley Group from moving from one part of this economic region (Manhattan) to another part (Stamford).
This myopic view of what constitutes New York is consistent with Saul Steinberg's famous New Yorker magazine cover, which sums up our xenophophia in one magnificent cartoon.
Or with the Big Apple as seen by one former official: the city is Manhattan; the suburbs are Brooklyn, Queens and the Bronx, and the country is Staten Island and Yonkers.


Farmer Bros. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Doses of Pineal Gland Hormone Can Reset Body's Daily Clock
MOST people had little difficulty changing their watches and clocks when the country switched last week from daylight to standard time.
Shifting their bodies, however, was another matter.
Twice a year -- and for frequent long-distance travelers, far more often than that -- the human body is asked to readjust its internal rhythms to suit the whims of society.
The adjustment, nudged along by social influences as well as sunlight, often takes days and in some cases weeks before the desire to sleep and eat, as well as a dozen other daily body rhythms, matches the new clock time.
Now, however, researchers who have spent decades studying the factors that set internal time clocks and the disruptions wrought when people's body clocks run too fast or too slow believe that a pill may eventually help people better adjust.


Review/Television; A Macho Image for a Sensitive Soul
In a new season distinguished by its mediocrity, breakout shows and stars are at a premium.
Bursting out of the gate, the new shows strain mightily but, so far, nothing looks like a sure winner.
Still, the spectacle of so much demonstrable talent being stuffed into so many dumb concepts can be perversely fascinating.
Will the producers wake up before the cancellation notices arrive?
There are, as it happens, a few things worth saving.
Case in point: Martin Lawrence, star of "Martin," at 8:30 P.M. on Thursdays on Fox.
Mr.
Lawrence is a stand-up comic whose widest exposure to date had been as the host of HBO's "Def Comedy Jam," an uninhibited monthly showcase for black comedians.
In terms of subject matter and language, the material is definitely not network sitcom.
On one show, Mr.
Lawrence came bouncing out in briefs, doing a mean takeoff on the white rapper Marky Mark and his co-opting of black street and performance styles.
If white men can't jump, Mr.
Lawrence implied, they sure know how to grab high-paying underwear ads.


A West Bank Militant Scoffs at Palestinians' Talking Peace
In this hard-bitten Palestinian village at the dead end of a twisting hillside road, walls carry graffiti images of rifles, with calls for armed struggle.
Here, peace with Israel seems like a distant mirage.
The hamlets and hills of this isolated region, south of Jenin in the northern West Bank, are a stronghold of the militant Black Panther organization, a loose collection of armed bands that is carrying out a purge of suspected Palestinian informers, a guerrilla war against Israeli troops and sniping attacks against Jewish civilians.


Perot Gave Networks a Race, at Any Rate
Even if Ross Perot's campaign for the White House is not successful politics, it was certainly successful television, if not quite an outright hit.
In a format he all but invented, the paid political program, Mr.
Perot was a remarkably consistent television performer.
In eight programs through Oct. 26, seven half-hours and one full hour, Mr.
Perot averaged a 9.1 rating, which is only slightly below average for the three main networks and much better than average for the Fox network.


Group of Homeless Men Wins Right to Cast Votes
Men who live in New York City's homeless shelter in Orange County were summoned to court today to tell a judge why they wanted to vote here Tuesday.
By day's end, Justice Louis A. Barone had granted them the right to cast their ballots.
And he had done more.
Conducting a roll call of 100 men who call Camp La Guardia home, he put names on the homeless, recognizing them as more than faceless symbols of poverty and hard luck.


NESB Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Perini Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Critic's Notebook; The Skateboard Set: Back to Conviction
The bartenders passing out cheese crackers and cocktails in the Vista Hotel lounge in the World Trade Center saw a different kind of corporate regalia last weekend: instead of executives in pin stripes, there were scruffy skateboarders and hip-hop homeboys in knit caps making deals while sipping cola in the lobby's armchairs.
This was the annual College Music Journal Music Marathon, where members of independent music's air force -- college radio programmers -- gather to hobnob with artists and music industry representatives in what is often the first business convention of their lives.
Ambition beats at the heart of the marathon.
Over four days of relentless club and panel hopping, the nearly 6,000 people attending scramble to better their positions in the pop-music obstacle race.
Musicians pass out tapes to anyone whose name tag spells power; graduating college seniors ask their elders for advice and internships, and record label scouts line the back walls of nightclubs eyeing the latest objects of underground hype.
This year, however, a different sense of possibility lent the marathon some fire.
Politics, represented not only by the election but also by the changing face of alternative music itself, motivated much of the marathon's discussion and even its music.


BMR Financial Group reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Early Bird Is Father In Sandpiper Species
AMONG polyandrous spotted sandpipers, the adage of the early bird has taken on a new meaning.
A study by two biologists from the University of Nevada at Reno shows that a female spotted sandpiper can store sperm for up to a month and use it to fertilize any of the several clutches of eggs it lays in a typical monthlong mating season.


Oakwood Homes reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Sovereign Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Deposition Remains Closed
A Federal judge in Brooklyn yesterday refused to allow two newspapers access before the election to a deposition by the former clerk of Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato's hometown, who in the past has accused the Senator and village officials of favoritism in the awarding of federally subsidized homes.
Citing information they recently received from confidential sources, the newspapers, The New York Times and Newsday, contended that the deposition and related material might include further allegations about Mr.
D'Amato, who is engaged in a bitter re-election battle.


Sotheby's to Increase Charges Paid by Buyers
A week before the biggest sales of the fall, Sotheby's announced yesterday that it would increase the 10 percent commission it charges purchasers.
Beginning on Jan. 1, buyers are to be charged 15 percent on all goods sold for $50,000 or less.
Sales of higher value are to be charged 15 percent on the first $50,000 and 10 percent thereafter.
The increase was the first change since the commission was initiated, in London in 1975 and in the United States in 1979.


FirstFed Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Mtolo Finds His Title Doesn't Come With Instant Stardom Back Home
If Willie Mtolo is a big hero today in all of South Africa, then he has not yet been informed of the development.
Mtolo won the New York City Marathon on Sunday in 2 hours 9 minutes, 29 seconds.
Since then, nobody from back home has been hounding him for interviews.
Endorsement offers have been for international shoe contracts, not local products.


Countdown to Election Day
GEORGE BUSH
The President plowed through five final campaign stops with force, punching every political button hard in speeches in New Jersey and Philadelphia, and at hasty airport rallies in Louisville, Akron and Baton Rouge.
He invoked his tax-cutting pledge, his success in easing nuclear terror, his victory over Iraq, his Navy combat record and even his wife Barbara's visits with AIDS babies.
"We are going to pull off one of the biggest surprises in political history," he said.
BILL CLINTON


Sydney Levy; Developer, 78
Sydney Levy, a former real-estate developer in New York City, died on Saturday at the Northridge Hospital in Fort Lauderdale, Fla.
He was 78 years old and lived in Pompano Beach, Fla.
Mr. Levy died of multiple myeloma, said his son-in-law, Dr. Joel Feldman.


Johnson Retires Again


Bosnia's Dispossessed
Since the fall of the Bosnian town of Jajce to Serbian forces last week, 35,000 more people, most Muslims, have straggled to neighboring villages in search of refuge from their enemies and the coming Balkan winter.
United Nations workers are frantically trying to secure food, clothing and shelter for them.
Article, page A3.


CHRONICLE
Asked what characteristics bound together a disparate group of winners of the 1992 Charles A. Dana Awards in Health and Education, Dr.
SAMUEL O. THIER, president of Brandeis University and a member of the selection jury, reached back to paraphrase the 18th-century play "The Critic," by Richard Brinsley Sheridan.
"The number of people who undergo the fatigue of thinking for themselves is few indeed," Dr.
Thier said yesterday, "and these awards recognize those people." The awards are given annually by the Charles A. Dana Foundation, a philanthropy in New York that gives grants for programs in neuroscience and education.


Corrections
A map on Sunday showing states with United States Senate races misstated the status of New Jersey.
There is no Senate race in New Jersey this year.


RESULTS PLUS
Lizeality by a Neck  Lizeality wore down favored Fortunate Charmer in the final strides to win by  a neck yesterday in Aqueduct's $27,000 Cee Zee purse.
The winner carried 115 pounds, with Nick Santagata aboard, in the race for older fillies and mares.
The winning time was 1:242/5 for seven furlongs.
The victory was the second in six  starts this year for Lizeality, who earned $16,200 for Derby Hill Stable and returned $11.60, $3.60 and $2.80 for $2 across the board. (AP) TENNIS Americans Advance
David Wheaton and Derrick Rostagno, two Americans who have fallen sharply out of the top 20 since the beginning of the year, scored first-round victories at the Paris Open yesterday.
Wheaton, who has dropped from his 1991 ranking of No.  17 to No. 58, beat 39th-ranked Javier Sanchez of Spain, 7-6 (7-3), 7-6 (7-4), and Rostagno, who has fallen from No. 13 to No. 97, beat 87th-ranked Nicklas Kulti of Sweden, 6-4, 6-3.
Jim Courier, ranked No. 1, will play Andrei Chesnokov today.
Third-seeded Stefan Edberg will face 18-year-old Andrei Medvedev, who has risen to No. 24 with three clay-court tournament victories this year.
In other matches, Amos Mansdorf, the 1988 Paris Open winner, beat Carl-Uwe Steeb, 6-3, 3-6, 6-3; Wally Masur was a 6-3, 6-4 winner over Marc Rosset, the Olympic gold medalist, and Emilio Sanchez beat Andrei Cherkasov, 7-6 (7-4), 6-4.  (AP)
HOCKEY


Credit Markets; Treasury to Expand Offering To Stem Shortage of Note
The Treasury announced yesterday that it would sell $11.25 billion in current 10-year notes next week in an effort to eliminate a serious shortage of the security.
This is the first time the Treasury has used its authority to sell additional securities of the same issue to combat such a shortage, which has sharply driven up the cost for trading in the 10-year note that was auctioned last August and could disrupt the market.


OTHER HIGHLIGHTS
WOMEN IN THE SENATE 'Year of the Woman,' as Predicted
This was to be the "Year of the Woman," and that prediction was borne out in the Senate elections.
Carol Moseley Braun, a Chicago Democrat, will be the first black woman in the Senate.
In California, two women were elected to the Senate at once: Dianne Feinstein, the former Mayor of San Francisco, who won a special election to fill the last two years of Gov.
Pete Wilson's Senate term; and Representative Barbara Boxer, who won a full six-year term to succeed Alan Cranston.
Both are Democrats.


For Some Adults, Bed-Wetting Is Far From a Distant Memory
For some adults, bedtime is something to be dreaded, a reminder of a problem most people have outgrown long ago and of their inability to master a skill acquired by most 6-year-olds.
They are adults who have trouble waking up dry.
They are mature people, who experts say probably number in the hundreds of thousands if not the millions, who are bed-wetters.
Because of their problem, they often live in constant fear of embarrassment, afraid to share their beds with loved ones or even to be house guests.


San Diego Arts Group, Short of Funds, Closes
The San Diego Foundation for Performing Arts, a producing organization known for its innovative dance programming, has announced that it has closed.
Despite a national fund-raising drive, the foundation was unable to raise the $200,000 it needed by the cutoff date of Oct. 28.
The money would have offset actual and projected losses of $215,000, reductions in government grants and a sudden drop in single-ticket sales this year.
The foundation was able to raise only $137,000.


Islanders End Lemieux's Streak but Can't Stop the Penguins
So often in the last several seasons, the Islanders have let the Pittsburgh Penguins lure them into a high-scoring game, only to find that it rarely pays to trade chances with the two-time defending Stanley Cup champions.
So tonight, the Islanders tightened up against the Penguins, allowing them only one goal on 14 shots in the first two periods.
Unfortunately for the Islanders, they didn't score any of their own, and the Penguins scored again in the third period to take a 2-0 victory.
As the Penguins proved last season in the championship round against Chicago, they can win with any style.


Theater in Review
God of Vengeance  Jewish Repertory Playhouse 91 316 East 91st Street
By Sholem Asch; adaptation by Stephen Fife; directed by Ran Avni; set by Rob Odorisio; costumes by Gail Cooper-Hecht; lighting by Betsy Finston; music and sound by Raphael Crystal; general manager, Steven M. Levy; production stage manager, D. C. Rosenberg.
Presented by the Jewish Repertory Theater, Mr.
Avni, artistic director; Edward M. Cohen, associate director, in association with the 92d Street Y.M.-Y.W.H.A. and Play Producers, Annette Moskowitz and Alexander E. Racolin.
WITH: Jodi Baker, Robin Leslie Brown, Christine Burke, Marilyn Chris, Roy Cockrum, Maury Cooper, Deborah Laufer, Bernie Passeltiner, Bernadette Quigley, Stephen Singer and Lee Wallace.
To celebrate its move uptown to Playhouse 91, the Jewish Repertory Theater is presenting a new adaptation, in English, of Sholem Asch's dark and memorable Yiddish play, "God of Vengeance," the first work produced by the company when it started in 1974.


Hachette Acquires Metropolitan Home
Hachette Publications announced yesterday that it had acquired Metropolitan Home magazine from the Meredith Corporation.
Hachette's courtship of Metropolitan Home was remarkably fast in the magazine industry, taking just over a weekend to pull the deal together.


ACCORDS IMPERIL AN IRAQ ARMS CASE
The Justice Department secretly agreed not to prosecute top executives of a company that supplied Iraq with millions of dollars in Western arms-making equipment, according to documents and interviews.
The disclosure of the agreements, reached in 1990 and 1991, is expected to deepen the controversy over the Bush Administration's failure to stop the flow of arms to Baghdad.


Personal Health
ONE day while walking along one of New York's less savory streets, I passed a man who, though standing up, was nodding like a heroin addict who had just had a fix.
But when his body crumbled, his head smashed on the sidewalk, and he began to flail about wildly, I realized I had made a dreadful mistake born of ignorance.
It was not drugs but epilepsy that provoked the man's bizarre behavior, and had I acted quickly I could have cushioned his fall and spared him a head wound that required hospital treatment.
Though epilepsy is the most common of chronic neurological disorders, afflicting about 4 million Americans, few people have ever knowingly seen an epileptic seizure.


Yonkers Police Commissioner Is Injured in Car Bombing
The Yonkers police commissioner, who is taking part in a broad investigation of allegations about past corruption in city government here, was injured this morning when a bomb exploded in his car.
The Commissioner, Robert K. Olson, was badly cut on his left leg as a result of the blast that Mayor Terence Zaleski called an "assassination attempt" outside the Commissioner's suburban apartment building near Bronxville just after 8 A.M.
He was treated at Lawrence Hospital in Bronxville and returned home to recuperate.
The commissioner's home is now guarded by the police.  'Just Didn't Appear Right'
Mayor Zaleski said there was a possibility that the bomb was related to an inquiry into possible ties between organized crime and city officials.


No Time Like the First


Transcript of the President's Speech, Conceding His Defeat by Clinton
Following is the text of President Bush's concession speech last night, as recorded by The New York Times:
Thank you so much.
Well, here's the way I see it.
Here's the way we see it and the country should see it -- that the people have spoken and we respect the majesty of the democratic system.
I just called Governor Clinton over in Little Rock and offered my congratulations.
He did run a strong campaign.
I wish him well in the White House.


Modernized Subway Station Unveiled at Herald Square


Corrections
An obituary on Sept. 16 about Dr.
Julius Bell, an ear, nose and throat specialist who practiced and taught in Manhattan for 56 years, omitted a survivor.
She is a daughter, Sandra Bromberg of Monsey, N.Y., who wrote last week to point out the error.


Alice I. Bryan, 90, Expert on Libraries
Alice I. Bryan, a psychologist who fostered the advancement of women in her profession and who led a major study on the role of libraries, died on Friday at Roosevelt Hospital in Manhattan.
She was 90 years old and lived in Manhattan.
She died of leukemia, her relatives said.
Her death was reported yesterday by Columbia University, where she had taught for 35 years.


THE 1992 ELECTIONS: CELEBRATION MAN IN THE NEWS: William Jefferson Blythe Clinton; A Man Who Wants to Be Liked, and Is
It is 2:30 in the morning of Election Day, and Bill Clinton, a middling amateur saxophonist, is playing his true instrument, the crowd.
Thousands of people have come to see him in Fort Worth, and they are wild with emotion, straining so heavily against the heavy steel barricades set up to keep them apart from the candidate that it takes half a dozen large police officers to keep the fences from toppling forward.


A Senator Confronts Baseball
In an Election Day game of hardball, a United States Senator from Florida yesterday said baseball's exemption from antitrust laws could be challenged if club owners do not allow the Giants to move from San Francisco to Florida.
"This is a clear test for major league baseball here," Senator Connie Mack, Republican of Florida, said in a conference call arranged by a public relations company representing the Tampa Bay group that is trying to buy the Giants.


Corrections
A chart in Business Day on Monday showing last week's activity in various financial markets reversed the labels of two trend lines.
The Standard &amp; Poor's 500-stock index was represented by the jagged, darker line; while the 150-day moving average was represented by the smoother, lighter line.


What History Lies Beneath Bavarian Surface
To the Editor:
You depict Bad Tolz, Germany, as a Bavarian paradise of lederhosen and golden beer on the Isar River, marred only by farmer suspicions of the European Community (news article, Oct. 17).
For me, your article evoked bitter memories.
That town was one of the first targets of Hitler's version of ethnic cleansing.
I saw it happen while I was on my vacation as a 12-year-old.


Ralston Purina Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Jets Are Failing to Make the Grade
It is midterm for the Jets.
If grades were given based upon records, then the Jets, at 2-6, would have to receive a failing mark.
But their record is not indicative of everything that has happened this season.
Early in the season, the team appeared inattentive, but now the players have their concentration back.
At times they have lacked consistency and intensity, but they never quit.


Poor Buenos Aires! Can Paris Be Like This?
The people of Buenos Aires like to think of their city as the Paris of Latin America because of its thriving arts, ornate French architecture, outdoor cafes, broad boulevards and tranquil parks.
But uncollected trash piled up on the sidewalks recently and residents, climbing over unfilled potholes and pondering the high tax rate and disclosures that the city was essentially broke, with $600 million in debt, remembered that Paris was thousands of miles away.


Clinton Carves a Wide Path Deep Into Reagan Country
Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas recaptured for his party yesterday the Democrats who had fled to Ronald Reagan, and he made strong inroads into what had been Republican strongholds in the suburbs and among voters who label themselves moderates and independents.
In general, according to interviews with voters as they left the polls, President Bush lost the groups that Mr.
Reagan had won over and that had remained with Mr.
Bush in 1988.
More than half the Democrats who said they voted for Mr.
Bush last time voted for Mr.
Clinton this time.


For Weary Supporters, Hope Ebbs as Tide Slowly Turns
As the tide turned against Robert Abrams last night in his bid for the United States Senate, the 150 supporters who had gathered at the Sheraton Hotel were torn between elation over the Clinton victory and letdown over what seemed to be a narrow defeat for the Attorney General.
At 2 A.M., speaking to his supporters, Mr.
Abrams said that while Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato appeared to have won, there remained "a degree of uncertainty."


D'Amato Is Victor Over Abrams In New York's Bitter Senate Race
Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato, the battle-scarred Republican incumbent, drew support from just enough Democrats to squeak to a third term over State Attorney General Robert Abrams last night, claiming victory despite an overwhelming landslide for Bill Clinton in New York.
Mr.
D'Amato won re-election, after repeated investigations into his conduct in office, in the tightest statewide contest since his own initial victory in a three-way race 12 years ago, according to unofficial returns.


Touchable Art's the Toast of Paris
Children climb all over them, teen-agers rub their round surfaces, blind people come to feel them, tourists stand by them to be photographed and older Parisians simply look at them and smile.
The bronze sculptures of Fernando Botero, it seems, have taken over the Champs-Elysees.
The sculptures -- 31 of them -- are mainly bronze renditions of the proudly rotund men, women, children and animals who frequently appear in the Colombian artist's better-known drawings, aquarelles and paintings.
So they are immediately recognizable as Boteros.


Marcam Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Samuel W. Kalb; Obstetrician, 94
Dr.
Samuel W. Kalb, an obstetrician who practiced in Newark for 35 years, died on Sunday in Muhlenberg Hospital in Plainfield, N.J.
He was 94 years old and lived in East Orange.
Dr.
Kalb graduated from Valparaiso (Ind.) University and, in 1926, the University of Cincinnati School of Medicine.
He spent his residency in obstetrics in Dublin before opening his practice in Newark in 1930.
He retired in 1965.


Democratic Coattails Weak As Marino Wins Re-election
Surviving the specter of Democratic coattails and a tough campaign that included attacks from conservatives, State Senator Ralph J. Marino, the Republican majority leader, won re-election tonight.
The Senator from Oyster Bay -- the most powerful Republican in state government -- had some nervous moments this evening as the size of Gov.
Bill Clinton's victory in New York took shape.
But shortly before 10 P.M., Mr.
Marino's Democratic opponent, James F. Gaughran of Huntington, called to concede, saying that early returns from Huntington showed Mr.
Marino ahead by as much as a two-to-one margin in some precincts.


Bridge
When Jim Jacoby, long one of the country's best players, died early last year he had a book in preparation.
It is "Bridge Toolkit," and his co-author, Allan Falk, completed the work.
It is now available from Falk, at 2010 Cimarron Drive, Okemos, Mich. 48864, for $12.95 including postage.
The book offers useful insights into areas that most other books neglect.
Most of the chapters are about bidding, but there is also some valuable material about defense.
The diagramed deal is given as a test, with the South and West hands hidden.
The reader is East, defending three no-trump after the auction shown, and West has led the heart queen.
How should East plan the defense?


St. Lawrence Cement reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


With a Bow to Show Business, National Kicks Up Its Heels
By dawn, the debris from Bill Clinton's Presidential rally was gone and in its place in the Meadowlands parking lot were 700 horses, all poised to kick off their own campaigns and kick up their iron-clad heels this week at the 109th National Horse Show.
Competition got under way this afternoon at the show, which features more breeds, from ponies to Percherons, and offers more prestige and prize money ($600,000) than any other such event on the yearly calendar.


Trump Revises Plaza Loan
Ending lengthy negotiations with his creditors, Donald J. Trump said yesterday that he had restructured debt agreements on $425 million he borrowed to buy the Plaza Hotel in Manhattan in 1988.
Mr.
Trump's creditors, led by Citibank, agreed to restructure the $300 million first mortgage on the hotel that was originally scheduled to mature June 30, 1993.


SPS Technologies reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Review/Dance; Red Star: Hornpipes and Cossack Leaps
The Red Star Red Army Chorus and Dance Ensemble from Russia is a polished and highly professional spinoff from the more famous Aleksandrov Red Army Song and Dance Ensemble, also known, especially through its recordings, as the Red Army Chorus.
At its enthusiastically received Manhattan debut at Avery Fisher Hall on Monday night, the Red Star dancers, singers and musicians adopted a style that was distinctly Boston Pops, remote from the old heroic manner of the Aleksandrov chorus.


Banker Holds A Large Lead In Jersey City
A 33-year-old investment banker took a substantial lead tonight in a 19-way race to become the fourth person to serve as Mayor of Jersey City this year.
With 145 of 177 districts reporting in a special election to fill the mayor's office until May, Bret Schundler led his nearest rival by more than 1,400 votes.
Returns from the other districts will not be available until Wednesday, the city clerk said, because polling officials did not turn them in tonight.


Swank Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


German Town Copes With Its Share of Foreigners
Helmut Seubel, who runs a temporary shelter for refugees and asylum-seekers in this southern German medieval market town, is glad that few of the townspeople here seem to know where the shelter is.
"Thank God they don't," he said, showing a visitor around the other day as some of the 105 people staying in the building, many of them fleeing the fighting in Bosnia and Herzegovina, talked and let their children play in the courtyard outside.
"We haven't had any attacks on this home, and knock on wood, we don't want any, either."


Funding Is Restored for Women's Sports
In an effort to level the playing field for both men and women in college athletics, United States District Judge MAURICE COHILL on Monday ordered Indiana University of Pennsylvania to restore funding for women's gymnastics and field hockey.
"We plan to go over all elements of the case carefully with our counsel to determine what, if any, our next legal steps will be," WILLIAM SWAUGER, a university spokesman, said yesterday.


Northeast
CONNECTICUT...Clinton
Gov.
Bill Clinton took this state of disaffected voters, which had not supported a Democratic Presidential candidate since 1968.
President Bush apparently failed to win over the ranks of Reagan Democrats and moderate Republicans he needed to help him take the eight electoral votes in Connecticut.


Buck Stops at Coach for Breaking Rules
Coach PAT DYE acknowledged that Auburn broke National Collegiate Athletic Association regulations in the case involving former defensive back ERIC RAMSEY, and said he will have to answer for it.
But Dye said he had no plans to resign as coach.
He was forced out as athletic director when Ramsey told of receiving improper aid as a player.
Dye's comments came in an interview published yesterday in The Huntsville (Ala.) Times.


Travelers Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


On Clinton's Coattails, Many Democrats Blunt Anti-Incumbent Anger
Congressional Democrats blunted the national anti-Washington mood yesterday as voters made it clear they feared gridlock more than incumbency.
In state after state, Democratic lawmakers who clung to Gov.
Bill Clinton's coattails survived tough Republican challenges.
Democrats appeared likely to gain in the Senate and suffer only modest losses in the House.


Rising Caution on Using Celebrity Images
THE "Butcher of Baghdad," it turns out, is thin-skinned.
An Iraqi diplomat recently complained that an advertisement for a data service company used an "unfavorable" photograph of Saddam Hussein without his permission.
The caption of the ad for Gov PX, a provider of prices of Treasury bills, reads, "History has shown what happens when one source controls all the information."


Fabric Sides Are Opening Up Trucking
What has curtains and double-hubbed wheels? A curtainsider, of course.
A type of truck trailer with flexible "walls" made of a tough fabric that can be drawn back for loading and unloading, the curtainsider has been common in Europe for nearly a decade, but only now is catching on in the United States.
There are about 10,000 in use on American roads, and the makers expect the market to expand.


Abandoned Newborn Found in Bronx Alley
An newborn girl stuffed into a gym bag was abandoned in a cold, damp alley in the Bronx yesterday morning, where her cat-like cries alerted a couple who rescued her.
The child, who did not appear to have suffered any physical injuries, was taken by the police to Lincoln Hospital, where she was listed in good condition, said Detective Joseph McConville, a police spokesman.
The mother has not been found.


FOREIGN TOURISTS TO REMAIN IN JAIL
Fifteen Malaysians deemed witnesses to a Federal smuggling case are still behind bars tonight after a detention hearing to resolve their plight was recessed by a judge.
The 15 are part group of 24 Malaysian tourists detained by the Immigration and Naturalization Service on Oct. 21, when their tour guide was held on suspicion of smuggling two Malaysians into the country.
They were detained because either the Government or the defense wanted them as witnesses.


Gejdenson Claims Victory, but Recount Is Sought
Senator Christopher J. Dodd won a third term today, easily defeating Brook Johnson, a Republican businessman who spent millions of his own money trying to make Mr.
Dodd's long tenure in Washington an issue.
Mr.
Dodd, a Democrat first elected to Congress in 1974 as a member of the House representing eastern Connecticut, had 59 percent of the vote today, to Mr.
Johnson's 38 percent, with 53 percent of the state's precincts reporting.


No Anger by Johnson On Malone's Remarks
Magic Johnson has told his friends that he harbors no bad feelings toward Karl Malone and other players who recently went public with their fear that playing against Johnson could pose a danger to them.
Some players on the Los Angeles Lakers said, however, that they were still confounded by Malone's comments in The New York Times on Sunday.
Malone said he felt uncomfortable playing against Johnson, who has tested positive for the virus that causes AIDS, because gashes are often opened on the court.


An Egalitarian Approach Gains in Computing
A leading producer of computer networking systems for small businesses received a vote of confidence last week that it could probably have done without.
The Microsoft Corporation entered its market.
Artisoft Inc., tiny but profitable, has seen its once high-flying shares lose more than half their market value since Microsoft's plans became known this summer.
And last Tuesday, when Microsoft formally announced its new software, shares of Artisoft took an additional hit, dropping 75 cents, to $14, in over-the-counter trading.


All 10 Incumbents Win Re-election, and Democrats Keep Majority in Delegation
In what had been predicted to be the year of the anti-incumbent, New Jersey voters returned all 10 incumbents to the House of Representatives and allowed the Democrats, against the odds, to keep the numerical edge they have held in the delegation for 28 years.
The state's first Hispanic Congressman, a Democrat, also won handily in the new 13th District, which was drawn this year to favor a Hispanic candidate.


Public &amp; Private; A Place Called Hope
For the last 15 years Barbara Walters has been haunted by the comment she made to Jimmy Carter in a pre-inaugural interview.
"Be wise with us," she said.
"Be good to us." The truth is that we all know what she meant, because most of us, on one Tuesday in November or another, have felt at least a whiff of the same thing.
It's called hope.


Voters Approve Broader Use of the Death Penalty
By a substantial margin, voters today approved a constitutional amendment that prosecutors said would make it easier to seek the death penalty in certain cases.
Two other constitutional questions also passed, but by much narrower margins.
One would have the state take over costs of the county-based Superior Court system and the other would grant the Legislature a veto over rules and regulations proposed by the executive branch.


Circle in the Square Theater Postpones Season Opening
The Circle in the Square Theater, which was to open its new season this month with a revival of "The Apple Cart," by George Bernard Shaw, has announced that the season opening will be delayed until February.
The managing director, Robert Buckley, said yesterday that the company had raised only $90,000 of the $200,000 needed to produce the Shaw comedy.


Coventry Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


William Harrington, Who Made Gains in Biochemistry, Dies at 72
Dr.
William Fields Harrington, the Henry Walters professor of biology at Johns Hopkins University since 1975, died at his home in Baltimore Saturday.
He was 72 years old.
The university announced his death yesterday.
His family said the cause was heart failure.


Arthur Vare; Wall Street Executive, 86
Arthur Vare, a former senior partner of the Wall Street firm of Kalb, Voorhis &amp; Company, died on Monday at the DeWitt Nursing Home in Manhattan.
He was 86 years old and lived in Manhattan.
Mr.
Vare had suffered from Parkinson's disease and had suffered a series of strokes in recent years, said his son, Robert Vare.


Orion Capital Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Yankees Trade Roberto Kelly to Reds for O'Neill
The Yankees scrapped their glorious plans involving Roberto Kelly yesterday and traded their once-untouchable outfielder to the Cincinnati Reds for power-hitting right fielder Paul O'Neill.
Joe DeBerry, a minor league first baseman, also came to New York in the deal, which essentially centered on the 29-year-old O'Neill, a .259 career hitter with 96 home runs and a contract through 1994, being swapped for the 28-year-old Kelly, a .280 career hitter with 56 home runs and an opportunity to become a free agent after next season.


The Economy's Casualty
In the end it was the faltering economy, which had bedeviled him all year, that did George Bush in.
From the New Hampshire primary in February, through the party conventions this summer, to the start of the general-election campaign on Labor Day, public opinion held remarkably steady: three-quarters of the American people, according to New York Times/CBS News polls, disapproved of the way the President was handling the economy.


Sports of The Times; Magic, Not AIDS, Leaves Stage
THE National Basketball Association may feel that it can breathe a bit easier now: Earvin Johnson has retired, this time for good.
The league's cherished image is safe.
In the months that have passed since Johnson's announcement that he was H.I.V.-positive, the N.B.A. has been confronted with a number of uncomfortable issues surrounding AIDS and has had to face up to questions of sexuality and promiscuity that have engulfed the sport.


Review/Fashion; Beene's Question: How Does It Move?
GEOFFREY BEENE, not content with expanding the frontiers of fashion design itself, has now made significant changes in its presentation, too.
Instead of a fashion show, the conventional way of introducing a new season's styles, he provided a static display, backed by mural-size drawings of his spring and summer clothes and by walls of photographs of them.
The models in the photographs were students at the School of American Ballet at Lincoln Center, site of yesterday's show.
"I didn't want to call it a multimedia event, because that's not precisely what it is," the designer said.
"But it's not a standard fashion show either, because I believe the shows have turned into mere entertainments -- they no longer inform. The models have become so important -- they have become bigger than design."


Adia Services reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Tide of Migrant Labor Tells of a Law's Failure
At dusk, the migrant workers trudge in from the orchards to the dusty courtyard of the farmer's labor camp, where they live in aged, rust-pocked trailers.
From straps on their shoulders, they carry galvanized buckets with canvas bottoms so the apples they pick will not bruise.
The workers get 50 cents each time they fill a bucket.
Every year, an estimated 45,000 of these men and women, nearly all originally from Mexico, spend one to six months in western Michigan.
With its wide variety of fruit and vegetable crops, including asparagus in the spring and apples in the fall, the region is one of the nation's leading employers of migrant labor.


Richfood Holdings reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 17


Corrections
An entry in the Addenda listing with the Advertising column in Business Day on Monday about a one-day television boycott for Nov. 13 misidentified the primary sponsor.
It is Morality in Media, which is being joined in "Turn Off TV Day" by Americans for Responsible Television and the American Family Association.


THE 1992 ELECTIONS: THE STATES Off The Trail: Visits With Americans; Cultivating Grass Roots The Old-Fashioned Way
The costly revels ended and the last campaign commercials slipped away as cold swept in like mercy from the lakefront, locking in the pre-dawn verities of Election Day.
Joe Lyons appeared on the streets of the Third Political Precinct, 45th Ward, looking for a fresh hurrah.
"There is a God: A Democrat can be President again," the party man announced.


A Business Week Account Is Resigned
Margeotes Fertitta &amp; Weiss in New York said on Monday that it had resigned from Business Week magazine's trade advertising account, with billings estimated at $1 million to $1.5 million, effective at the end of the month.
The announcement followed months of speculation in the Delaney Report, a trade newsletter, that the agency's hold on the account, which it had for four years, was loosening.
George Fertitta, the agency's president, confirmed a report of the resignation this week in Adweek, citing "creative differences" as the primary reason.


Yangpu Journal; Months or Millennia After Flood, the Poor Endure
The only solution to her family's problems, Wan Ziyu said glumly, was for her to die.
"Every day I live is a burden for my son," said Ms.
Wan, her white hair and wrinkled face betraying her 80 years.
She looked down at her four-inch long feet, bound and crippled when she was a child, and said, brooding, "It's better for me to die as soon as possible."


Prexy Comix


Excerpts From Perot's Concession Speech to His Supporters in Dallas
Following are excerpts from Ross Perot's concession speech in Dallas last night, as recorded by The New York Times:
I want to thank all of you who are here tonight and all the people who have come together across the nation.
Starting last February you did something that everybody said couldn't be done.
Millions of you came together to take your country back.


Yugoslav Premier Survives Serbian Effort to Oust Him
Prime Minister Milan Panic of Yugoslavia has narrowly survived an attempt to topple him by Serbian nationalists infuriated by his support for Western efforts to end the Balkan conflict and other positions he has taken.
The Parliament's 40-member upper house voted 18-17 today to override a no-confidence motion approved by an overwhelming majority of the lower house on Monday.
The ex-Communist Serbian Socialist Party, led by the Serbian President, Slobodan Milosevic, dominates the lower house.


U.N. ASKS CROATIA TO ADMIT BOSNIANS
The United Nations refugee relief agency appealed to Croatia today to open its borders to thousands who have massed here after Serbian forces captured the Bosnian town of Jajce last week.
"These people are definitely fleeing for their lives," Ron Redmond, spokesman for the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, said at a news conference in Geneva.
"We believe they deserve entry."


International Forest Products reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Yields Mixed On C.D.'s and Money Funds
Yields offered on bank money market accounts and certificates of deposit were mixed again for the week that ends today, as banks refrained from making sharp adjustments in deposit rates.
Analysts at The Bank Rate Monitor, a Florida-based interest rate publication, said average yields were little changed as money market accounts held firm in the New York market but slipped in a survey of 20 large banks nationwide.
For certificates of deposit, yields were thinly mixed in New York, but were moderately higher at the same 20 large banks.


On This Night, Little Rock Is One Mountain of Pride
They danced in the streets and hugged each other at the campaign headquarters and generally lost their heads when Gov.
Bill Clinton became President-elect tonight.
The downtown streets of the state capital, which are normally deserted by 6 P.M. on a busy day, were transformed into a rolling Mardi Gras as thousands of Democrats came by bus, plane, automobile and foot to celebrate their first national victory in more than a decade.


The Quest For Colors That Make Lips Smack
IN food, like life, looks matter.
The appearance of a food sends complex messages to the hungry brain.
Is a red raspberry better than a golden one?
A big shiny apple better than a small mottled one?
While all aspects of a food signify something, color may be the most potent symbol, in both natural and manufactured foods.
Red in a steak indicates rareness; red in a hard candy means a cherry or strawberry flavor.
Sometimes, the message is deep and primitive.
Black, for instance, is so associated with death that it is rarely given to a food.


60-Minute Gourmet
THE barriers between different world cuisines are falling faster than dropped souffles.
Even former culinary dogmatists like myself are now dabbling in recipes that combine, say, French fundamentals with Asian spices.
The dish here is a result of that modern liberalism.
The chicken fingers are Mexican in inspiration.
The pasta, of course, is Italian.


Natural Gas Considered Possible Cause of Blast
Police and fire officials combing the wreckage of a 13-story Harlem apartment building yesterday concentrated on natural gas as the likely cause of the thunderous explosion that tore open the three top floors and killed two people on Monday.
"What we are really trying to focus on is why the gas exploded," Capt.
William J. Bayer of the 25th Police Precinct said outside the building yesterday afternoon.


Caldor Bids for Alexander's Stores
The Caldor Corporation, a big discount retailer in the Northeast, made a bid yesterday to acquire and reopen 6 of 11 Alexander's department stores in the New York metropolitan area.
The bid competes with one by Bradlees Inc., another discount chain, for the properties of the 64-year-old bankrupt retailer.
The size of the Caldor bid was not disclosed in short statements by Caldor and Alexander's Inc. issued after 5 P.M. yesterday.
But Alexander's said that the new bid would exceed the Bradlees bid by about $5 million in "present value," as required last month of any future bidder by the Federal Bankruptcy Court in Manhattan, which is supervising Alexander's affairs.


Ban on Abortion Counseling Is Struck Down
A Federal appeals court today invalidated the Bush Administration's ban on abortion counseling at federally financed family planning clinics.
The court ruled that recent modifications to the ban, which the Administration made in the spring to mollify opponents, were improperly imposed.
Although the unanimous ruling, by a panel of the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit, was based on narrow procedural grounds, its immediate effect was sweeping: the bitterly contested ban, which covers 3,900 clinics around the country, was set aside.
Those clinics receive $1.5 million in Federal money annually to serve about 4.5 million women.


ESCO Electronics reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


NVR L.P.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


A Monumental, Fragile Mandate
The American public thundered yesterday for, above all, change.
Yes, voters endorsed Bill Clinton both for his positive program and his dignity in facing down nasty negative attacks.
Yes, the voters brought joy to Democrats long out of power and relief to millions worried that Republicans would pack the Supreme Court for years to come.
But the public said more than that:


Economic Indicators Drop by 0.3%
The predictive index designed by the Government to plot the economy fell three-tenths of 1 percent in September to produce the first back-to-back declines since 1991, the Commerce Department reported today.
The report offered more evidence that despite some scattered hopeful signs, the economic expansion is likely to remain feeble in coming months, analysts said.


Micronics Computers reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Bankruptcy For First City
A group of bondholders has forced the First City Bancorporation of Houston into involuntary bankruptcy, after regulators seized the company's 20 subsidiary banks late Friday.
The bankruptcy petition, which was presented to Federal Bankruptcy Judge Harold Abramson of Dallas on Saturday night as he was in a grocery store, is a way for bondholders to strengthen their claim to First City's remaining assets.


For Toasting Sweet Victory, Or Swallowing Bitter Defeat
IN any election, two outcomes are certain.
First, there will be winners and losers.
Second, both the winners and the losers will need a drink.
The recent campaign has been tough, bitter and long, so the cocktails should be good.
That's a tall order in the present age of brass, a degenerate time in which bartenders have been known to squirt margaritas from a hose, and when sliding vodka Jell-O cubes into an open mouth via a slalom course carved into a block of ice counts as a creative breakthrough.


New Chief At Magazine
Molly Schaefer, associate publisher of Cosmopolitan, was named publisher of Town &amp; Country yesterday.
She succeeds David A. McCann, a longtime Hearst Magazines executive, who will become publisher emeritus and a consultant to Hearst.
Peg Farrell, associate publisher and advertising director of Reader's Digest since 1990, will succeed Ms.
Schaefer at Cosmopolitan.


THE 1992 ELECTIONS: CONNECTICUT -- THE 5TH DISTRICT
Gary Franks, the only black Republican in Congress, won re-election tonight, defeating two challengers who split the Democratic vote.
Mr.
Franks, who was seeking his second term, received 43 percent of the vote with 78 percent of the precincts reporting, compared with 31 percent for James Lawlor, the endorsed Democrat, and 23 percent for Lynn Taborsak, a Democrat who ran under the banner of Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr.'s A Connecticut Party.


Equitable Resources reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Cambodians Ask U.N. to Abandon Its Peace Plan
The Cambodian Government called on the United Nations today to abandon its disarmament plan for Cambodia so Government troops can return to the battle against Khmer Rouge guerrillas, who have refused to disarm.
The Government also said that the Khmer Rouge, the Maoist-inspired rebels who are the most powerful of the three guerrilla groups who joined in the peace settlement, should be expelled from Cambodia's Supreme National Council.


Five States Adopt Term Limits for Members of Congress
Public anger with Congress reached a climax yesterday as voters in numerous states across the country overwhelmingly approved ballot measures to limit the number of terms that senators and representatives can serve in Washington.
By last evening, voters in California, the most populous state, Florida, Michigan, Missouri and Ohio had approved such limits by substantial margins.
And similar measures were leading heavily in nine other states, according to voter surveys and partial returns.


Incumbents Stave Off Rivals Amid Economic Concerns
Defying a wave of anti-incumbency that many in Congress had feared, all six of Connecticut's United States Representatives appeared to have won on Tuesday.
In the Second District, which covers most of eastern Connecticut, the six-term incumbent Democrat, Sam Gejdenson, appeared to have squeezed out a narrow victory over Edward Munster, a Republican State Senator from Haddam.
With 86 percent of the vote counted, Mr.
Gejdenson appeared to have won, but his opponent refused to concede, saying, "This is no mandate." Early this morning Mr.
Gejdenson declared victory, but Mr.
Munster said he was entitled to a recount.


Don't Forsake Somalia
Just when you think it can hardly get worse in Somalia, it gets worse.
In the key emergency food distribution center of Bandera, starving Somalis die at the rate of 250 to 300 a day.
Yet Bandera is only a short hop by air from the capital, Mogadishu, a port city where food rots on the docks.
How can this happen?
Because Mogadishu is a killing field in a barbarous clan war that has stopped virtually all food flights, and because the United Nations is too feeble to escort the food to those who are starving.


Tea Growers Plan Own Army in North India
After paying millions of dollars in protection money and ransom in the last few years, tea producers in India's northeast have announced plans to set up an 8,000-member private army to protect their interests.
Tea is one of India's largest foreign exchange earners, bringing in about $200 million in hard currency every year.
Assam, which is renowned for its strong-flavored tea, produces more than 60 percent of the 700,000 tons of tea manufactured in the country each year.
Despite the kidnapping and extortion, tea production has been good and the companies, which have offices in Gauhati, the commercial capital of the state, continue to prosper.


Theater in Review


COMPANY NEWS China to Buy Used Mill; A New Approach to Exporting Steel
Part of the defunct Kaiser Steel Corporation's old mill that turned pig iron into ribbons of semifinished steel will be broken down and shipped to China for reassembly, 20-story building and all.
The deal was agreed to by California Steel Industries.
The company bought Kaiser's finishing mill, but not the blast furnaces and other front-end operations, in 1984, after Kaiser shut down the Fontana, Calif., plant.


Transactions
MONDAY Baseball  National League
CHICAGO CUBS -- Fired Jim Frey, senior vice president and special player consultant.
Basketball


CLINTON CAPTURES PRESIDENCY WITH HUGE ELECTORAL MARGIN; WINS A DEMOCRATIC CONGRESS
Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas was elected the 42d President of the United States yesterday, breaking a 12-year Republican hold on the White House.
Mr.
Clinton shattered the Republicans' political base with a promise of change to an electorate clearly discontented with President Bush.


Ryan Statue Unveiled in His Hometown
The bronze statue of NOLAN RYAN, a hometown hero, was unveiled in front of city hall yesterday in Alvin, Tex.
"This is a special day in our lives, and it will give me a special feeling every time I drive by city hall, come in and pay my taxes," said Ryan, who attended the ceremonies with his wife.


COMPANY NEWS China to Buy Used Mill; A New Approach to Exporting Steel
Part of the defunct Kaiser Steel Corporation's old mill that turned pig iron into ribbons of semifinished steel will be broken down and shipped to China for reassembly, 20-story building and all.
The deal was agreed to by California Steel Industries.
The company bought Kaiser's finishing mill, but not the blast furnaces and other front-end operations, in 1984, after Kaiser shut down the Fontana, Calif., plant.


Canandaigua Wine Co.  reports earnings for Year to Aug 31


Jays a Bit Thin in the Wallet
The Toronto Blue Jays won their first World Series championship in their first World Series appearance, but their players will have to settle for second best in the Series financial payoff.
Based on the post-season players' pool and shares voted by the respective teams, the 35 members of the Blue Jays awarded full shares will receive $114,962.16 each.
That is the second highest winner's share, exceeded only by the record $119,579.66 gained by the Minnesota Twins last year.


Wine Talk
THE British, who have no more than a token wine industry of their own, have long been important arbiters in the European wine market.
They practically invented port and sherry; they made Bordeaux respectable and Champagne rich and were, for the longest time, far greater enthusiasts for the wines of the Rhine and Mosel than the Germans themselves.
They even gave these wines dreadful English names.
Sherry is, of course, Jerez, anglicized; claret is a simple version of clairet, an old French name for Bordeaux wine, and there is that truly execrable name for German wine: hock.


Lazio Ends Downey's Tenure
Throughout his campaign, Rick Lazio hammered away at Thomas J. Downey, making his overdrafts at the House Bank a major issue in the campaign.
Mr.
Lazio combined that with an attack on Mr.
Downey as a tax-and-spend Democrat whose policies were ill-suited for the current economy to end Mr.
Downey's 18 years in Congress.
A Long Island Democrat whose tenure made him one of the House's most influential members, Mr.
Downey conceded defeat in a telephone call to Mr.
Lazio at 11 P.M.
With 72 percent of the precincts reporting, Mr.
Lazio led Mr.
Downey with 75,768 votes (53 percent) to 65,898 for Mr.
Downey, one of the Democrats unable to ride the coattails of Bill Clinton and Al Gore.
Mr.
Downey had won re-election in 1990 with 56 percent of the vote and with 62 percent in 1988.


Many Teachers, Required to Make Do With Less, Are Giving Less in Return
Upset by Spartan pay increases and the effect of budget cuts on schools, many teachers are venting their frustrations in a way that has angered students and parents: They are refusing to write letters of recommendation for college-bound students, to tutor after school or to perform other duties not specified by their contracts.
The tactic, called "work to the rule," is being used in growing numbers of school districts across the country to underscore teacher disenchantment over the management of public schools.
At a time when teachers are under mounting pressure to produce better students, recession-induced budget cuts have meant teacher layoffs and larger class sizes, making teaching more difficult.
New contracts have provided small raises, if any; in some cases teachers have been asked to take pay cuts.


Signs of Thaw for Small Business
The entrepreneurial urge is stirring again in John Wyatt.
The 47-year-old computer expert founded his first business two decades ago, has since worked for a handful of companies large and small and now thinks the time is ripe for another start-up.
So with a promising product, two colleagues and cluttered office space above his garage in Chapel Hill, N.C., he has founded a new computer software company, Easy Entry Software.


Ingram to Undergo Surgery
Mark Ingram, the Giants' starting flanker for most of his six-year career, will undergo arthroscopic surgery on Wednesday to repair a ligament in his right knee.
He will be placed on injured reserve, but Coach Ray Handley said today he hoped that Ingram would be ready to return when the four-week minimum period for injured reserve expired.
The length of his absence will be determined by what Dr.
Russell Warren, the Giants' orthopedic surgeon, finds during the surgery.


Kollmorgen Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Review/Theater; Approximating the Marx Brothers
In a world overrun with Elvis impersonators and Marilyn look-alikes, it is easy to lose sight of the fact that celebrity impressionists can also be essential perpetuators of show business traditions that might otherwise be lost.
Take "Animal Crackers," the Broadway musical of 1928, which the Goodspeed Opera House has revived in a terrific production that runs here through Dec. 20.
The Broadway show catapulted the Marx Brothers to Hollywood, where they made the classic movie version (minus most of the Bert Kalmar-Harry Ruby songs) two years later.
Any contemporary mounting of this effervescent slapstick, would be unthinkable without actors who could reasonably approximate the looks, personalities and comic timing of the Marx Brothers, for whom the show was custom-made.


Emerson Electric Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Executive Changes
BANKAMERICA CORP., San Francisco, named Ronald E. Rhody, director of corporate communications and external affairs, to the post of executive vice president.
COLONIAL CENTRAL SAVINGS BANK, Clinton Township, Mich., named Margaret S. Makela senior vice president and chief financial officer and Gary W. Wilds senior vice president and general counsel.


Aided by Vote for Clinton, Democrats Retain Control
Connecticut Democrats, aided by a large turnout for Gov.
Bill Clinton in the Presidential race, retained control of the State Legislature tonight.
Unofficial counts by both parties had the Democrats winning at least 83 seats in the 151-member House, with 3 more seats claimed by Democrats but close enough to require recounts.
The Republicans took 65 seats.
Democrats won 20 seats in the 36-member Senate to 16 for the Republicans, according to unofficial counts by both parties.


Campus Journal; Marriage Talk as an Intramural Sport
For nearly two decades, Middlebury College freshman who gathered in the chapel here to pass around a ceremonial walking stick and celebrate the start of their academic careers learned about another tradition not found in their college catalog.
More Middlebury alumni marry each other than do graduates of any other college, former students recall being told by at least two college presidents at freshman orientation.
Some graduates remember hearing a different, more dramatic version: "Look to your left, look to your right: Two out of three of you will marry a Middlebury graduate."


EASTERN COLLEGE REPORT
Boston College
A favorite trivia question among Syracuse football historians: Who was the third running back in the 1966 Orange backfield that had in it two future Hall of Fame members, Larry Csonka and Floyd Little.
The answer is Tom Coughlin, who had little idea then that one day he would be a head coach taking a team into South Bend, Ind., to play Notre Dame.


3 Agencies Name Creative Directors
Three agencies have appointed creative directors to head their shops.
Dion Hughes, a vice president and creative director at Chiat/Day/Mojo in New York, was named to the new position of co-creative director at Angotti, Thomas, Hedge in New York.


Iran Votes for Barbarism
A state-run religious charity in Iran chose a moment when Americans were electing a President to announce that it was increasing the $2 million bounty for killing Salman Rushdie, the novelist.
Typically, the Iranian Government had no comment; its "moderate" leaders will doubtless assure Westerners that the whole Rushdie affair is much ado about nothing.
This fresh appeal for the murder of an Indian-born British subject follows other inflammatory gestures by a clerical regime that has no answers to Iran's economic miseries.
In the Sudan, Iranian "advisers" now help an Islamic dictator slaughter non-Islamic peoples in the south.
Iranian forces recently seized two disputed islands in the Persian Gulf.
And at home, ruling mullahs have intensified persecution of unveiled women and adherents of the Bahai faith.
They calculate that none of this matters to Westerners eager to do business.


The Pop Life
Scramblin' Man
Like a number of his contemporaries from the 1960's, the guitarist Carlos Santana is enjoying an upswing in his career.
His audiences are getting larger and younger, and he has moved to Polydor, which has allowed him to start his own label, Guts and Grace.
Part of the continued appeal of Mr.
Santana -- who will play two consecutive nights at the Paramount starting tomorrow -- can be attributed to radio, especially the "classic rock" stations, which keep programming his music and thus introduce it to newer generations.


TKTS Names New Leader
The Theater Development Fund, which runs the TKTS reduced-price booths in Manhattan and Brooklyn, yesterday named Thomas F. Leahy, a former CBS Television executive, as president.
The nonprofit fund sells two million tickets a year to Broadway and Off Broadway shows, dance performances and musical events.
The tickets are worth about $40 million.
The fund has a staff of 100 and a budget of $13 million.


Mead Data's President Steps Down
Jack W. Simpson, president of Mead Data Central Inc., the Mead Corporation's fastest-growing subsidiary in the last decade, resigned unexpectedly yesterday.
Mr.
Simpson, 51 years old, was appointed president of Mead Data in June 1982.
The unit is a world leader in electronic publishing, whose operations include the Lexis and Nexis electronic information research services.
Under Mr.
Simpson's aegis, revenues grew from $47 million in 1981 to about $470 million last year.


Panel Is Against Letting Women Fly in Combat
In an unexpected rebuff to supporters of an expanded role for women in the military, a Presidential commission recommended today that women should continue to be barred from flying combat planes.
As expected, the panel also said women should be prohibited from ground combat.
But the commission did vote to allow women to serve on most warships.


Brazil's Police Enforce a Law: Death
Sao Paulo's military police quelled a prison riot in early October by firing 5,000 bullets in the space of one hour, leaving 111 prisoners dead and an equal number wounded.
The police, who had refused to negotiate with the prisoners, suffered only minor wounds.
Many Brazilians were shocked, their outrage heightened by stark photographs of rows of rough pine boxes filled with bodies shattered by bullets and mutilated by attack dogs.


Rangers Hire Osteen as Pitching Coach
CLAUDE OSTEEN, the former Los Angeles Dodgers left-hander, was hired by the Texas Rangers yesterday to be their pitching coach, replacing TOM HOUSE.
Osteen, 53 years old, is the first coach hired by the Rangers since KEVIN KENNEDY was hired as manager two week ago.
The two men worked together when Kennedy was manager at Class AAA Albuquerque in the Dodgers' farm system during 1990-91.


Midwest
ILLINOIS...CLINTON
Illinoians made history by sending Carol Moseley Braun, the 45-year-old Cook County Recorder of Deeds, to the United States Senate.
Ms.
Braun will be the first black woman, as well as the first black Democrat, ever in the United States Senate.
With nearly two-thirds of the vote counted, Ms.
Braun, a former State Senator, had won 56 percent of the vote, with the remainder going to the Republican, Rich Williamson.
Surveys of voters leaving polls showed that Ms.
Braun had scored particularly well among women, but won among men by only two points.
Ms.
Braun won 93 percent of the black vote, but only 49 percent of white votes.


Mayor Never Called
To the Editor:
Re "How to Keep Business in New York" (editorial, Oct. 21): Pity the struggling mom-and-pop stores of the city that together employ many more than the 4,100 employees of the Morgan Stanley Group.
Because they do not go under a single name they will never get the same attention from the Mayor.
Yet the mom-and-pops will pick up the tab for the preferential tax breaks (looks like a 3.9 percent tax reduction for Morgan).
If the city benefits from these deals, why not offer them to all business?
Perhaps it's time to improve this city in ways that make people and businesses want to stay, instead of offering bribes to those who wish to leave.
I worked for a company with about 50 employees that moved to Jersey City.
The Mayor never called to say goodbye.
WILLIAM H. WOODROFFE  Brooklyn, Oct. 21, 1992


Transportacion Maritima reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Talks Fail; Trade War Is Feared
American and European negotiators failed to achieve a breakthrough tonight on an impasse over farm subsidies that has blocked world trade talks, making a trans-Atlantic trade war likely within days.
Agriculture Secretary Edward R. Madigan said he would recommend that President Bush impose prohibitive duties on certain European exports.
The European Community is likely to retaliate against American exports.


Connecticut Energy Corp. reports earnings for Year to Sept 30


AT LUNCH WITH: Marcia Gay Harden; Now Playing: Something Beyond Beauty
"UNTIL people get to know me," the actress Marcia Gay Harden said, tossing her head back and exhaling a stream of cigarette smoke, "they see a dark, hard, sensuous bitch."
She was talking about casting directors.
But it was obvious that none of the lunch-time customers at the Third Coast, a health-food restaurant on the north side of this city, had her confused with Shirley Temple.
A young man who dropped by the table to pay her a compliment about her acting was blushing a deep scarlet before he was through.


A New Democracy Votes Communist
A few days after Lithuania's former Communists surged ahead in the first round of elections for a new parliament, pranksters put up a mock Lenin statue, made of cardboard with Russian rubles pinned on its chest, in what used to be Lenin Square.
The figure draw a crowd of agitated citizens ready to dissect the elections on Oct. 25 for signs that Lithuania, once again, is setting a trend.


BUSINESS DIGEST
International
Trade negotiators failed to break the impasse over farm subsidies, and no new talks are scheduled.
The United States Agriculture Secretary, Edward R. Madigan, said he would recommend to President Bush that the United States impose prohibitive duties on certain European goods.
The European Community is likely to retaliate.  [ Page D1. ]
OPEC's crude oil output rose in October to 25.15 million barrels a day, a 12-year high, according to a Reuters survey.  [ D7. ] The Economy
The Government's index of leading indicators fell three-tenths of 1 percent in September to produce the first back-to-back declines since 1991.
The monthly Commerce Department report offered more evidence that the economic expansion is likely to remain feeble in coming months.  [ D1. ]


INSIDE
Abortion Curb Is Voided
A Federal appeals court invalidated the Administration's ban on abortion counseling at Government-financed family planning clinics.
Page A29.
Report on Women in Combat
A Presidential panel said women should be allowed to serve on most warships but be barred from combat flights and ground fighting.
Page A24.


Knicks Keeping Kimble; Stay in Hunt for Mahorn
The Knicks reduced their roster to the 12-man limit today by releasing forward Lewis Geter and backup center Greg Butler.
But they are still exploring the possibility of signing a free agent, perhaps Herb Williams or Rick Mahorn.
Guard Bo Kimble and forward Eric Anderson won the final two roster spots, at least for now.
The Knicks, who are at the salary cap, may still cut Kimble later to create room for either Mahorn or Williams.


Sierra Pacific Resources reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


No Headline
"With high hopes and brave hearts, in massive numbers, the American people have voted to make a new beginning." -- PRESIDENT-ELECT CLINTON.  [ B3:1. ] "We will get behind this new President and wish him -- wish him well." -- PRESIDENT BUSH.  [ B5:1. ] "Forget the election. It's behind us. The hard work is in front of us." -- ROSS PEROT.  [ B5:1.)


Ivax Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Cheers for Giants if They Go 8-8
Halfway through the National Football League season, the Giants are straddling the middle, and not just because they have a 4-4 record.
They do not seem to be a very good team, although they played like one in beating the Redskins Sunday night, 24-7.
They are not really a bad team, although they have too often looked lethargic.
At times, they have seemed to play without inspiration, without confidence, even without purpose.


Ruland Is Given His Release by 76ers
JEFF RULAND, still recovering from his latest leg injury, was cut yesterday by the Philadelphia 76ers.
The National Basketball Association team also cut MICHAEL ANDERSON, a free agent.
"Jeff has been unable to go out and play," General Manager JIM LYNAM said.
"In Michael's case, he was a long shot to make our team."


COMPANY NEWS
CHARTER POWER SYSTEMS INC., Plymouth Meeting, Pa., announced that its subsidiary, C &amp; D Charter Power Systems Inc., had completed the acquisition of the business and certain assets of the Ratelco Manufacturing division of Ratelco Inc.
CHOCK FULL O'NUTS CORP., New York, said it had acquired a controlling interest in Private Brands Coffee and Tea Co.


Finally, the Economy Was What Mattered Most
Mabel Gates calls herself a "registered Republican, life-long, family, forever." But when the moment of electoral truth came yesterday in a voting booth in White Plains, she cast tradition aside and voted for Gov.
Bill Clinton.
"Bush and Reagan have had their chance, finito! I call it trickle-down poverty," said the 73-year-old retired physical-education teacher.


Baseball Trying to Decide Who Is Eligible for Games
Robin Yount and Ozzie Smith could be headed for the Atlanta Olympics in 1996, but such younger stars as Barry Bonds and Ken Griffey Jr. are unlikely to get the same chance to participate.
These foul lines have been drawn by USA Baseball, the sport's governing body in this country, which has endorsed a plan that would reinstate retired professionals for the Olympics, but would not include any active major leaguers.


Food Notes
Beard House Benefit
The James Beard Foundation's annual dinner and auction to benefit the James Beard House in Greenwich Village will be held on Nov. 15 at 5 P.M. at the Essex House, 160 Central Park South (Seventh Avenue).
Five chefs from New York, along with Kaspar Donier from Seattle, and Johanne Killeen and George Germon from Providence, R.I., are to prepare the dinner, and there are dozens of items for auction.
A trip to Venice is the door prize.
Tickets are $125 for members and $175 for nonmembers; they can be reserved by calling (212) 627-2308.


Philip Engel; Union Official, 78
Philip Engel, a retired iron worker and former union official, died on Sunday at Albert Einstein Medical Center in the Bronx.
He was 78 years old and lived in Tamarac, Fla.
Mr.
Engel, the father of Representative Eliot L. Engel, Democrat of New York, died of heart failure after suffering from a heart ailment for several months, an aide to the Congressman said.


CHRONICLE
At the New York law firm of Cadwalader, Wickersham &amp; Taft, they have taken to calling DON GLASCOFF "the 200-year-old partner," and he is not in the least bit miffed.
"That's because I am chairman of the bicentennial committee," Mr.
Glascoff said yesterday as he explained the rigors of planning the celebration of the law firm's 200th anniversary.
The celebration began last January, and by the time it concludes in February it will have included more than 30 events and projects, including lectures, conferences and a musical salute.
SOL WACHTLER, Chief Judge of New York State, will speak at the opening of an exhibit of the law firm's memorabilia on Monday at the Association of the Bar of the City of New York.
Several pro bono projects have been organized in honor of the anniversary, including the compilation of a comprehensive guide for neighborhood organizations that want to combat drugs.


Democrats Are Victorious In Gubernatorial Races
On a night of sweeping Democratic victories, all four Democratic incumbent governors won and three other Democratic candidates triumphed in states previously held by Republicans.
Re-election victories by Gov.
Evan Bayh of Indiana, Gov.
Howard Dean of Vermont, Gov.
Gaston Caperton of West Virginia and Gov.
Bruce Sundlun of Rhode Island led the way for the Democrats.


In Britain, Ideology Wars Against Miners
To the Editor:
"In Village Under Ax, British Miners Feel Betrayed" (news article, Oct. 25), like earlier coverage of threatened pit closures in Britain, overlooks the ideological battle being played out.
Prime Minister John Major, despite his differences over Europe with his predecessor, Margaret Thatcher, remains committed to the vast privatization program that she set in train.
Electricity is the most recent of the public enterprises (including British Airways, British Gas, British Telecom) that have been "liberated" into the market economy.


'Senator Pothole,' and Money, Win
Alfonse M. D'Amato, the scrappy Long Island Republican who reveled in his nickname of "Senator Pothole," proved the political adage last night that all politics is local, withstanding Gov.
Bill Clinton's 16-point landslide in New York State to win a third term in the United States Senate.
It was a race that the 55-year-old incumbent would have lost if New Yorkers had voted by issues and party line and logic.


Nothing Fishy Here
To The Living Section:
I read your article on pasta sauces  [ "Sauce Makers Smile at the Rage for Pasta," Oct. 28 ]  by Florence Fabricant, and was interested to find out how many people do not know the derivation of "marinara."


Pacific Telecom Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Aon Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Once Again, Republicans Maintain Control of the Senate
After spending more for a state legislative seat than any other candidate in New York history, the majority leader of the State Senate, Ralph J. Marino, last night comfortably fended off a vigorous challenge that had threatened his standing as the most powerful Republican in state government.
At the same time, several Republican colleagues of Mr.
Marino in the Senate also appeared to have beaten back Democratic challengers and thus preserved the G.O.P.'s 27-year grip on the Senate, but with the strong possibility that the party's majority would be diminished.


VH-1 Narrows Review to 3
VH-1, the adult-oriented music video channel, said yesterday that it had narrowed its review to three agencies contending for its account, previously handled by Fred/Alan in New York, which closed in June.
Billings were not disclosed.


The Vote for President, State by State


Matlack Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Orderly, Respectful and, Yes, a Day-Care Center
"PUT one more chair, O.K.?" the old Chinese woman pleaded as her 3-year-old granddaughter stared at the drawings of pumpkins that line the halls of Maryknoll Transfiguration nursery, kindergarten and day-care center.
"We cannot do that," explained Janet P. Bertomen, the director.
Gently she ushered the woman out, saying the girl's application would be placed on file.
She did not say that there are 5,000 names in that file or that the Chinatown school, with its 128 pupils, is in all probability the most selective educational insititution in America, taking in a far lower proportion of applicants than the 18 percent accepted by Harvard, the 17 percent at Princeton or the 12 percent at the Air Force Academy.


"Congress at a Glance"


Search for Intelligent Life in Space Isn't Science; Give It a Golden Fleece
To the Editor:
"What If They're Out There?" (editorial, Oct. 11) reports that the National Aeronautics and Space Administration plans to spend $10 million "on a 10-year program to listen for radio signals broadcast by advanced civilizations on other planets." Proponents of such a search guesstimate that among 400 billion stars in our Milky Way galaxy there may be 40 billion planets, containing 10,000 civilizations.
It would be more realistic to ask what is the likelihood of making contact with intelligent life on a planet circling the handful of stars nearby with which telecommunication might be feasible.


At Sarajevo Zoo, the Last Survivor Dies
After surviving the siege of Sarajevo for more than 200 days, a bear, the last surviving animal in the zoo here, has died.
"We took her some bread and an apple last week, but she was too weak to eat them," Pal Takac, a zoo employee, said today.
"She died the next day. I was sad to see her go after all these months, but at least her suffering is over."


Leaving Door Open, Perot Exits Dancing
After a campaign that finished third but made history nevertheless, Ross Perot delivered a poignant and gracious concession speech tonight that pointedly left the door open to a future race for the Presidency.
"I want you to know that our love for you and my love for you is permanent and I will carry the memory of this past few months with me for the rest of my life," Mr.
Perot told several thousand supporters who gathered in a hotel ballroom here.
"And I am available to you any place, any time and anywhere as long as I am around."


Facing Bitter Crowd, Bush Exhibits Grace in Defeat
At a gloomy and sometimes angry post-election gathering tonight, it was left to President Bush to sound a note of grace in defeat.
"The people have spoken, and we respect the majesty of the democratic system," he said.
"And I want the country to know that our entire Administration will work closely with his team to insure a smooth transition of power."


Nurturing Sounds of Perfection in Young Voices
George Swietlicki was late for chorus rehearsal.
He knew it, and he knew the consequences.
As he rushed into the room, he looked at the 30 children waiting for him.
Without a word, the fourth and fifth graders pointed down at the linoleum.
Mr.
Swietlicki dropped and did 10 push-ups, one for each minute he had been late.
After all, he expects push-ups from tardy children, so he is surely not exempt.
It shows "respect for the organization," he said.


Spice and Apples for a Fall Menu
FOR this dish, spiced pork tenderloin, you need whole coriander seeds and whole cumin.
Ground spices will not do because they are too fine to make a coating for the pork tenderloin.


New Editor For Tribune In Oakland
The newspaper group that recently bought the financially troubled Oakland Tribune has named a black woman to be its editor.
Pearl Stewart, 41 years old, who has years of reporting experience in and around Oakland, will assume the post at The Tribune on Dec. 1, in a move intended to reaffirm the paper's commitment to Oakland, which has a large black population.
The appointment was announced Monday.


Hanya Holm Is Dead at 99; Influential Choreographer
Hanya Holm, a major choreographer of modern dance and Broadway musicals, died yesterday at St.
Vincent's Hospital in Manhattan.
She was 99 years old and lived in Manhattan.
She died of pneumonia, said Heidi Holm, her daughter-in-law.


In Brazil's Food Capital, Tastes to Please the Gods
GRAND culinary celebrations like Thanksgiving, which honor the fruits of historic pioneer harvests, may be annual feasts in the United States, but here in the northern Brazilian state of Bahia, the food, spices and rich offerings of the country's African-Latin founding cooks are avidly commemorated every day.
Bahia's unusual dishes are a source of great pride for Brazilians, who relish the rituals and art of preparing and partaking of these native specialties.
From the humblest street vendor to the most sophisticated restaurateurs, the best of Brazilian cuisine can be found throughout the historic city of Salvador.


Proposed Hospital Merger Concerns Medical School
The proposed merger of two Long Island hospitals, brought on by the changing economics of health care, is threatening the survival of the State University Hospital at Stony Brook, officials there say.
As Suffolk county's only referral center for specialized care, the 10-year-old hospital at Stony Brook has agreements with more than 50 hospitals on the East End of Long Island to assist patients who would otherwise have to travel more than 100 miles to medical centers in Manhattan.


CHRONICLE
AUDREY HEPBURN had a malignant tumor removed from her colon on Sunday and is expected to remain at Cedars-Sinai Medical Center in Los Angeles for about a week, RON WISE, a spokesman for the hospital, said yesterday.
"The tumor that was removed was categorized as a low-grade malignancy, and her physicians feel positive that the entire tumor and all the malignancy were captured in the surgery," he said.
"Her condition is fair, but her spirits are excellent. Flowers are pouring in."


Vanbiesbrouck's Injury to Test Ranger Defense
The vulnerability of the Rangers' defense may be much deeper now that John Vanbiesbrouck has aggravated his groin injury.
Vanbiesbrouck aggravated a pulled muscle on his left side during the Rangers' 7-6 overtime victory against Buffalo Monday night at Madison Square Garden.
His status is termed day to day by the Rangers, but the injury will definitely keep him out of tonight's game against the Flyers and Eric Lindros, who are paying their second visit to the Garden this season.


Blast Survivors Feel Less Homeless Than Lucky
It seemed a small thing, Clarice Smith admitted, but she was overjoyed yesterday to step over the rubble and into her apartment to find her parakeet, Cuddles, alive and well.
Vance Abel wanted his dentures.
Della Saunders said she could worry only about her neighbors who were killed or injured in the huge explosion that ripped through their Riverton apartment complex in Harlem on Monday.
"It's not me I'm concerned about," said Ms.
Saunders, a 56-year-old city worker, though she was newly homeless and counted as her only possessions a bag of deodorant, toothpaste and soap she had just bought.
"It's the people who were hurt. I'm going to be fine."


Butler International reports earnings for 13wks to Sept 30


Book Notes
Reinventing the Past
Imagine being at a dinner party at San Simeon, William Randolph Hearst's mountaintop paradise in California, with Katharine Hepburn, Bette Davis, James Stewart, Gregory Peck, Ava Gardner, Audrey Hepburn, Douglas Fairbanks Jr., Lauren Bacall and Helen Hayes, to name but a few of the Hollywood luminaries invited.
Imagine that between cocktails and courses of pate de foie gras, filet mignon, lobster, tossed salad and a buffet of desserts, the guests talk about Cary Grant, Grace Kelly, Greta Garbo, Marlene Dietrich, Ingrid Bergman and Spencer Tracy, and about the making of movies that are now classics.


Spartan Motors reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Nets Reduce Logjam by Trading Blaylock to Hawks
Mookie Blaylock, the New Jersey Nets starting point guard last year, will be starting for the Atlanta Hawks this season.
Blaylock and injured forward Roy Hinson were traded to the Atlanta Hawks yesterday for guard Rumeal Robinson.
The deal put an end to any lingering question about who will be running the Nets' offense this year.


PRESIDENT OF CARTER HAWLEY HALE RESIGNS
H.
Michael Hecht, president of Carter Hawley Hale Stores Inc., resigned yesterday, saying, "After 18 years with the company, and the recent successful conclusion of its reorganization, it is time to move on." Mr.
Hecht, who was named president in 1991 after serving as an executive vice president since 1990, said, "I am optimistic about the future for Carter Hawley Hale and personally looking forward to new challenges."


Cornell to Evaluate Teaching Ability to Tenure Decisions
In a move to restore some of the importance that teaching has lost to research, Cornell University has decided it will not approve tenure decisions unless they include a thorough assessment of teaching ability.
At a meeting last week, Cornell administrators adopted faculty recommendations to make formal written evaluations of teaching an essential part of tenure decisions.
The evaluations will make use of student critiques, peer review and syllabuses, tests and lesson materials.
Such materials have long been required to evaluate a professor's performance in research.


Voters Reject $800 Million Plan For Projects in New York State
Showing that they were more concerned about the state's already-high level of debt than its high unemployment, New Yorkers yesterday rejected Proposal One, which asked them to give the state permission to issue $800 million worth of bonds to finance public works projects.
With the votes of 68 percent of the state's precincts counted, 54 percent voted against the bond issue, dealing a blow to Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo.


Cincinnati Milacron reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 3


Knicks Keeping Kimble; Stay in Hunt for Mahorn
The Knicks reduced their roster to the 12-man limit today by releasing forward Lewis Geter and backup center Greg Butler.
But they are still exploring the possibility of signing a free agent, perhaps Herb Williams or Rick Mahorn.
Guard Bo Kimble and forward Eric Anderson won the final two roster spots, at least for now.
The Knicks, who are at the salary cap, may still cut Kimble later to create room for either Mahorn or Williams.


Gilded Time Is Facing Old-Time Jinx in Derby
Maybe David Milch can write a smash ending to this story since he taught creative writing at Yale and later won an Emmy Award for writing on the TV series "Hill Street Blues." But on racing's richest and rarest day of the year, a cruel hoax was played on his colt Gilded Time last Saturday at Gulfstream Park.
You wouldn't think so, at first glance.
The colt won the Breeders' Cup Juvenile, he won for the fourth time in four starts, he brought home $520,000 of the $1 million purse, he clinched the Eclipse Award as the best 2-year-old colt of 1992 and he was promptly acclaimed the early favorite to win the Kentucky Derby in 1993.
And while many people were proclaiming A.P.
Indy the Horse of the Year because he won the Breeders' Cup Classic, everybody was anointing Gilded Time as the Horse of Next Year because he won the Juvenile.


Columbia Has Long Offered Both Asian Studies and Flexibility
To the Editor:
You report on those who stigmatize Columbia University's core curriculum as centered on "dead white European males" (news article, Oct. 10), but fail to mention that Columbia has since 1948 offered Asian counterparts to the humanities and contemporary civilization, in which classics from major Asian traditions -- Islamic, Indian, Buddhist, Chinese and Japanese -- are read and discussed.


WEST
ALASKA
The race between President Bush and Governor Clinton was too close to call here in this state, which had not given its three electoral votes to the Democrats since 1964.
This was the case despite Mr.
Clinton's opposition to drilling in the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge, which Alaskans overwhelmingly favor.
Mr.
Perot led the polls in early June, but his support faded after his withdrawal and re-entry.


Maloney Leading Rep. Green
For seven terms, Bill Green has held on to Manhattan's 14th Congressional District, because his brand of progressive Republicanism appealed to the district's many wealthy residents, even though most of them are Democrats.
But with redistricting this year, the 14th was broadened to include swaths of Queens, Brooklyn and the Upper West Side, places populated with Democrats who knew little about and had no loyalty to Mr.
Green.
With the help of these new areas, City Councilwoman Carolyn B. Maloney, Mr.
Green's challenger, apparently won enough votes to defeat him.
Although she was outspent by a margin of at least 3 to 1, Ms.
Maloney, who concentrated her campaign in the new areas, appeared to have benefited from Bill Clinton's overwhelming victory in New York City.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-22  U.N. PLEA TO CROATIA
The United Nations appealed to Croatia to open its borders to desperate refugees.
Thousands have massed at the frontier since Serbs captured the Bosnian town of Jajce.
A18  Yugoslavia's moderate Prime Minister barely survives ouster.
A18


Lincoln National Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Study Says Middle Class Are Drawn To SUNY
Sixty percent of the full-time undergraduates at the State University of New York's four-year schools come from families with incomes greater than $50,000 a year, while only 45 percent of the students in the state's private institutions have parents who earn that much, a report by a group representing private colleges shows.
The report, by the Commission of Independent Colleges and Universities, is expected to provide ammunition on the contentious issue of whether the state should do more to support private colleges.
It is also expected to widen the debate over the proper tuition levels at New York's two public university systems, the State University and the City University of New York, whose representatives criticized the report as flawed.


Supreme Court Drops Case on Protection Against Self-Incrimination
After hearing arguments in a potentially important self-incrimination case, the Supreme Court announced today that it would not decide the case after all.
The action leaves intact a 1991 ruling of the Montana Supreme Court that convicted sex offenders cannot be required to undergo therapy as a condition of staying out of prison if an essential part of the therapy is an acknowledgment of guilt.


South
ALABAMA...BUSH
President Bush captured Alabama in part by attacking Mr.
Clinton on social issues.
At an anti-Clinton rally last week parents said their children would be exposed to homosexual scout masters if the Democrat won.
With nine electoral votes, Alabama last went Democratic in 1976.


Police Link Victims of Ambush in Queens to a Mob Faction
Law enforcement officials said yesterday that the victims in a brazen ambush on a Queens street on Monday night were affiliated with one of the warring factions of the Colombo organized crime family.
One man was killed and two were wounded by a gang of masked gunmen who fired into their car.
The wounded men were officers of a Queens carpenters local and one of them was a defendant in the so-called windows case in which the Government accused the mob of controlling the lucrative window-installation industry in New York City.


THE 1992 ELECTIONS: CELEBRATION Man in the News: Albert Arnold Gore Jr.; A Focused Leader on an Uneven Climb
When the subject of Al Gore Jr. is raised, inevitably the phrase "born to lead" -- spoken with either admiration or sarcasm -- somehow seeps into the conversation.
Still, if it was preordained for this child of a former Senator and native son of Washington to reach the heights of power, his rise to the Vice Presidency has been accomplished through fits and starts.


An Insensitive Celebration
A day after Lemrick Nelson Jr. was acquitted of all charges in the killing of a Hasidic scholar in Brooklyn's Crown Heights area, his lawyer, Arthur Lewis Jr., took him and the jury out to dinner.
Some jury members hugged and kissed Mr.
Nelson, some toasted him, several angrily defended their verdict.
What an unfortunate ending to that painful trial.
Such insensitivity could only rub salt in the wounds of a deeply divided community.


National Sea Products reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Travelers' Loss $358 Million; 1,500 More Jobs Will Be Cut
The Travelers Corporation announced losses yesterday for its third quarter that were higher than expected and said it would cut an additional 1,500 jobs as part of a restructuring that altogether will reduce the company's work force by 5,000.
About 1,000 of the 1,500 job cuts announced yesterday are expected to be made in Connecticut and most of those in Hartford, where the company has its headquarters.


THE 1992 ELECTIONS: CONNECTICUT -- THE 2d DISTRICT; Gejdenson Claims Victory, but Recount Is Sought
In a district hit hard by cuts in the military budget, Representative Sam Gejdenson, a Democrat and the senior member of the state's House delegation, claimed victory tonight in a close race.
But his opponent, Edward W. Munster, a first-term Republican State Senator, refused to concede and demanded a recount.
With 86 percent of the precincts counted in the Second District, Mr.
Gejdenson had 51 percent of the vote to Mr.
Munster's 49 percent.


Metropolitan Diary
FAREWELL Budapest, Hello Rome: John Wykert spotted this sign in the window of a West 72d Street hair stylist: "Michael Angelo formerly Sandor has joined our staff."
Howard Lamel, who describes himself as a middle-aged part-time potter, was giving an outdoor demonstration of wheel-throwing at a church fair on the Upper East Side when it began to rain.
The children who had gathered around were fascinated as more and more clay attached itself to Mr.
Lamel.
Finally, one mesmerized youngster gathered up his nerve and approached.
"Boy, is your mother going to kill you," he said.


Dycom Industries reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Review/Opera; Smetana and Strauss in Chicago
A traveling critic doesn't often see ordinary subscription performances of operas out of town; they are eclipsed by premieres and special events.
But this weekend, framing the world premiere of William Bolcom's "McTeague" on Saturday night, the Lyric Opera of Chicago presented two finely crafted executed performances that were deserving of attention simply because they were ordinary, showing what this company can do when it turns away from the glare of world press coverage and tends to its common wares.
The works happened to be on opposite ends of the operatic spectrum, calling for radically different vocal and dramatic styles: Strauss's "Elektra" in a 1975 Gotz Friedrich production, and Smetana's "Bartered Bride" in an English National Opera production new to Chicago this season.
One is about a woman scorned, the other about a woman loved; one is Expressionist horror, the other folk froth.
One deals with a world turned awry; the other playfully sets it right.
But both were treated with care and taste and both were given world-class vocal performances.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
8.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
5.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.06
3.21
4.94
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.01
3.05
4.76
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.22
3.27
4.81
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.41
6.45
7.19
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.65
7.65
8.02
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.62
8.62
9.00
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.64
6.68
6.83
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


New York Firefighters Reject Contract, Forcing Arbitration
A contract settlement with New York City firefighters that some city officials hoped would be a model for other labor talks has been rejected by the union.
The negotiations will now go to an independent panel for arbitration on Monday, said James F. Hanley, the Commissioner of the city's Department of Labor Relations.


School Plan Draws Fire From Board
Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez's plan to let New York City parents send their children to schools outside their districts has been sharply questioned by two members of the Board of Education, who wonder what impact it will have on poor and minority families.
A resolution approving the Chancellor's plan is scheduled for debate today at the board's regular meeting in Brooklyn, with a vote to come later.
Mr.
Fernandez has contended that he does not need the board's approval but wants its support before allowing the transfers.


Robert Dudley; Milliner, 87
Robert Dudley, a New York milliner whose hats for women were popular in the 1940's and 1950's, died on Sept. 24.
He was 87 years old and lived in Manhattan.
Mr.
Dudley died at St.
Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital Center in Manhattan after a series of strokes, said Robert Marcus, a family spokesman.


Half Palestinian, Half Israeli, Village Is a Contrast in Styles
If Palestinian self-rule ever comes to the occupied territories, it will likely apply to half this village, which straddles the border between Israel and the West Bank.
Simultaneous Israeli and Palestinian rule over this community would add yet another special dimension to the lives of residents here, who as it is find themselves shuttling between two worlds.


PAGE BY PAGE
THE PRESIDENCY  Clinton is elected President as his promise of change wins support in every region.
A1  News analysis: Why Clinton won.
A1


Fannie Mae Prices 5- , 10-Year Issues
The Federal National Mortgage Association, the country's largest investor in home mortgages, priced $900 million of debentures for sale to the public yesterday with 5- and 10-year maturities.
Underwriters from the regular selling group for Fannie Mae, the common name for the shareholder-owned company chartered by Congress, said they were offering $600 million of 6.05 percent five-year debentures due on Nov. 10, 1997, priced at 99.90625 to yield 6.072 percent, or about 17 basis points more than Treasury securities with a similar maturity.
A basis point is a hundredth of a percentage point.


Networks Broadcast Sly Hints As They Await Voting's End
By 9:15 P.M., the television networks had each given Bill Clinton 238 electoral votes, just 32 fewer than he needed to be the sure winner.
CBS cut away to Little Rock, where Richard Threlkeld was reporting from in front of a huge, celebratory crowd.
Then the network cut back to New York, where Dan Rather was urging viewers in states where the polls were still open to get out and vote.
"We do not yet know who the President is going to be," he assured them.
Really, Dan? We Know, and You Shouldn't
Watching the network coverage of the election returns last night was like watching one long episode of "I've Got a Secret." From the time the coverage began at 7 P.M. it was clear from the clues they were giving out that the network anchors and reporters had already concluded that Mr.
Clinton would be elected President.
But because of the way the game is played, they couldn't tell the public that -- at least not in so many words.


Milestone for Black Woman In Gaining U.S. Senate Seat
Carol Moseley Braun, who was an obscure Cook County officeholder until six months ago, tonight became the first black woman elected to the United States Senate, beating Richard S. Williamson handily in a race where symbolism was as important as strategy.
With 75 percent of the vote counted, Ms.
Braun led with 56 percent of the vote to 44 percent for Mr.
Williamson.


Let's Curb Solicitation To Crime by the F.B.I.
To the Editor:
The most troublesome aspect of the Federal Bureau of Investigation's attempted sting of President Bush's Texas campaign committee chairman is not that the operation was unprecedented (editorial, Oct. 28), but that such techniques have become routine.
It is standard operating procedure for undercover agents of the F.B.I. and other Federal agencies to offer unsuspecting citizens opportunities to commit crimes that would not otherwise occur.
One-time stings like the Dallas operation are so common as to be exempt from guidelines for F.B.I. undercover operations.


Senator Proclaims Comeback, and Victory
Shortly after 1 o'clock this morning, after a long night of suspense, Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato joined hundreds of cheering supporters in a ballroom at the New York Hilton and claimed victory over Attorney General Robert Abrams.
Looking happy but subdued, surrounded by former Mayor Edward I. Koch and a crowd of loyalists, he thanked his family, his campaign aides and particularly Jewish leaders for their assistance.
Then he embraced Norman Rosenbaum, the brother of the Hasidic scholar slain last year in Crown Heights, and said, "I pledge to you, we will pursue justice" -- a reference to the acquittal of the man accused of killing his brother.


1954 Topeka Desegregation Case Continues Odyssey in the Courts
The Brown v.
Board of Education desegregation lawsuit -- the historic case that produced the landmark 1954 Supreme Court ruling that separate but equal is not equal -- remains unresolved, 38 years later.
Last week a Federal appeals court told the Topeka school board to come up with a plan to remedy unconstitutional racial imbalances that persist in the city's public schools.
The ruling, issued Oct. 27 by the Court of Appeals for the 10th Circuit, in Denver, said Topeka still had such unconstitutional imbalances in student and staff assignments at the district's three high schools, six middle schools and 26 elementary schools.


Books of The Times; Nuremberg as Seen by Prosecutor
The Anatomy of the Nuremberg Trials  A Personal Memoir  By Telford Taylor  Illustrated. 703 pages.
Alfred A. Knopf. $35.
As a record of the international trials of Nazi Germany's major war criminals and the personal story of Telford Taylor's role as the chief American prosecutor, "Anatomy of the Nuremberg Trials" is a masterly work of military and judicial history.
Mr.
Taylor's book marks the apogee of his career as a crusading lawyer and law professor.
It is the long-awaited narrative he had to write because of his singular experience.


Review/Film; On Faith, Reason and the Holocaust
"The Quarrel," Eli Cohen's film adaptation of a short story by the Yiddish writer Chaim Grade, is commendable simply for having the temerity to grapple with serious ideas in a form not usually given to intellectual discourse.
During much of its 88 minutes, an Orthodox rabbi and a non-religious Jewish poet, fervently carry on the age-old argument about reason versus faith.
What gives their debate an anguished urgency is the shadow of the Holocaust, which each has survived bearing a heavy load of guilt.
The film, which opens today at Film Forum 1, is set in Montreal in 1948.
One morning, Chaim Kovler (R. H. Thomson), a New York poet visiting Canada, runs across a group of Orthodox Jews in a park practicing a Rosh ha-Shanah ritual.
In the crowd, he is astonished to discover Hersh Rasseyner (Saul Rubinek), a childhood friend from Poland, who he assumed had died in the Holocaust.
Best friends 15 years earlier, they parted bitterly when Chaim forsook the religious life to become a writer.
Having lost their families, both have started new lives in North America.


Marathon Realty Holdings reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


David Rosenthal, 46, A Poet and Translator
David Hershel Rosenthal, a writer, poet and translator of Catalan literature, died on Friday at his home in Suffern, N.Y.
He was 46 years old.
He died of pancreatic cancer, said his father, the poet M. L. Rosenthal.


Pro-Israel Lobby's Leader Quits Over Boasts
The president of the leading pro-Israel lobby has resigned after making a series of exaggerated statements on tape about negotiating with the Clinton campaign over Cabinet choices and making deals with James A. Baker, former Secretary of State, officials of the lobby said today.
The tapes of David Steiner, the President of the American-Israel Public Affairs Committee, were provided to The Washington Times, officials of the lobby, known as Aipac, said.


Excerpts From the Victory Speech by President-Elect Clinton
Following are excerpts from Governor Clinton's Presidential acceptance speech at the Old State House in Little Rock, Ark., as recorded by The New York Times:
My fellow Americans, on this day with high hopes and brave hearts in massive numbers the American people have voted to make a new beginning.


Barry Easily Wins Seat on City Council
Former Mayor Marion S. Barry Jr. of Washington, freed from prison last spring after serving six months for cocaine possession, easily won a seat on the District of Columbia City Council today.
Mr.
Barry, who was mayor for 12 years until he was caught using cocaine in a police investigation, will represent the Eighth Ward, the city's poorest.


Search for Intelligent Life in Space Isn't Science
To the Editor:
"What if They're Out There?" (editorial, Oct. 11), on the search for extraterrestrial intelligence, gives fear of alien invasion as the only objection to this controversial project.
Sober scientists object to the search program because its enthusiasts, in rationalizing the project, promote magical thinking.


Accounts
*
Hiram Walker &amp; Sons, Detroit, placed in review its Canadian Club whisky account, with billings estimated at $5 million, after five years at EJL Advertising, Chicago.
A Hiram Walker spokeswoman confirmed a report of the review this week in Adweek, adding that the company was seeking an agency to help develop a global marketing strategy.
The three shops invited to participate in the review are the incumbent; CME KHBB Advertising, Minneapolis, and Messner Vetere Berger McNamee Schmetterer, New York.


Burlington Industries Equity reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 3


Harmon Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Market Place; A Legal Strategy Ends in Dismissal
PUBLIC disclosure is a funny thing.
While publicly traded companies must inform investors of some plans that might affect earnings, they need not disclose when the strategies are farfetched.
Consider Lifschultz Industries, a New York conglomerate that for five years has been trumpeting a single note in its investment symphony: a $1.8 billion lawsuit pending against three large trucking companies.
The suit charged that the group had conspired over 25 years through bribery, fraud and other criminal activities to push Lifschultz out of the trucking business.
Company executives hoped the litigation against the Consolidated Freightways Corporation, Yellow Freight System Inc. and Roadway Express Inc. would bring a windfall to holders of Lifschultz stock.


Parker &amp; Parsley Petroleum Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Move to Keep Polls Open Fails
Shortly before New York's polls closed at 9 P.M. last night, a state judge denied a request by the state Democratic Party to keep polling places in New York City open for two extra hours.
Lawyers for the Democrats told Acting State Supreme Justice Robert D. Lippmann that the extension was necessary because of a heavy turnout, bad weather in the morning, polling places opening late, long lines discouraging some voters, broken voting machines and general confusion among first-time voters or those who were unaware of redistricting and visited the wrong polling place.


A Minimalist Actor Now Warms to Excess
Just a couple of years before Samuel Beckett died, John Cameron Mitchell was introduced to him in a Paris cafe.
Mr.
Mitchell, who is now appearing to sterling notices as a young man coming of age as a homosexual in Larry Kramer's autobiographical play "The Destiny of Me," was at the time a fledgling actor just out of college.
Confounding Mr.
Mitchell's expectations -- "I thought he'd be bitter, aloof, Sartre-esque or something" -- Beckett, frail but accommodating, agreed to inscribe a first edition of one of his books.


Giddings &amp; Lewis reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 27


Photojournalist Wins $20,000 Smith Grant
Eli Reed, a New York City-based photojournalist, was named the 1992 winner of the annual W. Eugene Smith Grant in Humanistic Photography yesterday.
The grant is $20,000.
It is sponsored by Nikon and administered by the W. Eugene Smith Memorial Fund.
Mr.
Reed will use the grant for a photographic examination of racism in the United States, the foundation announced.


Green and Downey Lose as New York State Delegation Changes Dramatically
In the most drastic transformation of the state's Congressional delegation in decades, New York voters yesterday elected at least eight new members, with at least two longtime incumbents headed for defeat.
With the defeat of Thomas J. Downey, a Suffolk County Democrat with 18 years in the House, and of Bill Green, a liberal Manhattan Republican with 14 years of service, New York will be missing at least 12 incumbents, and much of its seniority, in a delegation already diminished by reapportionment.


Results Plus
TENNIS  Wheaton Upsets Chang  David Wheaton, an outsider in a tournament featuring 19 of the top 20 men's players in the world, upset No. 4-seeded Michael Chang, 6-4, 1-6, 6-3, yesterday in the second round of the $2.1 million Paris Open.
Chang reached the semifinals last year.
In other matches, Jim Courier, top-seeded and ranked No. 1 in the world, easily defeated Andrei Chesnokov of Russia, 6-3, 6-0, to reach the third round, and Stefan Edberg, seeded No. 3, eliminated Andrei Medvedev of Ukraine, 6-1, 1-6, 6-1.
John McEnroe, making perhaps his last visit to a tournament in Paris, held off Mark Woodforde of Australia, 6-3, 3-6, 6-3, in the opening round and will meet Boris Becker of Germany next. (AP) BASEBALL  Japan Stars Beat U.S.
The wildness of Cincinnati Reds reliever Norm Charlton helped Japan's All-Stars to a 10-3 rout over a team of major leaguers yesterday, giving the Japanese their first victory after three losses.
Charlton failed to retire any of the five batters he faced in the eighth inning when the Japanese broke a tie and scored six runs.
Charlton gave up two hits and three walks, including a tie-breaking bases-loaded walk.
The Japanese added two runs in the ninth before 54,000 spectators at the Tokyo Dome.
The Americans scored on a two-run single by Seattle's Ken Griffey Jr. and a homer by Ruben Sierra of Oakland. (AP) HORSE RACING  Binary Light Wins  Binary Light was a 2 1/2-length winner in the $93,600 Knickerbocker Handicap at Aqueduct yesterday, after front-running Rinka Das stopped abruptly inside the final furlong, then bolted to the outside.
Binary Light, carrying 111 pounds and ridden by Jean Cruguet, covered a mile and an eighth on a muddy track in 1:523/5 in posting his second victory in 16 starts this year.
Share the Glory, 110 and riddenJohn Velasquez, finished second, a length ahead of Turkey Point, 113 and ridden by Randy Romero, in the seven-horse field.
Rinka Das, seemingly assured of victory, appeared to be startled by something when he acted up.
Jockey Julie Krone was thrown to the track, but was not hurt.
Binary Light returned $35.80, $12.20 and $4.40 for $2 across the board. (AP) SOCCER  Marist Downs St.
John's  St.
John's No. 3-ranked men's soccer team was upset by Marist College, 3-2, in double overtime yesterday in Poughkeepsie, N.Y.
Marist's Andy Clinton scored the winning goal with six seconds remaining in the second overtime.
The loss dropped St.
John's record to 15-2-2.
Marist finished the season 10-6-4.
St.
John's next match will be in the Big East tournament.


Review/Opera; Met Preserves Sublime and Silly
"L'Elisir d'Amore" was composed 160 years ago for the light entertainment of the Milanese public, but it is no accident of history that it survives and thrives next to Wagner and Verdi in the operatic repertory.
Something of the sublime rises from this silly little musical comedy.
Indeed, the argument that greatness can exist without universal themes and moral weight -- that, for example, three minutes from Mendelssohn's "Songs Without Words" may be worth two hours of Mahlerian agonizing -- receives powerful support in Donizetti's closing of Act I, a sequence of small miracles that transform addled infatuation into music of breathtaking and heartbreaking beauty.


CHRONICLE
DIANE VON FURSTENBERG is not fond of asking for money.
"It makes me want to cry," she said.
"I am never able to do it." The designer was explaining the dilemma she faced when she wanted to help the Housatonic Valley Association a conservation group.
So she hit on something a little less direct: an auction, but one with something of a twist.
"There are a lot of famous and talented people in the communities near where I live in Litchfield County, Conn., but they tend to hide in their part of the wood," she said.
"I thought that an auction would be a good idea because people could give things that don't cost too much but that others would want. The idea was to get them to give something personal."


Gibson Greetings reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Donegal Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Bonn Journal; Berliners Await the Return of a Capital. And Wait.
The German Government is supposed to move to Berlin by 1998.
To get ready, the national Parliament moved last week into a new $171 million building in Bonn with glass walls.
Earlier in the week, the Government signed a contract to rent 180,000 square feet of office space in four new buildings in Bonn in 1994, for all the legislators and Government workers who will soon move to Berlin.


Clearly Canadian Beverage reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


NVR L.P.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Old Republic International reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


United Cities Gas reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Democrats Gain, but With Little Pattern
Democrats won eight of the 12 gubernatorial races Tuesday, picking up two additional seats to give them a total of 30.
But on a day when another Democrat swept to victory as President, the races for governor were decided less by Bill Clinton's strength than by local issues and personalities and traditional voting habits.
In several states, voters elected a governor of one party while favoring a president of another.


Sports of The Times; At Risk: One Boxer, Who Else?
MAGIC JOHNSON isn't alone.
There's at least one other athlete out there who has tested positive for H.I.V., the virus that leads to AIDS.
The other athlete is a boxer.
Sandy Johnson of the Nevada State Athletic Commission won't identify him other than to acknowledge that he is not a marquee name.
Fifteen months ago, the commission informed the boxer that he couldn't fight on a Las Vegas undercard.
He had been medically suspended for having tested positive for H.I.V.


Thomas W. Phelps, 90, Ex-Investment Counsel
Thomas W. Phelps, a retired Manhattan investment counsel and economic specialist, died yesterday in Nantucket Cottage Hospital in Massachusetts.
He was 90 years old.
He had been a permanent resident of Nantucket since moving from Manhattan after he retired.
His family said Mr.
Phelps, who had been in failing health, had voted on Tuesday before he was taken to the hospital.


Robert C. Arneson Is Dead at 62; Sculptor of Whimsical Portraits
Robert C. Arneson, a sculptor and ceramicist renowned for whimsical self-portraits and works on political themes, died on Monday at his home in Benicia, Calif.
He was 62 years old.
He died of liver cancer, said his New York dealer, Allan Frumkin of Frumkin/Adams Gallery.


Iran Announces Arrest of American Businessman
A day after the American elections, Iran took a hard line against the United States today by announcing the arrest of an American executive on charges of corruption and "links with agents serving foreign intelligence services."
Iranian radio said the American, Milton Meier, 58 years old, who ran a well-known travel agency here, had "confessed to all the mentioned charges," including links with the Shah's secret police, Savak, and "receiving hundreds of thousands of dollars in bribes from foreign companies."


Luigi Provasoli, 84, Biologist Who Aided Federal Government
Luigi Provasoli, a biologist who advised the United States Government on nutrition, oil spills and the oceans, died on Friday at his home in Comerio, Italy.
He was 84 years old.
Dr.
Provasoli died of a heart attack, said Haskins Laboratories of New Haven, Conn, which reported his death yesterday.
Dr.
Provasoli was affiliated with Haskins, a not-for-profit organization, from 1951 to 1981.
He also did research and taught at Yale University from 1970 until he retired in 1987.
In the 1960's, he served three Presidents on their Science Advisory Committees, dealing with the issues of food resources, oil spills and uses of the seas.
In 1982 he won a National Academy of Sciences award.
He was a past president of the Phycological Society of America and a founding editor of the Journal of Phycology, which reports on algae and protozoa.
He wrote 80 articles and reviews, mostly on insect pests, nutrition and ecology of protozoa and crustacea, the genes and growth of algae and symbiosis in marine worms.
He served on the boards of the American Institute of Biological Science and the American Type Culture Collection and was an advisor to the National Science Foundation and Smithsonian Institution.
He was born in Busto Arsizio, Italy.
After graduating from the University of Milan in 1931, he earned a doctorate in zoology there in 1939.
His early research was on pests, silkworms and flagellates.
Surviving is his wife of 54 years, the former Rose Desemini.


Clinton Warns U.S. Foes And Reassures Its Friends
President-elect Bill Clinton's declaration today that no foreign nation should "doubt America's resolve" during this transition period was intended to signal adversaries, particularly President Saddam Hussein of Iraq, that they should not try to test the young new American leader, Clinton aides said.
Mr.
Clinton's statement also appeared, in part, to be an effort to address any lingering public doubts that his lack of experience in foreign affairs and his efforts to avoid military service during the Vietnam War would in some way diminish his abilities to be an effective Commander in Chief.


CHRONICLE
Words from one prize winner, WILLIAM J. VANDEN HEUVEL, about another, KATRINA VANDEN HEUVEL: "I admire her as much as anyone in her generation as a force for decency, compassion, social justice. For a father to have the chance to express that admiration is a great opportunity."
The vanden Heuvels will jointly receive the 1844 Medal for civic leadership of the Correctional and Osborne Associations at a luncheon today at the Harvard Club.
The groups, working to improve the prison system, share a common administration, and the vanden Heuvels are on the board.


Move to Limit Terms Gathers Steam After Winning in 14 States
The national movement to impose term limits on members of Congress gathered momentum today following sweeping approval of such limits by voters in 14 states Tuesday.
Leaders of the movement said today that they hoped the vote would pressure Congress to draw up a constitutional amendment imposing uniform national limits on the service of Senators and Representatives.
The state measures passed Tuesday all varied somewhat, generally setting limits of 12 years for senators and 6 to 12 years for representatives, depending on the state.


Currency Realignment Needed, Spaniard Says
Spain believes that a further realignment of currency rates in the European monetary system will probably be necessary before the end of the year and that changes are necessary to restore stability to the system, Finance Minister Carlos Solchaga said in a recent interview.
"We are not convinced about the immediate stability of the system," he said.
"I'm afraid that markets have some doubts about the parities, and I believe that as necessary current rates may be modified in the coming weeks. We are absolutely open to possible changes of parities."


U.S. Physical Therapy reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
A.T.&amp; T. is negotiating to buy a third of McCaw, the nation's largest cellular phone operator, for $3.8 billion.
The alliance would take advantage of the research prowess of A.T.&amp; T.'s Bell Laboratories, accelerate the growth of the cellular industry as well as hasten the arrival of personal communications technology.  [ Page D1. ]
Paramount named Sherry Lansing chairwoman of its motion picture group.
Ms.
Lansing, a former president of 20th Century Fox, replaces Brandon Tartikoff, who resigned last week.  [ D1. ]


Emotional High for 'Lowly Arkansas'
"Highest of the High," ran the headline in the weekly Arkansas Times, and for Bill Clinton's home state the words were about right.
Playing off President Bush's description of Arkansas as "the lowest of the low" the headline reflected the extraordinary degree to which the Arkansas Governor's victory on Tuesday was seen as a triumph not just for him, but also for his often-derided home state.


The Talk of Paris; Backstage Drama at Paris Opera
The opera season in Paris has lurched to life this fall with interesting productions at three different sites.
That's not counting Peter Brook's latest streamlined opera, "Pelleas Impressions," which is to open at his Bouffes du Nord theater here on Nov. 13.
But as usual in Paris, the most operatic events took place not onstage but backstage at the Paris Opera, which is once again in the throes of the sort of administrative infighting that seems to define this tortured institution.


Alliance Capital Management reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Mario the Magician Offers Thrill a Minute
Watching Mario Lemieux perform, now, while his hockey powers are at their peak, is like watching the man walking the high-wire at the circus.
On any given day, you may see the most thrilling show of a lifetime, or you may see one false move that brings about the sudden end of a career.
Both possibilities were present Tuesday night, when Lemieux's Penguins beat the Islanders by 2-0 at Civic Arena.
Lemieux didn't score for the first time in 13 games, although he led both teams with six shots on goal and dominated play for much of the time he was on the ice.
More troubling, however, were his two, brief absences, one in the middle of the first period, the other late in the second, when he went to the locker room with team trainers.


Nassau Clerk's Race Requires More Paperwork Before Decision
For months, the Nassau County Clerk's office has been plagued by lengthy backlogs in handling paperwork.
Now, a special election to choose a new county clerk is mired in a delay of its own.
And again, huge amounts of paper will be decisive.
As of late yesterday, the Republican candidate, Carl Marcellino, the Oyster Bay town clerk, had collected 239,937 votes, against 239,290 for his Democratic opponent, Doreen Banks, the North Hempstead clerk.


PARENT &amp; CHILD
DR.
SHEILA RIBORDY, the director of the clinical psychology training program at De Paul University in Chicago, sees a lot of very busy people in her private practice.
They're trying to cope with the overwhelming stress in their lives.
"Some of them have trouble squeezing their appointment with me into their schedule," she said, adding that many of her highly stressed, tightly scheduled patients are still in elementary or junior high school.
A few are even younger.


30 Workers Supervise 7 Girls Left Behind at Training School That Was Closed in July
The McCorkle Training School for Boys and Girls was officially closed on July 1.
But seven girls aged 14, 15 and 16 were left behind, under the supervision of 30 workers trained for adult prisons.
The girls' lives are in limbo because of a decision by the State Department of Corrections last year to close the training school, which was the only center for girls deemed too unruly for placement in a group home.
But the state has not decided where they will go.


Maverick Rookie Hurt
Dallas Mavericks rookie forward DEXTER CAMBRIDGEis expected to miss the first eight weeks of the National Basketball Association season because of a stress fracture in his right leg.
Cambridge, a former Texas star, was hurt when he was accidentally kicked during Monday's exhibition game against San Antonio. (AP)


UAP Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Preston Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Lifecore Biomedical reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Enterra Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Georgia Senator in Runoff
A Georgia election law, the only one of its kind in the nation, has forced still one more contest this year: Senator Wyche Fowler, a freshman Democrat, will face Paul Coverdell, a Republican businessman, in a runoff on Nov. 24 after neither got a majority in Tuesday's election for the United States Senate.
With 99 percent of the vote counted today, Mr.
Fowler had 1,097,764, or 49 percent, while Mr.
Coverdell had 1,066,149, or 48 percent.
A Libertarian, Jim Hudson, got 69,802, or 3 percent.


Review/Film; Slight Smile for Rat Poison
"The Match Factory Girl" was shown as part of the 1990 New York Film Festival.
Following are excerpts from Caryn James's review, which appeared in The New York Times on Oct. 3, 1990.
The film, in Finnish with English subtitles, opened yesterday at the Lincoln Plaza Cinema, Broadway at 63d Street.
. . .
For Aki Kaurismaki, being laconical and deadpan is high art.
The downtrodden heroine of "The Match Factory Girl" spends most of the film looking pathetic and sad with excellent cause.
But a glimmer of a smile crosses her face when she dilutes rat poison in water, for reasons the audience will soon discover.
The film is a magnificent conclusion to a trilogy about Finnish working-class heroes that includes "Shadows in Paradise" and "Ariel." This virtuosic work is heartbreaking until it turns outrageously funny.
The film begins with a log in a factory and follows the stages by which wood emerges as a box of matches.
At the end of this long mechanical chain is a pair of hands hovering over a conveyor belt, making certain the mailing labels are stuck securely on the boxes.
The hands belong to Iris, a wan blonde with circles under her eyes whose life threatens to remain as mundane and sterile as her job.
She pays rent to sleep on the couch in the apartment of her mother and stepfather, who do little more than eat and smoke.
She puts on blue eyeshadow, goes to a dance and at the end of the evening is the only woman left sitting against the wall.
And in a small act of heroism, she defies her parents and takes part of her paycheck to buy a cheap-looking red-flowered dress in which she is finally asked to dance.
As Iris, Kati Outinen has a slight, angelic smile as she rests her head on this strange man's shoulder.
Her beautiful, unsentimental performance is all the more remarkable because so far Iris has not said a word on camera.
No one, in fact, says very much in this film.
Music and noise are everywhere, but dialogue is a luxury in Mr.
Kaurismaki's spare esthetic.
Iris is no saint; she sleeps with the stranger that night and later finds herself in the kind of mess that makes her want to poison ratty humans.
And the more rebellious she becomes, the more Mr.
Kaurismaki provokes viewers to cheer her antisocial behavior.
The director's style is ruthlessly pared down, every scene edited to its core, every lingering shot of an empty room used to good effect.
Yet Mr.
Kaurismaki's buoyant energy fends off any hint of a mannered or minimalist approach.
He keeps viewers trailing after him by unsettling every expectation.


Kinnard Investments reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Election Result Favors Municipals
For investors who own municipal bonds and the dealers who sell them, the election of Bill Clinton was good news yesterday.
The President-elect has promised to raise taxes on higher-income individuals, and that is music to the ear of a trader or owner attuned to the tax-exempt market.
While those who may have their taxes raised will not be happy, the higher rates they pay will also make the tax-exempt municipal bond market a more attractive tax shelter for their money, analysts say.


Despite Some Puzzling Readings, '92 Polls Came Through at End
As in most election years, poll takers had their own ups and downs during the 1992 Presidential race.
Most came within two or three percentage points of predicting the margins by which Gov.
Bill Clinton would beat President Bush and Ross Perot.
In fact, most major poll takers came within one point of Mr.
Clinton's percentage of the vote.


THE 1992 ELECTIONS: CONGRESS
District-by-district results of the contests for the U.S.
House of Representatives appear on pages B18-B19.


Alan Page Turns Up A Winner at the Polls
ALAN PAGE, a former pro football star and Hall of Famer, easily moved into the Minnesota Supreme Court yesterday in an election forced by his own legal challenge.
Page, who became an assistant Attorney General after his football career ended, became the first black elected to the high court by defeating KEVIN JOHNSON, an assistant Hennepin County Prosecutor.
It was the first race since 1966 for an open seat on the seven-member court.


Kelly Says Departure Leaves a Bonds-Sized Hole in Left Field
Shocked about being traded?
Not Roberto Kelly.
He said yesterday that he had expected the Yankees to trade him since September.
They did so on Tuesday, obtaining Paul O'Neill from Cincinnati in a swap of outfielders.
Shocked by the nature of the trade?
Kelly certainly was.
He expected the Yankees to get a starting pitcher in return.
That the Yankees did not acquire a pitcher tells Kelly that they will surely delve deep into free agency in search of arms.


Medco Research Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Thermo Instrument Systems Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 26


Rain but No Tears as Bush Returns to Capital
He has unashamedly and publicly misted up many times before, at religious ceremonies and speeches about war and memorials for dead sailors and farewells to old friends.
If a practiced catch in the throat was a hallmark of Ronald Reagan, a handkerchief has been one of George Bush's most reliable studio props.
"We Bushes cry easily," he told David Frost in 1989.


Loews Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Union Pins Its Hopes on G.M.'s New Management
With the General Motors Corporation's newly appointed chief executive officer, John F. (Jack) Smith Jr., signaling that he needs labor's help in changing the company, industry analysts and union officials are hoping for a new era of improved labor relations at the nation's largest auto maker.
On Monday, Mr.
Smith said he wanted to "find, cultivate and maintain common ground with union leaders" following weeks of rumors and worried speculation that the company's outside board of directors intended to get tough with the United Automobile Workers union.
It is still too early, however, to predict what will happen next summer when the company and the union begin negotiating a new contract.  'It Looks Promising'
"The rhetoric certainly goes in the direction of a more cooperative relationship," Harley Shaiken, an industry analyst at the University of California in San Diego, said.
"The statement was designed to defuse rumors and to smooth the way for continued negotiations with the U.A.W. It looks promising in the short term. There is a perception that the U.A.W. is spoiling for a fight. The reality is quite different."


Pac Rim Holding Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Rockwell International Has Profit Drop of 9% in Quarter
The Rockwell International Corporation reported a 9 percent decline in fiscal fourth-quarter earnings today and a 20 percent drop for the year before a special charge.
Analysts said the results were within expectations.
The company, an aerospace, electronics and auto parts business based in Seal Beach, Calif., posted final-period net income of $138 million, or 62 cents a share, compared with $152 million, or 66 cents a share, in the corresponding period a year earlier.
Revenues dipped 3 percent, to $2.9 billion from $3 billion.


With Ingram Out, McCaffrey Moves Up
Ed McCaffrey got what he wanted, but not the way he wanted it.
As Mark Ingram underwent arthroscopic surgery today on his right knee, McCaffrey was named to replace him as the Giants' starting flanker for Sunday's game here against the Green Bay Packers.


Market Place; Measuring Value Among Biotechs
CALL it a correction or call it a crash, but by any name, biotechnology stocks have taken a beating this year.
This means buying opportunities for investors who believe the group has hit bottom.
But picking winners remains challenging, and traditional valuations like price-to-earnings ratio are still not relevant for most of the group.
Viren Mehta, an analyst with Mehta &amp; Isaly Worldwide Pharmaceutical Research, has developed two new measures to evaluate these companies, which he calls the research multiple and the price-to-employee ratio.
These are a function of a company's market valuation -- total shares outstanding multiplied by the current share price -- relative to its research spending and personnel.


Fernandez Broadens Plan To Permit School Choice
Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez said yesterday that empty seats in any of New York City's elementary and junior high schools would have to be made available to children from other districts as part of a new school choice plan.
In addition, the Chancellor said that he might soon try to require the city's 32 school districts to permit students to choose any school within their districts.
Only five allow free choice now.


Essay; Losers, Not Weepers
With reporters on campaign beats covering the reception of returns in Houston and Little Rock; and with The New York Times's Washington editors up in New York putting together the election issue -- on Election Night the Times bureau here was like a morgue.
Seeking human political contact at a historic moment, I walked one block east to watch the returns in the office of Lane Kirkland of the A.F.L.-C.I.O.
We differ on economics, agree on foreign affairs, but in this election we were curiously aligned: Lane was a Democrat supporting Clinton, I was a Republican opposing Bush.


Tasty Baking Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 26


Corrections
A film review yesterday about "The Quarrel" at Film Forum 1, on West Houston Street, misidentified the author of the short story upon which the film is based.
He is Chaim Grade. (Chaim Kovler is a character in the film.)


The Subject Is Politics, and the Voices Are as Diverse as the Country
Wherever Americans gathered yesterday, the subject was politics in general and Bill Clinton in particular.
The young and the old, suburbanites and ghetto residents, political junkies and even the avowedly apathetic paused to contemplate the election results and what a Clinton Administration might be like.


HIGH COURT IS COOL TO SACRIFICES BAN
A challenge to a Florida city's ban on animal sacrifice provided the Supreme Court a spirited debate today over what limits exist on government's ability to curb unpopular or even dangerous religious practices.
The Justices appeared likely to declare the ban unconstitutional, seemingly unpersuaded by the City of Hialeah's defense of a law that forbids the ritual or ceremonial killing of animals while permitting such means of ending animals' lives as hunting, commercial slaughter, pest control and, for sick pets, euthanasia.


Economic Scene; Still Banking On Trouble
WILL taxpayers, insurers of last resort for bank deposits, once again be left holding the bag?
Warnings of humongous bank losses ahead, offered in a new book and splashed around the airwaves by Ross Perot, have been dismissed by Federal regulators in a rare public display of wrath.
And the regulators' scorn was only reinforced last week with reports of surging bank earnings.
But there is much more to the new book, "Banking on the Brink" by Roger J. Vaughn and Edward W. Hill (Washington Post Company Briefing Books), than estimates of which banks may be buried under a rubble of bad loans or how much it might cost Uncle Sugar to dig them out.
The two economists argue that commercial banking is dying -- at least commercial banking-as-usual.
And they see little evidence that the road to a more diverse system for transforming private savings into productive capital has been mapped by Washington.


Bridge a Symbol of Calcutta's Hope and Chaos
Every evening, thousands of Calcuttans travel long distances to view with pride the newest acquisition of this 200-year-old city: a giant cable bridge that commands a sweeping view of a city known for its mix of squalor and wealth, grime and sophistication.
But within days of its high-profile inauguration by Prime Minister P. V. Narasimha Rao in October, the bridge got the kind of hiccups that Calcutta's people are familiar with: The computers at the toll gates stopped working.


IES Industries reports earnings for 12mo Sept 30


Playing Stalin the Man Not Stalin the Monster
For Robert Duvall, portraying Stalin was the harshest challenge of his 40-year career, leading him to raise fundamental questions about the uses of his craft in depicting historical figures.
How does an actor play a historical villain without falling into caricature?
How can an actor accurately portray a man who devours not only his enemies and rivals but also leaves millions dead without a hint of remorse?


Bomb Defect Called Key to Chief's Escape
The Yonkers police commissioner survived an apparent attempt on his life on Tuesday because an explosive planted in or under his car malfunctioned, according to a city official.
The official, who spoke yesterday on the condition that his name not be used, said that Commissioner Robert K. Olson, who is involved in an investigation into allegations of past links between City Hall and organized crime, was lucky to escape with a relatively minor injury.
"This was not just a warning," he said.
"Had it worked properly, it would have killed him."


North American Mortgage reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Reviews/Fashion; Fun and Games, Well Seasoned With Reality
AS the clock crept toward 7 on Tuesday evening, the thousand people assembled in a SoHo gallery for Todd Oldham's 6 P.M. show were hooting and clapping with impatience.
But once the music blared and the first model appeared, lying on her back and kicking her legs, all was forgiven.
It was the start of a joyous romp through mythical fairgrounds with models done up in outrageous wigs and doing campy turns down the runway.
The showmanship was meant to please the designer's friends in the audience, who included Spike Lee, Vanessa Williams, Susan Sarandon, Tim Robbins and David Byrne.
The fashion professionals were there for the clothes, and there was plenty to please them, too.


It's Live Spots Only At WFMT Radio
It's back to the future for WFMT, an FM radio station in Chicago, which is reinstating its policy of broadcasting only live commercials.
Under the policy, effective Jan. 1, the station will have announcers read advertising copy rather than playing pre-recorded spots.
Dan Schmidt, senior vice president at the station, said the shift was intended to enhance the image of WFMT, which presents classical music and other fine-arts programming.


SALVADORAN HINTS FIGHT OVER PURGE
One of El Salvador's most powerful military leaders has lashed out at a plan to purge scores of officers for human rights violations and other reasons, saying the officers are considering steps to fight their dismissal.
The official, Deputy Defense Minister Juan Orlando Zepeda, said that how military officers responded to the confidential orders for their removal or transfer depended largely on when and how the orders were carried out.


New York's Perverse Losses
It was supposed to be the year in which the voters mowed down incumbents indiscriminately, without regard to their ability, to demonstrate their anger at being taken for granted by Congress.
New York voters perverted that message in the worst way.
They sent back the incumbent Republican Senator Alfonse D'Amato, a man of shabby accomplishment and indifferent ethics -- while turning out two of their most effective House members, Bill Green of Manhattan and Thomas Downey of Suffolk County.
In terms of lost influence and shadowed reputation, New York will pay and pay and pay.


PAGE BY PAGE
THE PRESIDENCY  President-elect Clinton sets to work, shaping his Administration and warning foreign aggressors.
A1  Clinton's victory came from stern discipline, a sense of purpose and plain dumb luck.
A1


For Big East, It's Almost That Time
With two new coaches present and one coaching legend absent, the Big East Conference initiated the 1992-93 basketball season yesterday with its news media day in New York City.
Here are a few snapshots from the annual meeting of coaches and players: Thompson in the Gate
Despite being confined to his bed earlier this fall because of a pinched nerve in his back, Coach John Thompson of Georgetown said that his enthusiasm for coaching was as great as ever.
When someone asked if he looked forward to the new season, which begins with the Big Apple N.I.T. on Nov. 19, he responded:


Halifax Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Oh, So Traditional; Oh, So Subversive
THERE'S a pile of cups and saucers that looks like the aftermath of a raucous party; a toilet in the manner of Delft; a quartet of Lenin look-a-like candlesticks; fine china incongruously decorated with Keith Haring grafitti, and a shapely tureen with a portrait of the sublimely self-involved artist Cindy Sherman as a dreamy Madame de Pompadour.
The medley of ceramic pieces is part of a small but imaginative exhibition titled "Artists and Industry" that is on view at the Jane Hartsook Gallery, at 16 Jones Street, between Bleecker and West Fourth Streets, through Nov. 25.


Hanover Insurance reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


THE 1992 ELECTIONS: DISAPPOINTMENT -- NEWS ANALYSIS An Eccentric but No Joke; Perot's Strong Showing Raises Questions On What Might Have Been, and Might Be
Ross Perot, a political neophyte who said and did enough bizarre things during the Presidential campaign to allow his critics to brand him as an eccentric or worse, scored a more impressive showing than any third-party candidate since Theodore Roosevelt ran on the Bull Moose ticket 80 years ago.
More than 19 million people voted for him Tuesday.
And though he personally campaigned in only 16 states, Mr.
Perot received more than 20 percent of the vote in 31.
He actually finished second in Utah.
He finished third in every other state, but in one, Maine, he pulled 30 percent of the vote.


FLY-FISHING WITH: Leigh H. Perkins; Such Joy, Where a River Always Runs
IT was a perfect day for curling up in front of a fireplace.
The sky was battleship gray.
The air was dank with drizzle and sleet and fog.
To any sensible person, the weather could only be called dismal.
Why, then, was Leigh H. Perkins standing knee-deep with a fishing rod in his hand in the rushing Batten Kill River?
To Mr.
Perkins, 64 years old, a dean of American fly-fishing and a self-proclaimed optimist about any encounter with the great outdoors, the weather was merely nippy.


Russell J. Cooper; Industrialist, 74
Russell J. Cooper, the founder, owner and president of the Consolidated Metals Corporation in Dover, N.J., died on Tuesday at his home in Essex Fells, N.J.
He was 74 years old.
He died of cancer, his family said.


Ducommun Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 26


Weldwood Canada reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Executive Changes
BARNEYS NEW YORK, New York, named Charles W. Bunstine 2d senior vice president and chief operating officer.
CHIRAL TECHNOLOGIES, Exton, Pa., a unit of Daicel Chemical Industries Ltd., appointed Thomas B. Lewis president and chief executive.


Woolworth Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 24


SOUTH
ALABAMA - BUSH
Alabama remained loyal to the Republicans, putting its nine electoral votes in Mr.
Bush's column.
As usual, Republicans branded the Democrat as too liberal, especially on social issues.
At a rally last week in Birmingham, for instance, parents said their children would encounter homosexual scoutmasters if Mr.
Clinton won the election.


A Day After a Defeat, There Is Blame
As the national Democratic Party savored its first Presidential triumph in 16 years yesterday, members of one rarefied subspecies -- New Yorkus argumentus -- second-guessed their nominee's failed campaign for the Senate.
"Abysmal" was among the kinder words they used.
A race that the party faithful hoped would unseat a dented two-term Republican incumbent, Alfonse M. D'Amato, instead produced a food-fight of a primary and a buzz-saw attack from Mr.
D'Amato in the general election.
By the end, three of the state's most prominent Democrats -- Robert Abrams, Elizabeth Holtzman and Geraldine A. Ferraro -- were bleeding, their political futures in doubt, with blame to go around.


Jar in Iranian Ruins Betrays Beer Drinkers of 3500 B.C.
They must have had some bibulous days and nights six millenniums ago at the Sumerian trading post of Godin Tepe, in the Zagros Mountains of what is now western Iran.
Archeologists can tell by sampling the dregs.
In the same room of the ruins where archeologists last year reported finding the earliest chemical evidence for wine, they have now identified the earliest chemical evidence for beer.
The identification was made by analyzing a pale yellowish residue sticking to the interior of a double-handled pottery jar.


With Help, New York High Tech Could Rival Silicon Valley; Recycled Workers
To the Editor:
This is a word of appreciation for the Ageworks I.B.M. computer training program sponsored by the New York City Department for the Aging.


EnClean Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


U.S. to Impose a Tax On European Imports
The United States plans to announce punitive taxes on European imports on Thursday morning, taking another step toward a trans-Atlantic trade war after the breakdown of talks on farm subsidies, American officials said today.
Carla A. Hills, the United States trade representative, will announce taxes of 100 percent or more on up to $350 million worth of luxury European exports, mainly white wines from France, said two American officials who insisted on anonymity.
Rufus Yerxa, a deputy United States trade representative, said the Customs Service would begin collecting the taxes 30 days after an announcement was made.
Retaliation Proceeds
The delay is needed to instruct customs officials on the new taxes, to allow time for the arrival of goods already paid for by American importers and to permit further negotiations.
Bureaucratic and legal details were worked out nearly two weeks ago, and the retaliation is now proceeding with relatively little high-level involvement in the wake of President Bush's loss in Tuesday's election.


Candela Laser Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 3


Accuser's Past at Issue in Assault Case
The defense in the Glen Ridge sexual assault trial pounded today at its theme that the mildly retarded young woman central to the case was sexually experienced and enjoyed the acts that the state charges were crimes.
In a day of cross-examination of a psychologist who is a main prosecution witness, one of the defense lawyers, Michael Querques, focused on the young woman's past sexual activities and her discussions about the March 1, 1989, episode in conversations secretly taped by a former girlfriend of one of the four defendants.


Garden Q. &amp; A.
Fooling the Eye
Q.
Some weeks ago you wrote about a small garden in Queens where a winding path made the area seem larger.
What other design tricks help? -- Ruth R. Collins, Washington
A.
Fooling the eye seems to be a continuing goal of small-space gardeners, and a serpentine path certainly helps, especially if it's also slightly narrower at the far end of the garden.
Another method of achieving a false perspective is to plant species with large leaves, like hostas or rhododendron, close to the window or viewing point, and those with small leaves, like liriope or cut-leaf maples, toward the rear.
This is a favorite device in Japanese gardens.
Latticework and artfully positioned mirrors also help make gardens feel larger.
Small gardens were the focus of a special issue of the newsletter The Avant Gardener published in September.
Suggestions included using small and delicately textured trees and shrubs as space dividers, tucking in partially hidden surprises like pools, and positioning a small statue or fountain as focal point at the far end of the area.
To obtain a copy, send $2 to The Avant Gardener, P.O.
Box 489, New York 10028.
. . .
Address questions to Garden
Q.&amp; A., The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York 10036.
Those of general interest will be published.
Unpublished questions cannot be answered individually.


Starrett (L.S.) (N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 26


Johnson Speaks Out
Judging by the amount of interest the procedure seemed to draw, you would have thought MAGIC JOHNSON was undergoing major surgery at courtside in Chapel Hill, N.C., Friday night, not a simple bandage on a minor arm scratch.
But the way Johnson tells it in a taped interview that will be broadcast tonight on ABC's "PrimeTime Live" it was the alarmed stares of his teammates and reporters during a timeout in the exhibition game that helped persuade him to call off his comeback with the Lakers and retire from basketball once and for all.
"You could see the fear upon people's faces," Johnson said.
"Just saying, 'O.K., is it all right? Did he bandage it all? Is it all bandaged up? Is it all right? It's not leaking?' "


Years of Seniority Are Gone in One Swoop
Every year when New York City wanted to make sure it would get its $9 million in Federal help to pay for police protection for the United Nations, Representative Bill Green of Manhattan, a seven-term Republican, was there on the Appropriations Committee to see it through.
And when New York State wanted the Federal Government to pay a greater share of job-training for welfare recipients, Thomas J. Downey of Long Island, a nine-term Democrat on the Ways and Means Committee, shepherded the measure into the tax bill sitting on President Bush's desk.


THE 1992 ELECTIONS: REACTION Off the Trail: Visits With Americans; New Hampshire Voter Recalls Clinton's Stern Test
Bill Clinton arrived at Phil and Ann Ackerman's house on a snowy night nine months ago, plummetting through a double-digit fall in his poll standings.
His Presidential campaign was failing and a pack of news reporters was staked out on Mr.
Ackerman's icy driveway.
The Arkansas governor was visiting within, at number 9 Sunshine Court, to talk of banking reform and the threat of foreclosure stalking the Ackermans.
But the Clinton character issue was flurrying outside furiously as the snow.


Lindros Quiet? Not Much Chance
So what if Eric Lindros is only 19.
So what if he is a rookie, a self-proclaimed kid who has played a mere 14 games in the National Hockey League.
That doesn't mean he's going to keep his mouth shut and his shoelaces tied and always wear a smile on his face.
Take last night, for example.
Lindros was asked what was wrong with the Philadelphia Flyers, who had just lost, 3-1, to the Rangers at Madison Square Garden, extending their winless streak to seven games.
Did he spew the usual rookie-speak of cliches and polite comments and vague generalities?
Not a chance.
This is a guy who told the Quebec Nordiques to forget about him last season, draft rights or no draft rights, because he didn't want to play in Quebec.
He's big on honesty, brutal or not.


Parolee Shot to Death by Police in Bronx
A man who was on parole for armed robbery was shot to death early yesterday morning in the Bronx by a New York City police officer who believed he was reaching for a weapon, the police said.
The man crashed his car into a street lamp and then tried to speed away, the police said, and the officer shot him when he reached toward the floor of the car.
A starter pistol was later found on the front driver's seat, said Lieut.
Raymond O'Donnell, a police spokesman.
He called it a "imitation gun," saying it could not be fired.


Teacher Walkout Threatened
Teacer union officials say they plan a one-day walkout against the Los Angeles school system next week unless stalled contract negotiations over pay cuts are resolved by then.
A spokeswoman for the system, Diana Munatones, said tghe district wold hire substitute teachers and reassign administrators to schools open if the walkout, planned for Nov. 13, occurs.
Teachers face a 9 percent salary cut in paychecks this Friday.
Two weeks ago, union members voted to authorize a strike, but no strike deadline has been set and negotiations have continued.
District officials say the salary cuts are necessary because of a $400 million budget shortfall.


Elections Change Face Of Lawmaking Bodies
There will be an enormous transfer of power in state capitals next January as a result of Tuesday's elections, which gave one of every three or four seats in state legislatures to newcomers, many of them female, black or Hispanic, according to the National Conference of State Legislatures.
The turnover, the largest in at least a decade, may shift control of legislative chambers to a new party in as many as 14 states when the ballots are finally tallied.
Republicans have already won six of these legislative battles and could well win four more.


Biopool International reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Citgo Petroleum Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Infiniti Account Is Switched To Chiat From Hill, Holliday
CONTINUING the turmoil that has rocked the automotive marketing world for nearly two years, the Nissan Motor Corporation U.S.A. said yesterday that it had pulled its Infiniti division advertising account from Hill, Holliday, Connors, Cosmopulos Inc. and placed it with Chiat/Day/Mojo Inc.
Chiat has handled the $165 million advertising account for the auto maker's Nissan division since 1987.


Daydream Scales Heights But Can't Clear a Fence
Margie Goldstein, the National Horse Show's resident daredevil for tonight's Puissance Stake, has never minded asking her 13-year-old horse, Daydream, to jump a ceiling-high obstacle of simulated brick and mortar.
She has no fear of heights and neither, it seems, does he.
Daydream, a perennial favorite in this height-defying event, had won four consecutive Puissance events before tonight.
Alf, the 8-year-old Hanoverian stallion who outjumped an 11-horse field for a surprise victory at the Meadowlands, had never won a Puissance before.


Omnicare Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Hees International reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Democrats Promise Quick Action on a Clinton Plan
Democrats moved quickly yesterday to commit the 103d Congress to fast action on President-elect Clinton's legislative plans, saying the election results assured him of effective support on Capitol Hill.
Starved for legislative successes against President Bush, they have told each other, Mr.
Clinton and reporters that they expect to be able to pass his main proposals, once he tells them what they are, in the first months of his Administration.
That is when unity, rather than individual agendas, will matter most politically.


New in the United States Senate
California  BARBARA BOXER
Barbara Boxer began and ended her campaign by telling the same signature story: the march up the great steps of the Senate by seven female Representatives demanding attention to sexual harassment accusations against Judge Clarence Thomas.
But the gate keeper barred their way, telling them that no "strangers" could enter.
And so Ms.
Boxer, a fiery five-term Marin County Representative better known for using her office as a bully pulpit than for writing legislation, set herself the historic task of "opening the doors."


Uni-Marts Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Democrats Gain, but With Little Pattern
Democrats won eight of the 12 gubernatorial races Tuesday, picking up two additional seats to give them a total of 30.
But on a day when another Democrat swept to victory as President, the races for governor were decided less by Bill Clinton's strength than by local issues and personalities and traditional voting habits.
In several states, voters elected a governor of one party while favoring a president of another.


DI Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Vencor Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Home Video
This has been the week of "Beauty and the Beast" in video stores.
Disney reports that seven million copies of the tape were sold in its first six days on the shelves.
While distributors and dealers can't confirm that figure, many say "Beauty and the Beast" is the fastest-selling title ever.
Now comes another animated film on tape, also associated with Disney, that is distinctive for another reason.
Next week Lightyear Entertainment will release "The Snow Queen," the fairy tale by Hans Christian Andersen.
The 30-minute tape, which is narrated by Sigourney Weaver, is part of the "Stories to Remember" series of children's animated films.
On Nov. 14 it will be shown on the Disney Channel.


Bonn Journal; Berliners Await the Return of a Capital. And Wait.
The German Government is supposed to move to Berlin by 1998.
To get ready, the national Parliament moved last week into a new $171 million building in Bonn with glass walls.
Earlier in the week, the Government signed a contract to rent 180,000 square feet of office space in four new buildings in Bonn in 1994, for all the legislators and Government workers who will soon move to Berlin.


Maximilian Becker; Literary Agent, 89
Maximilian Becker, a literary agent who produced several Broadway plays in the 1940's and 50's, died on Tuesday at Lenox Hill Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 89 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died of kidney failure, said his wife, Yvonne.


NuVision Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Dateq Info Network reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Handy &amp; Harman reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Clinton, Savoring Victory, Starts Sizing Up Job Ahead
After an election whose results rang with a cry for change but offered no specific mandate, President-elect Bill Clinton set to work shaping his new Administration yesterday, huddling with his transition team, issuing a scarcely veiled warning to Iraq and promising that over the next six months, he would "focus like a laser beam on this economy."
The 46-year-old Mr.
Clinton committed his Administration not only to ending the lingering recession, but also to lifting the nation to a higher level of economic productivity for years to come.


Continental Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Auto-Trol Technology Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


D'Amato: Combining Money, Attacks and Foe's Blunders
Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato's campaign strategists describe their remarkable defeat of New York Attorney General Robert Abrams as a long, brilliantly plotted march to victory.
But it might not have happened had it not been for a word.
At the time that Mr.
Abrams called his opponent a "fascist" one cold late night in Binghamton, Mr.
D'Amato's poll indicated he was stalled.
His campaign, which after the Democratic primary had narrowed a 15-point gap with a fusillade of negative advertisements, had hit a plateau, persistently trailing Mr.
Abrams by 4 to 5 percentage points.
Bogged down by an accumulation of allegations of ethical misconduct and fighting an inevitable New York landside for Bill Clinton, his prospects seemed to be dimming.


CXR Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Hampshire Group reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 26


Mylan Laboratories Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Fischer Saves Game With Precise Play
Bobby Fischer and Boris Spassky agreed to a draw yesterday after Spassky had counterattacked ingeniously with one of his favorite defenses and Fischer had fought his way out of trouble by slipping into an ending that he survived with precision play.
Thus, after Game 29 of their exhibition match in Belgrade, Fischer is still on the edge of triumph with 9 victories to Spassky's 5.
But in the last four games Spassky has been offering tough resistance.
He has taken some of the bugs out of his openings to win one game and draw three.
As close as Fischer is to victory in the match, it's not over yet.


Victorious Dodd to Press for Campaign Limits
The day after winning Connecticut's most expensive Senate race, Senator Christopher J. Dodd vowed today to work for legislation to limit the cost and length of campaigns.
"I can't think of anything that would do more to level the playing field and eliminate a lot of the concerns that are reflected by some of the peripheral issues like term limitations," Mr.
Dodd said at a news conference at the Goodwin Hotel.
"Campaign finance reform is something I am going to push for ardently and immediately."


Car of Choice For Sarajevo? It's Armored
"The Mad Max is coming," a French soldier in a dark green flak jacket whispered to his companion.
They stiffened to attention as a jaunty little white armored car pulled up in front of the shell-pocked building that houses what remains of the Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Air vents swept back on each side like reptile fins gave the two-seat Panhard scout car a rakish, daredevil look that reminds the French peacekeepers here of the Australian desperadoes and their weird vehicles in the "Mad Max" film series.


The U.N. Fails Bosnian Refugees
With refugees from the newly "cleansed" Bosnian city of Jajce now massed at the Croatian border, desperately seeking entry, the U.N.'s refugee arm rightly presses Zagreb to fulfill its international obligations.
But the U.N.'s own peacekeeping forces set a bad example by turning back refugees in the areas of Croatia they patrol.
If international conventions bind anyone, surely they bind U.N. personnel.
And if the Geneva Convention on Refugees covers anyone, surely it covers Bosnia's Muslims, fleeing virtual genocide in their invaded homeland.


Reliance Group Holdings Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Interferon Sciences reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Coherent reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 26


Barry Kwalick; Educator, 50
Barry Kwalick, director of the mentoring program at the City University of New York, died on Monday at Lenox Hill Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 50 years old and lived in Manhattan and Hurley, N.Y.
Mr. Kwalick died of complications from AIDS, said his wife, Jennifer Leighton.


The Subject Is Politics, and the Voices Are as Diverse as the Country
Wherever Americans gathered yesterday, the subject was politics in general and Bill Clinton in particular.
The young and the old, suburbanites and ghetto residents, political junkies and even the avowedly apathetic paused to contemplate the election results and what a Clinton Administration might be like.


D'Amato Strategist Shuns the Spotlight
He is widely recognized in Republican circles as a master strategist, "a polling guy with creative talents," as Roger Ailes, another Republican strategist of note, described Arthur J. Finkelstein, the strategist behind Alfonse M. D'Amato's successful campaign for a third term in the Senate.
Trying to re-elect a candidate vulnerable on ethics issues, Mr.
Finkelstein designed a campaign that emphasized Mr.
D'Amato's service to the state and threw his opponent, Robert Abrams, on the defensive by attacking him as "hopelessly liberal."


Wells Fargo Prices Floating-Rate Notes
Wells Fargo &amp; Company yesterday priced $150 million of floating-rate notes due 1994 through underwriters led by Lehman Brothers.
The two-year floating-rate notes were priced at 100 to float quarterly at a full percentage point above the three-month London interbank offered rate, the basic short-term interest rate in the Eurodollar market and the rate to which many Eurodollar loans and deposits are tied.
The rate, known as Libor, is similar in concept to the United States prime rate except that it is less subject to individual bank adjustment.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
7.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
4.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
2.87
3.09
4.68
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.99
3.01
4.63
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.20
3.22
4.68
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.43
6.41
7.06
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.67
7.65
7.91
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.60
8.62
8.90
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.61
6.64
6.83
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Remember, Moses Married a Midianite
To the Editor:
In "Debating Intermarriage, and Jewish Survival" (front page, Oct. 18), you state that "in the Bible Jews are repeatedly warned that intermarriage endangers the survival of a distinct Jewish people." Indeed, Nehemiah and Ezra speak out forcefully, even harshly against intermarriage.
But for a much longer period of biblical history intermarriage was commonplace and accepted.
Moses married a Midianite and had a mutually respectful relationship with his father-in-law, Jethro.
King David seems no less a Jew for having Ruth, the Moabite, as a forebear.
Joseph and Judah had non-Jewish wives.


Lansing Succeeds Tartikoff As Head of Paramount Films
Paramount Communications Inc. named Sherry Lansing chairwoman of its motion picture group yesterday.
Ms.
Lansing, a successful film producer, will effectively replace Brandon Tartikoff, who resigned unexpectedly from Paramount last week.
This will be the second time that Ms.
Lansing has run a film studio.
As president of production of 20th Century Fox from 1980 to 1983, she was the first woman in such a position.
She now becomes one of the few executives, male or female, to have run two studios.


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Oct. 28 about the financial condition of the General Motors Corporation misstated the company's fiscal practices regarding its pension fund.
While it is illegal to use pension fund assets to pay for operations, G.M. has employed the common corporate practice of spending on operations cash that might otherwise have been contributed to its pension fund.


Marten Transport reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Student Stabbed Leaving Manhattan High School
A 16-year-old student was stabbed as he left his Manhattan high school yesterday, in what the police said was retaliation for a subway robbery.
Officers arrested four students from the same school, Julia Richman High School, two on charges of attempted murder and assault and two on weapons charges because, the police said, they were in possession of a folding knife.
But Officer Peter Frischia, a police spokesman, said detectives were still looking for the student who stabbed the victim, Jeremy McRey.


Venezuela's Open Border Speeds Drug Traffic
A new customs union with Colombia is bringing more to Venezuela than fresh coffee.
A surge in cocaine seizures indicates that Venezuela's open border policy is quickly making this quiet Caribbean nation a preferred embarkation point for illegal drugs to the United States and Europe.


Adolescent Obesity Linked to Adult Ailments
Being overweight during the teen-age years can lead to life-threatening chronic disease in adulthood, even if the youngster later sheds the excess weight, according to new findings from a study spanning more than 60 years.
The study indicated that adolescent obesity was even more strongly linked to health risks than being overweight in adult life.
The lasting effects of teen-age obesity were most pronounced among boys.
Those in the top 25 percent of weight in relation to their height were found to be more likely than leaner boys to suffer fatal heart attacks, strokes, colon cancer and other health problems before their 70th birthdays.


Foodmaker Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 27


The Subject Is Politics, and the Voices Are as Diverse as the Country
Wherever Americans gathered yesterday, the subject was politics in general and Bill Clinton in particular.
The young and the old, suburbanites and ghetto residents, political junkies and even the avowedly apathetic paused to contemplate the election results and what a Clinton Administration might be like.


HOME IMPROVEMENT
FIXING a fluorescent light that does not light or that exhibits mysterious symptoms is usually fairly easy if you understand how fluorescent lights work.
An incandescent light bulb contains a filament that glows when heated by electricity.
A fluorescent bulb contains gases and a phosphor coating.
Electricity flowing through the bulb energizes the gases, causing them to emit invisible ultraviolet light, which causes the phosphor coating on the bulb to give off visible light.


Medco Containment Services Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Robert Blattner 2d, 40, MCA Video President
Robert Blattner 2d, president of MCA Home Video, was killed Oct. 31 in a plane crash in Grand Junction, Colo.
He was 40 years old and lived in Tarzana, Calif.
Mr.
Blattner was on his way back to the company's headquarters in Los Angeles after visiting a film location in Utah.
The plane he was a passenger in had taken off from Canyonlands Airport near Moab, Utah.
It crashed on approach to Walker Field in Grand Junction, said Christine R. Hanson, a spokeswoman for MCA.


Pogo Producing reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-21  IRAN SEIZES U.S.
Robert C. Arneson, sculptor and ceramicist.
Luigi Provasoli, U.S. adviser, biologist and researcher at Yale.
Editorials/Op-Ed A34-35  Editorials  Ten reasons to feel good.
New York's perverse losses.
The U.N. fails Bosnian refugees.
Letters  William Safire: Losers, not weepers.
Leslie H. Gelb: Who gets what jobs.
Peggy Noonan: Why Bush failed.


J &amp; J Snack Foods reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 26


Designers Set Some Holiday Tables
TABLE settings invite imagination.
The table is the one part of the home that must be changed and fussed with three times a day.
Bernardaud, the French porcelain manufacturer, has invited nine New York interior designers to create settings at its boutique at 777 Madison Avenue (66th Street).
The exhibition, called "Holiday Table Settings," opens with a preview tonight to benefit Diffa (Design Industries Foundation for AIDS).


A New Day Dawning For the N.B.A. Lowly
There is no such thing as the 1991 Atlanta Braves and Minnesota Twins in the National Basketball Association.
Teams do not go from last place to playing for the championship.
They build, draft-by-draft, piece-by-piece, and that can sometimes take years.
When the Orlando Magic entered the league four years ago, General Manager Pat Williams asked the new N.B.A. city to be patient.
"We said it would probably take five good drafts for us to be competitive, contend for the playoffs," said Williams.
"We've had four, and I think now it's fair to say that we're one away."


Coalition Government Falls Apart in Ireland
The small but powerful party that gave Prime Minister Albert Reynolds the votes needed to run a coalition Government turned against him tonight, and its officials said they had withdrawn from the Government and would vote for its collapse in Parliament on Thursday.
Government and opposition officials said this meant that the action of the Progressive Democrats assured that Mr.
Reynolds would lose a vote of confidence scheduled Thursday in the 166-member Parliament.


Review/Architecture; 6 Visions of a New Ferry Terminal
The world's most famous cheap date will soon be puttin' on the Ritz.
If things proceed according to plan, voyagers on the Staten Island Ferry, that cut-rate, late-night ship of love, will no longer await departure in hateful surroundings.
Instead, urban romantics, and mere 9-to-5 commuters, will grandly embark from a crystal palace.
Or a classical pavilion.
Or a soaring, barrel-vaulted terminal crowned with a gigantic illuminated clock.
Or whichever of six remarkable designs, by a roster of prominent architects, is chosen today in an architectural competition to find a plan for a new Whitehall Ferry Terminal down at the tip of Manhattan.
As Edna St.
Vincent Millay didn't put it, it is all very merry to go back and forth between these six lovely visions of the ferry.
These designs, taken together, demonstrate the range of solutions serious architects can bring to the same problem.
And the manner in which the design is being chosen proves there is still plenty of life in that venerable device for selecting architects, the competition.


Bush Vetoes Tax Bill With Urban Aid
As Democrats celebrated the early retirement of the President's veto pen and the end of an era of gridlock between the White House and Congress, Mr.
Bush today killed the $27 billion tax bill that included enterprise zones designed to aid the cities.
The bill included several measures Mr.
Bush had promoted, like the cancellation of luxury taxes on boats and automobiles.
However, in the end, he blocked the measure because he had pledged in the final weeks of the campaign to oppose any new taxes.


Clinton, Savoring Victory, Starts Sizing Up Job Ahead
After an election whose results rang with a cry for change but offered no specific mandate, President-elect Bill Clinton set to work shaping his new Administration yesterday, huddling with his transition team, issuing a scarcely veiled warning to Iraq and promising that over the next six months, he would "focus like a laser beam on this economy."
The 46-year-old Mr.
Clinton committed his Administration not only to ending the lingering recession, but also to lifting the nation to a higher level of economic productivity for years to come.


Renaissance reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Household International reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


MIDWEEK REPORT
Week 10
Bye-bye to the byes and hello to the resumption of full 14-game weekly schedules -- and a President-elect.
Political football history doesn't always repeat, but the last time the Democrats won the White House, in the fall of 1976, the Raiders ended up beating the Vikings in Super Bowl XI in Pasadena, Calif., the very site of Super Bowl XXVII this Jan. 31.


FOREIGN TOURISTS ARE TO BE FREED
A Federal magistrate today cleared the way for 15 more Malaysian visitors to go home as soon as they give videotaped testimony as witnesses in a smuggling case that has kept them detained in county jails for two weeks.
And she ordered that process speeded up.
Scolding the United States Attorney's office here for creating unnecessary delays in the case, Magistrate Marianne B. Bowler today ordered both prosecutors and defense lawyers to work 12 hours every day until all testimony is taken and to limit the sessions to 90 minutes a witness.


CNA Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Helping Chinese Reach Goal of Jobs in Teaching
GEORGE YEH, who holds a Ph.D. in mathematics from the State University of New York at Binghamton, is now preparing to become a teacher in New York City's public school system.
In the meantime, he works as a hotel housekeeping attendant.
Mr.
Yeh, who has spent nearly half of his 45 years studying mathematics, mostly in Chinese schools, is one of hundreds of immigrants who have found that credentials that could land them senior positions in their countries could not get them far here.


CMI Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Mobster-Turned-Informer Tells of Jury-Fixing
Returning to the same courtroom where he testified against John Gotti eight months ago, Salvatore (Sammy Bull) Gravano testified yesterday in the trial of a former juror who is accused of taking a bribe to acquit Mr.
Gotti in an earlier case.
Mr.
Gravano, who wore a dark double-breasted suit and a perpetual frown, gave terse answers in a hoarse voice as he told the prosecution that he delivered $60,000 in cash to an intermediary for a juror on the panel that acquitted Mr.
Gotti and several others of Federal racketeering charges in 1987.


Quebecor Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


ITT Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Incumbency Keeps Balance Intact
For nearly 20 years, one overarching feature of state government in Albany has been division: the Democrats in control of the Assembly, the Republicans ruling the State Senate and a governor often wringing his hands over his seeming inability to bring them together.
Consciously or not, state voters firmly ratified more of the same on Tuesday.
Even in a state where Democrats outnumber Republicans 3 to 2 and despite Democratic vows to soar to control of the Senate this year on the wings of the Clinton-Gore ticket, the State Senate will remain, as it has since 1965, firmly in the hands of Republicans.
It will either continue to have 35 Republicans and 26 Democrats or, pending the outcome of one close race in southwestern New York, the G.O.P. will lose just 1 seat.


United Industrial reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Bird Medical Technologies reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


With Help, New York High Tech Could Rival Silicon Valley
To the Editor:
In "New York a Hard Town for High-Tech" (Business Day, Oct. 12), you describe the challenges faced by Willow Peripherals, a gutsy company that started its computer business in the South Bronx.
Willow's struggle in attracting employees to one of New York's most notorious neighborhoods should not be surprising.


Swift Transportation Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Jacobs Engineering Group reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Stone &amp; Webster reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Willcox &amp; Gibbs reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


U.S. Sub Checks Gulf's Waters With Iran in Mind
With an eye on the sale of Russian submarines to Iran, the Pentagon has sent a nuclear submarine into the Persian Gulf to examine the acoustic properities of the waters there, senior Pentagon officials said today.
The deployment of the Topeka, which passed through the Strait of Hormuz on Sunday, represents the first time that a nuclear-powered American submarine has entered the Persian Gulf.


Bio-Rad Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


First Marathon reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Moore-Handley Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Major Barely Wins Test Vote on European Union
Prime Minister John Major narrowly beat back an alliance of Conservative Party rebels and rival Labor Party politicians who came within three votes tonight of dealing the Government's political authority a crippling setback.
In a highly charged showdown in the House of Commons, Mr.
Major and his aides managed to cobble together a coalition of some 300 Conservative loyalists and members of the small, pro-European Liberal Democratic Party to pass, 319 to 316, a symbolic motion that pledged his Government "to play a leading role in the development of the European Community."


Executives' Outlook On Clinton Presidency
Although they traditionally favor Republican Presidents and policies, the nation's business, economic and finance leaders look to a future with the Democrat Bill Clinton as President by showing restrained hope if not hats-in-the-air enthusiasm.
In a series of interviews, some expressed the view that the nation's economy may well benefit from what they regard as the open-mindedness of President-elect Clinton in coping with the economy.
Others voiced the fear that Government might grow too big again under a Democrat but were now nevertheless optimistic about the nation's chances for long-term economic growth.


Liqui-Box Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 3


And Now, the Real Election
Technically, the next President has not been determined by Tuesday's election.
The popular vote has decided only how the electors from each state will vote when the Electoral College votes are officially counted on Jan. 6.
And in theory, the popular vote has not even really decided that.
The electors can legally vote for anybody they want, although they almost never exercise that discretion.


Jobs Delayed After Failure Of Bond Act
Local officials throughout New York State yesterday were placing some public works projects on hold and making plans to scale down or stretch out others after voters' rejection of Proposal One.
A pillar of Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo's strategy for stimulating the New York economy, the proposal called for issuing $800 million in state bonds.
The money would have been used to help finance projects like sewage and water systems, roads, sidewalks, ports and waterfront projects, business parks and parking garages.


Advanced Magnetics reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Richard W. Hall, 65, an Author Who Specialized in Gay Themes
Richard W. Hall, the author of six books of fiction and a collection of plays, all on gay themes, and a book critic, died last Thursday at Roosevelt Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 65 years old and lived in Manhattan.
His death was reported yesterday by his sister, Dr.
Marny Hall of Oakland, Calif., who said the cause was AIDS.


The Elections
SEA CHANGE
Democrats and Republicans face a transformed political landscape.
News analysis, page B1.
COMMON CAUSE
Democrats moved quickly to committ the next Congress to fast action on Bill Clinton's agenda.
B6.
LOST LAWMAKERS
New York State is losing 214 years of seniority on Capitol Hill. B15.
NEW FACES
The elections will produce an enormous transfer of power in state capitals. B9.
BAD CALLS
The once infallible New Hampshire primary rule, and other leading indicators that didn't lead.
B1.
National Coverage . . .
B1-10 State by State . . .
B11-13 District by District . . .
B18-19 New York Region . . .
B14-17, B20 Metro Report . . .
B21-26


Highest Presbyterian Panel Bars Homosexual Minister
The highest court of the Presbyterian Church (U.S.A.) ruled yesterday that an openly gay, sexually active person cannot serve as a minister of any of its 11,500 churches.
The immediate impact of the surprise ruling was to nullify the hiring of a lesbian as a co-pastor of a church in Rochester, N.Y.
The ruling is also expected to discourage many other homosexual ministers in the Presbyterian Church (U.S.A.) from openly declaring their sexual preference.


Carver Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Pro-Israel Lobbyist Quits Over Audiotaped Boasts
The president of the leading pro-Israel lobby has resigned after being audiotaped in a telephone conversation in which he made exaggerated claims about negotiating with the Clinton campaign over Cabinet choices and making deals with former Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d.
The tapes of that conversation involving the lobbyist, David Steiner, president of the American-Israel Public Affairs Committee, were subsequently provided to The Washington Times, which reported the episode today.


Voters Deny 2d Term to Quayle Quarterly
When the Bush-Quayle ticket lost the election, Deborah Werksman and Jeffrey Yoder lost the publishing venture that brought them considerable international attention.
The founders of The Quayle Quarterly say they are happy campers.
After three years of running the 20-page newsletter devoted to the positions, gaffes, opinions and gaffes of "the man who could be the next President," Ms.
Werksman, 34 years old, and Mr.
Yoder, 37, confessed that they are glad that they won't have Dan Quayle to kick around anymore.


Remember, Moses Married a Midianite; Role of Conversion
To the Editor:
Re your Oct. 18 article, all sides agree that if a conversion to Judaism occurs before marriage, there is a Jewish marriage, not an intermarriage.
Children raised in a conversionary marriage are more likely to be raised as and identify as Jews.


Electronic Embroidery
THE pioneering namesake of mechanical sewing, I. M. Singer, once considered naming his machine after P. T. Barnum.
And with good reason.
A century ago, the sewing machine must have seemed as astonishing as a three-ring circus.
Competitions were even staged between trained seamstresses and the new contraptions as the world's oldest craft became a technological spectacle.
In recent years, another revolution has been taking place as electronics have entered the world of the bobbin.
There are sewing machines with electronic controls and hundreds of automatic stitch designs.
There are machines with touch screens and the ability to do monogramming.
Pfaff makes a sewing machine that allows the user to sketch a stitch and program it into the machine.


Dyersburg Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 3


Quaker Chemical reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Transportacion Maritima reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


West
ALASKA - BUSH
Alaska, where Mr.
Bush won handily, has not given its three electoral votes to the Democrats since 1964.
Mr.
Clinton's chances were hurt by his opposition to drilling in the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge, which Alaskans overwhelmingly favor.


A.T.&amp; T. Seeks to Buy McCaw Cellular Stake
A.T.&amp; T. is negotiating to buy a third of McCaw Cellular Communications Inc. for $3.8 billion, a move that would increase the growth of both the established cellular-telephone industry and the nascent personal-communication services technology.
Analysts hailed the potential connection -- which negotiators said was close to completion -- between the world's largest telecommunications company, with its famed Bell Laboratories research arm, and McCaw, of Kirkland, Wash., the nation's largest cellular carrier.


Auburn Awaits Inquiry
Auburn expects to receive a letter from the National Collegiate Athletic Association within two weeks detailing the investigation into alleged rule violations in the football program, Coach PAT DYE told the team. (AP)


Agnico-Eagle Mines reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Lindros Speaks His Mind


The Subject Is Politics, and the Voices Are as Diverse as the Country
Wherever Americans gathered yesterday, the subject was politics in general and Bill Clinton in particular.
The young and the old, suburbanites and ghetto residents, political junkies and even the avowedly apathetic paused to contemplate the election results and what a Clinton Administration might be like.


Northeast
CONNECTICUT - CLINTON
As in many other states, the anemic economy defeated President Bush in Connecticut.
Gov.
Bill Clinton was the first Democratic Presidential candidate to carry the state since 1968.


With Few Votes to Spare, Gejdenson Holds His Seat
For his five colleagues in Connecticut's Congressional delegation, Tuesday was a day of easy victory.
But for Sam Gejdenson, who has represented the eastern half of the state for 12 years, it was a painfully close call.
Mr.
Gejdenson won by less than 4,000 votes out of 242,659 cast, despite the name-recognition advantage he enjoyed over his challenger and the overwhelming victories of his fellow Democrats, Bill Clinton and Senator Christopher J. Dodd.
The final tally was 51 percent for Mr.
Gejdenson and 49 percent for his opponent, Edward W. Munster, a Republican state senator, who still refused to concede as of this afternoon.


RESULTS PLUS
BASEBALL  3-Hitter for Clemens
Roger Clemens allowed 3 hits and struck out 10 in 7 innings yesterday as a team of major leaguers played to scoreless tie with the Japan All-Stars in Osaka, Japan.
Extra innings are prohibited by rules of the tour.
Only one Japanese runner reached second base -- a pinch-runner who stole second after replacing a hit batsman -- against the Boston star.
Philadelphia catcher Darren Daulton threw out three runners trying to steal second. (AP) TENNIS


Domestic Vehicle Sales Up 9.7% in Late October
A surge in the sales of light trucks pushed overall sales of domestically built vehicles up 9.7 percent in late October, the nation's auto makers reported yesterday.
Analysts were not able to pinpoint any reasons for the surge, except that the popularity of mini-vans, sport-utility vehicles and light trucks as personal transportation continued to grow unabated.


St. Joe Paper reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


17 Hurt Fighting Fire In TriBeCa Building
Seventeen firefighters were injured, none of them seriously, battling a relentless fire in a vacant building near the Holland Tunnel in Manhattan that continued to burn out of control early this morning, more than seven hours after it began, the fire department said.
The cause of the five-alarm fire, which engulfed all six floors at 36 Ericsson Place, in TriBeCa, was not immediately known, fire officials said.
A department spokesman, Firefighter James Spollen, said that the abandoned building might have been a paper factory.


INSIDE
Cellular Bid by A.T.&amp; T.
A.T.&amp; T. is negotiating to buy a third of McCaw Cellular Communications Inc., the giant cellular phone operator, for $3.8 billion.
Page D1.
U.S.
Plans Trade Sanctions
The United States is expected to announce punitive taxes on European imports today, following a breakdown of trans-Atlantic talks.
Page D1.


Moore Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


BRIEFS
Debt  *
Illinois Health Facilities Authority is tentatively offering $61.5 million of revenue refunding bonds for Mercy Hospital and Medical Center, yielding a maximum of about 7.18 percent for an issue due in 2015 through Bear, Stearns.
Serial bonds are priced to yield from 4.4 percent in 1994 to 6.6 percent in 2002, with another long maturity due in 2007 priced to yield 7.1 percent.
The financing is rated A by Moody's and A- by S.&amp; P. *
Palm Beach County, Fla., is tentatively offering $60 million of Solid Waste Authority refunding and improvement revenue bonds with a maximum yield of 6.3 percent for a bond due in 2008 through Smith Barney, Harris Upham.
The remaining serial bonds are priced to yield from 4 percent in 1995 to 6.2 percent in 2007.
Insured by Municipal Bond Investors Assurance, the bonds are rated triple-A by Moody's and S.&amp; P. Common Stock


Brascan Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Bonn Journal; Berliners Await the Return of a Capital. And Wait.
The German Government is supposed to move to Berlin by 1998.
To get ready, the national Parliament moved last week into a new $171 million building in Bonn with glass walls.
Earlier in the week, the Government signed a contract to rent 180,000 square feet of office space in four new buildings in Bonn in 1994, for all the legislators and Government workers who will soon move to Berlin.


GWC Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Freddie Moore Dies; Jazz Drummer Was 92
Freddie Moore, a jazz drummer whose career spanned seven decades, died on Tuesday at his home in the Bronx.
He was 92 years old
Mr.
Moore, whose career began when he was a teen-ager in traveling minstrel shows, performed with such jazz men as Sidney Bechet, King Oliver, Art Hodes, Eubie Blake, Bob Wilber and Roy Eldridge.


Unifirst Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 29


Parting of the Ways
The occasionally stormy but undeniably nonpareil professional partnership between MARTINA NAVRATILOVA and PAM SHRIVER, the most dominant doubles team in the history of women's tennis, is about to end.


Washington Isn't Fall Guy in Jets' Void
Everyone knew that the Jets' defensive line would suffer when defensive end Jeff Lageman went out for the year with a knee injury after the second game of the season.
Then, when defensive end Dennis Byrd went out two weeks later with a dislocated shoulder, everyone thought it would crumble.
It didn't.


Review/Circus; From Far and Wide, Agile Animals and Clowns
Among the pleasures of autumn in New York are the intimate joys and welcome wows to be found under the big blue-yellow-and-red tent pitched most appropriately by the Big Apple Circus in the cultural cornucopia that is Lincoln Center.
Fifteen years after the founding of the Big Apple by its artistic director, Paul Binder, this year's show seems speedier and more colorful than ever.
Zipping along with what seem like only the briefest of pauses for saying, "Amazing!" or "Wasn't that terrific?" or for laughing at the antics of the hard-working clowns, the 1992-93 Big Apple Circus uses its special charm to make a big world appear small.


Blackman Is 'Available' for the Opener
After practicing for three consecutive days, Rolando Blackman declared himself ready for the Knicks' season opener in Atlanta against the Hawks.
That does not mean Blackman will start or play significant minutes on Friday.
Coach Pat Riley, at least for now, appears committed to a starting lineup of Charles Oakley, Tony Campbell, Patrick Ewing, John Starks and Doc Rivers.
But all of the Knicks, especially Blackman, are elated that his back spasms have subsided.
Blackman, who missed all eight preseason games, hopes to work his way into the regular rotation gradually.


In Russia, the Coup Against Yeltsin Has Begun
To the Editor;
I disagree with the conclusions Leslie H. Gelb reaches in "Russia's Rumblings" (column, Oct. 25).
A change in Russian Government policies can help relations with the West.
Western aid would help Russia, but it may never get there in time to be of significant benefit.


U.N. Team Says Iraq May Be Hiding Scud Missiles
The head of the United Nations commission in charge of eliminating Iraq's weapons of mass destruction said today that he could not yet say with authority whether Iraq was hiding Scud missiles.
Under terms of the cease-fire in the Persian Gulf war, the easing of the United Nations ban on Iraq's oil exports depends on Baghdad's destruction of its war machine, and the commission chairman, Rolf Ekeus, said he was not ready to certify that this had been accomplished.


Harmon Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Radio Switch for Jets, Giants
The Giants and the Jets will be on different wave lengths next season.
WOR-AM and the Giants agreed in principle yesterday to a five-year contract that begins in 1993.
Giants games have been carried on radio by WNEW-AM for 32 years.
That station is being sold to Bloomberg Business Radio, which plans to change to a business-news format.
Financial terms were not disclosed, but a source involved in the broadcasts said WOR (710) had agreed to pay $2.6 million to $2.8 million a year for the broadcast rights.


U.S. INVESTIGATES AIDS RESEARCHER
A leading AIDS researcher is under investigation by Federal officials after allegations that he may have overstated the therapeutic effects of an experimental vaccine against the deadly disease.
The investigator is Dr.
Robert Redfield of the Walter Reed Army Institute of Research.
Central to the inquiry are statements made by Dr.
Redfield earlier this year that use of the vaccine, a protein known as gp-160, might reduce blood levels of H.I.V., the virus that causes AIDS, in those already infected, said Major Rick Thomas, a spokesman for the Defense Department which is conducting the investigation.


Herley Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 2


Partisan Or Not: Hearty Partying
WHETHER sharing cartons of takeout food, potluck dishes or chilled Champagne, the thousands of voters who gathered Tuesday evening to watch the voting results made clear that this Election Night was not one to spend alone at home.
People of all ages and races -- from Summit, N.J., to Santa Monica, Calif. -- offered many reasons for the unusual excitement this year.
Some said fear and uncertainty about the future had led them to a new political awakening.
Several said they wanted to introduce their children to the political process and the thrill of history in the making, especially in the highly unusual three-way Presidential race.
Still others said they had been galvanized by a single issue like abortion rights.


Anaren Microwave Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 26


Foreigners Hope Clinton Keeps Policy
After sitting through an American election campaign that largely ignored international affairs, many world leaders expressed hope today that a Clinton Administration will not veer far from President Bush's foreign policies.
Much like the Americans who voted for President-elect Clinton, however, many foreign governments are looking to the new Administration to revive the stagnating domestic economy in the belief that only a United States recovery can lift the global economy out of recession.


Kansas City Life Insurance reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


A House That Is Built Or Dismantled, Easily
People who are all thumbs, can't hammer a nail into a board and don't have a lot of money but who still yearn to own a home: take note.
Walter Kroner, a professor of architecture at Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute in Troy, N.Y., and seven students, none with construction skills, are building a 1,400-square-foot house from scratch, using only a screwdriver, a hammer and a wrench.
The wood post-and-beam house is a prototype of a do-it-yourself house that Mr.
Kroner conceived 20 years ago.


Editors' Note
An article on Oct. 23 reported the waning of environmentalist resistance to disposable diapers.
An adjoining chart illustrated environmental costs of cloth diapers versus disposable ones; in four categories out of six, disposable diapers were depicted as kinder to the environment.
The chart, based on data attributed to Arthur D. Little Inc., originally appeared in July 1990 on the Consumer's World page, which specified that Little's study was sponsored by Procter &amp; Gamble, a leading producer of disposable diapers.


Vandals Suspected of Setting Fires at Church in the Bronx
Vandals, possibly irate drug dealers, are suspected of smashing religious statues and setting several fires inside a Bronx church yesterday, hours before a community youth group was to meet there to plan a prayer vigil and march against a suspected neighborhood crack house.
The group, which had rallied several hundred people last month at a similar vigil that resulted in the shutting of another suspected crack house, said it intended to continue its demonstrations.


Tootsie Roll Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 26


Ten Reasons to Feel Good
Beyond all the political facts and figures -- what Adm.
James Stockdale derides as "all of the little stinky numbers" -- Tuesday's election evoked a whole web of feelings, reasons for satisfaction, and not just for Democrats.
The Lines.
All those people huddled under umbrellas outside Manhattan precincts gave a reliable clue to remarkable voter turnout everywhere.
About 104 million people voted, 55 percent of those eligible.
According to Curtis Gans, a voting scholar, that's the highest rate in 20 years.


Detrex Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Spartan Motors reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Bridge
Good players understand that when prospects look hopeless as declarer they should assume a favorable lie of the cards and play for a long shot.
But they do not always apply the same guideline in defense.
This was pointed out by Anders Brunzell, a frequent member of the Swedish international team, in an entry in the Bols Bridge Tips contest organized by the International Bridge Press Association.
Suppose that you have the West hand shown in the diagram.
South opens one no-trump, showing 15-17 points.
North raises to game, and you lead a club.
When the dummy shows up with 14 points, you know that the declarer and dummy combined have 29-31 points.
There is a strong temptation to go into hibernation, waiting for the next deal, but that is an error, as Brunzell points out.


Cairo Dish (Best Eaten on Street) Is a Big Hit
Perched behind a green wooden donkey cart, Hanafi Mohammed al-Gahsh nightly transforms a tiny patch of Cairo into a kingdom.
With his imagination, sidewalks become rolling shorelines and the gritty pot-holed street the sea.
With his hands he dishes out bowls of ful, a traditional bean dish.
And with his presence he fills his dozen tables, cascading out into the street, with the rich and the poor.


The Winners Shift Gears: What Now?
Standing in the cold, clear night before a backdrop of red, white and blue, the candidate had just given the speech campaign workers dream of, the one accepting election to the Presidency.
Bill Clinton's campaign manager, David Wilhelm, was walking away, threading his way through the kissing couples and the conga lines on the lawn of the Old State House.
Turning to the reporters trailing him, he smiled and quoted one of the great and famous questions of politics: " 'What do we do now?' " he said.
"Right?"


Century Telephone Enterprises reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Backer Spielvogel's Heir Apparent
After intense speculation, Backer Spielvogel Bates Worldwide made clear who is most likely to succeed Carl Spielvogel as chairman and chief executive.
The agency yesterday named Michael Bungey president and to the new post of chief operating officer, effective Jan. 1.
Mr.
Bungey, 52 years old, is currently chairman and chief executive of BSB Dorland and chairman of BSB Europe, based in London.
He will succeed William M. Backer, 66, as president.
Mr.
Backer was named vice chairman and retains the position of worldwide executive creative director.
Successors for both of Mr.
Bungey's positions will be named by the end of the year.


Sealed Air reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Wabash National reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Florio Warns Legislature On Veto Issue
A day after voters approved a constitutional amendment giving the Legislature veto power over executive rules and regulations, Gov.
Jim Florio warned today that the power could be abused if people do not demand full disclosure from their legislators.
"We need to make sure that when the Legislature does take action, that it really is the Legislature's initiative as opposed to some special-interest or lobbyist taking action," Mr.
Florio said during a wide-ranging post-election news conference.


Do Early Birds Catch a Pink Slip?
Bob Quinn struck early last year and see where it got him -- unemployed.
Quinn, general manager of the Cincinnati Reds at the time, didn't wait for the annual winter meetings to make deals that he saw as critical in shoring up the weaknesses that wrecked the team's chances of successfully defending their 1990 World Series championship.


Victorious, D'Amato Reconsiders Vow Not to Run Again
Hours after winning a re-election victory, Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato retreated from a campaign promise yesterday: he said he might seek a fourth term.
Trying to neutralize anti-incumbent sentiment by joining the crusade for term limits, Mr.
D'Amato announced last month that his race against Attorney General Robert Abrams would be his final campaign for public office.
"This will be the last time I run for public office," he said on Oct. 17, after one of the debates with his Democratic challenger.


Associated Communications Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


All Is Never Quiet on Barkley Front
Outrageous words sometimes flow from Charles Barkley's mouth.
Does he think before he speaks?
Absolutely.
His mind is as aggressively active as his 252 pounds of power and speed.
He just doesn't think -- worry, actually -- about the impact of his statements, the consequences or the possibility that they will be misconstrued.


Books of The Times; The Politics of the Book of Job
The First Dissident The Book of Job in Today's Politics  By William Safire  Illustrated. 304 pages.
Random House. $23.


Goldfield Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Utilicorp United reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Liuski International reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Curbing Machines That Phone to Solicit
THE Terminator of telecommunications is the automated telephone dialer.
Coldly working its way through the phone directory, an autodialer can call as many as 1,500 telephone numbers a day, both listed and unlisted, with a recorded sales pitch.
Telling a machine to stop calling is useless.
Still, some people like it.
Kathryn R. Moser, co-owner with her husband, Ronald, of the Lucky Leprechaun chimney-sweeping business in Salem, Ore., uses two autodialers to call as many as 1,000 people a day.
She said she reaches as many as 10 potential customers a day who would not have heard about her service through more conventional advertising.
"People complain about a lot of things, including autodialers," Ms.
Moser said.
"But this is an honest living."


Data Show Economy Is Unimproved
The first three post-election economic reports did little today to challenge the presumption that President-elect Bill Clinton would inherit a lackluster economy.
The Federal Reserve said today that economic activity was increasing at a slow and uneven rate around the nation.
That less-than-stellar picture was reinforced by the Commerce Department's report that while factory orders had picked up in September, business backlogs fell.
And the United States Chamber of Commerce said business confidence fell sharply in October.


Trenton Expands Student Proficiency Testing
The State Board of Education approved a new set of guidelines today that would impose some of the nation's toughest monitoring and assessment standards on New Jersey public schools and their students.
The new rules, 33 in all, would take effect in July.


Loan America Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Police Abuse of Homeless Splits North Carolina City
Norman Ben Hannah could not make out who had thrown lukewarm oil on his face as he lay under a railroad trestle.
Later, he said he heard laughing and, through the greasy film that stung his eyes, he could see a police car pull away.
Mr.
Hannah, 20 years old, lived on the streets.
He had no job, no assets and, with a history of arrests, he had little credibility.
So going to the police to complain about a couple of officers dousing him with oil seemed pointless.


CHRONICLE
A poem titled "Autumn Leaves" that its author, ALLEN GINSBERG, plans to read during an appearance tonight announces that when Mr.
Ginsberg gets up in the morning, his routine goes like this:
Check bloodsugar, clean teeth exact
ly, brush, toothpick, mouthwash
oil my feet, put on white shirt white pants white sox
sit solitary by the sink
a moment before brushing my hair, happy not yet
to be a corpse.


Falconbridge reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


At Dawn of New Politics, Challenges for Both Parties
The Democrats came out of the political wilderness on Tuesday.
The Republicans entered it.
The Democrats set aside all the self-doubts, the years of feeling on the wrong side of history, the election nights when the proud party of Roosevelt, Truman and Kennedy seemed consigned to a painful irrelevance.


THE 1992 ELECTIONS: DISAPPOINTMENT -- ROAD TO DEFEAT Sifting Strategies: What Went Wrong, and Right; Bush: As the Loss Sinks In, Some Begin Pointing Fingers
It was beginning to sink in, very painfully, that he had been fired and now he was expected to go back to Washington and take all his stuff out of the Oval Office, the worn Yale baseball mitt, the drawers full of tennis balls, the family pictures, the black and white horseshoes, his black Swiss army knife with "President Bush" engraved in silver.
As George Bush got ready to leave Houston yesterday morning and fly back to the capital, he took a call from one of the few senior Administration officials who had remained loyal to the end.
Could he have been better served by the people in charge of his campaign? the official asked, in an account of the conversation.
Frustration and Anger
"Don't get me started on that," the President snapped, his voice raw with anger, frustration and blame.


Applied DNA Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Italy Poll Sees Rising Feeling Against Jews
Valeria Dicapua was 9 years old when they came to take her family away, and the moment molded her soul as a Jew in occupied Italy.
When an opinion survey published this week suggested that anti-Semitism was again on the rise here, she said, the memories began to seethe.


Kenya Sets Date for First Open Vote in 3 Decades
Nearly a year after opening up the political system under foreign and domestic pressure, President Daniel arap Moi has announced that this country's first multiparty elections in nearly three decades will be held on Dec. 7.
The decision on Tuesday comes amid concern about how fair the elections will be.


COMPANY NEWS
CARGILL INC., Minneapolis, has reached an agreement to acquire a fruit-juice processing operation in Frostproof, Fla., from Proctor &amp; Gamble Co.
Terms of the sale were not disclosed.
IVAX CORP., Miami, announced that its wholly owned subsidiary, Norton Healthcare Ltd., had completed the acquisition of certain assets of the British generic pharmaceutical operations of Medeva P.L.C. for $37 million.


THE 1992 ELECTIONS: PRESIDENT-ELECT -- ROAD TO VICTORY Sifting Strategies: What Went Wrong, and Right; Clinton: Forging Discipline, Vision and Luck Into Victory
The Hollywood stars were streaming into the Biltmore Hotel in downtown Los Angeles on the warm night of June 2 to see and be seen with Bill Clinton, who had just wrapped up the Democratic nomination for President.
The Clinton California primary victory party was the hottest ticket in town.
But upstairs in the Governor's suite, Mr.
Clinton was frustrated, his advisers depressed.
The Wednesday morning headlines would proclaim him the winner, but a fatally wounded one.
In a politically debilitating turn of events, polls showed Mr.
Clinton running a distant third behind the shiny, new independent candidacy of Ross Perot.
It looked as if the party might be over before it had properly begun.


Corrections
A Man in the News article in late editions yesterday about President-elect Bill Clinton misstated his age when he was defeated for re-election after his first term as Governor of Arkansas.
He was 34 years old, not 32.


Berry Petroleum reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


American Medical Response Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Dinkins's Former Aide Is Sentenced for Embezzlement
Arnold I. Biegen, the former finance chairman of Mayor David N. Dinkins's re-election campaign, received the same sentence yesterday from a state judge that he got last week in Federal court -- 35 months in Federal prison.
Acting Justice Daniel P. Fitzgerald of State Supreme Court ordered that Mr.
Biegen's state sentence on theft and embezzlement charges be served concurrently with the Federal sentence he received Oct. 29 for income-tax evasion.
Justice Fitzgerald also ordered that Mr.
Biegen serve his terms in a medium-security Federal prison for nonviolent criminals, beginning next Thursday.


Shifting Field of Battle, Incumbents Win Handily
It was supposed to be the year of the outsider, but all 10 incumbent members of the House of Representatives won re-election on Tuesday.
The reason, candidates and other analysts say, is that voters judged the candidates individually rather than sweeping them away in a wave of anger at Congress and President Bush.
"For a while it looked as if the election would be a referendum on Congress," said Representative Rob Andrews, who won a second term in a race against an aggressive Republican opponent who made incumbency virtually the sole issue.


Helmsley Appeal Denied
A Federal judge yesterday rejected Leona M. Helmsley's request to shorten the time it takes to become eligible for parole.
Judge Thomas P. Griesa of Federal District Court in Manhattan, who had sentenced Mrs.
Helmsley to four years in prison for her conviction for income tax evasion, denied her request to be eligible for parole before she completed one third of the four-year sentence she began on April 15.
Mrs.
Helmsley, who is serving her sentence in the Federal women's prison in Danbury, Conn., will be eligble for parole in August, after serving 16 months.
She was convicted in 1989 of evading $1.2 million in income taxes.


Great American Management &amp; Investment reports earnings for Year to July 31


Events: Talks on Styles, Structures and Rehabs
Village Style
Parish House, Grace Episcopal Church, 802 Broadway (11th Street); (212) 924-3895.
Scott Marshall, the executive director of the Greenwich Village Society for Historic Preservation, will give an illustrated lecture on Tuesday at 6 P.M. on Gothic Revival-style residential, commercial and church buildings in the Village.
Reservations required.
Fee is $10 (for members, $6).
American Furniture
Metropolitan Museum of Art, Fifth Avenue at 82d Street; (212) 879-5500.
A four-part lecture series on 18th-century American furniture, including the Baroque, Rococo and Federal styles, starts Tuesday and continues on Nov. 17, Nov. 24 and Dec. 1.
Talks are at 2:30 P.M.
Fee is $35; for a single talk, $10.
New York's Past
Museum of the City of New York, Fifth Avenue at 103d Street; (212) 534-1672.
What the archeological record discloses about life in New York City from the 17th century forward will be discussed on three Sundays at 2 P.M.
This Sunday, there will be one talk on European diversity and an emerging New York style in the 1600's and a second lecture about recent excavations and slave life at an 18th-century manor house.
Future topics will include women in the 19th century (Nov. 15) and garbage in 18th- and 19th-century lower Manhattan and Brooklyn (Nov. 22).
Open Wednesday through Saturday, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M. (Thursday until 8 P.M.); Sunday, 1 to 5 P.M.
Free with museum admission.
Suggested admission is $5 for adults; $3 for children, students and those 62 and older; $8 for families.
Like New
Friends Meeting House, 15 Rutherford Place (near Second Avenue and 15th Street); (212) 675-0560 or (718) 636-0788.
A workshop on restoring and rehabilitating buildings built before 1940 will be held Saturday from 8 A.M. to 6 P.M.
The program is sponsored by the Brownstone Revival Committee, the New York Landmarks Conservancy and Traditional Building magazine.
Reservations are required.
Fee, including lunch, $75.


Forum Group reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Thoratec Laboratories reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Shareholders Charge Teledyne With Fraud and Bribery
A shareholder lawsuit was filed today charging that Teledyne Inc., a prominent military contractor here, falsified test results on electronics equipment it sold to the military and that the company bribed officials in Egypt and Saudi Arabia to gain new aerospace business.
Congressional staff members and lawyers involved in the case said the Federal Bureau of Investigation, the House Energy and Commerce Committee and several Defense Department agencies were investigating the fraud and bribery charges, which were made public in an amended shareholder lawsuit filed today.


I.O.C. Postpones Golf Vote
After informal discussion during executive board meetings in Acapulco, Mexico, the International Olympic Committee yesterday put aside the question of adding golf as a medal sport until a meeting of the organization in Lausanne, Switzerland, next June.
Organizers for the Atlanta Games are pushing for the inclusion of golf in the 1996 Olympics, and Augusta National has agreed to be the site of the competition.
The idea must be approved by the I.O.C. to move forward.


Nets Set Sights On Signing Mahorn
With the acquisition of Rumeal Robinson, the Nets are trying to make one more move before Friday's opener against the 76ers: sign Rick Mahorn.
"We think we have a pretty good chance to sign him, but a deal is not a deal until it is done," said Willis Reed, the Nets' vice president in charge of basketball operations, late today in his office at the Meadowlands.


Critic's Notebook; New Spice To Season TV Oldies, Mildly
While gray hair obviously hasn't put a crimp in Bill Clinton's ambitions, the slightest sign of age or aging is enough to make some skittish broadcasters dive for the cancellation button.
These are the network executives propounding a single and hardly unassailable advertising rule: young audiences, good (they spend more); older audiences, not so good (they're more careful).
So Fox Broadcasting, waving its "Beverly Hills 90210" banner, traffics almost exclusively in youthful romps featuring pretty faces and taut muscles.
And so, edgy and envious, the competition watches carefully.
This season, NBC has gone further, aggressively ridding its schedule of three established series whose ratings skewed heavily to older viewers.
But then, significantly, each show was grabbed by another network.
CBS got "In the Heat of the Night," now on at 9 P.M. on Wednesdays, and "Golden Girls," now on at 8 P.M. on Fridays, minus Bea Arthur and with the new title of "Golden Palace." Tonight at 8, "Matlock," starring Andy Griffith, begins a periodic run on ABC as a special two-hour movie.


Hook-SupeRx reports earnings for Year to Aug 31


No Headline
The greatest gesture of good will any nation can make to me during this period is to continue full cooperation with our President, George Bush. -- PRESIDENT-ELECT CLINTON.  [ B1:5. ]


55% Voting Rate Reverses 30-Year Decline
Voter turnout rose substantially this year, reversing a three-decade decline, political scientists said yesterday.
Curtis Gans, director of the Committee for the Study of the American Electorate, said it appeared that 104 million Americans, representing 55 percent of the voting-age population, cast ballots in this year's Presidential election.


Reviews/Fashion; The 30's Inspire Lauren To Change His Style
RALPH LAUREN, fashion's leading traditionalist, has changed his style.
He hasn't gone crazy, of course -- just loosened things up, mixed pieces around.
He has gone back to the 1930's for inspiration.
The 1960's and 1970's, to which some designers here and abroad have returned, are much too close and too familiar for him.
By some design alchemy, he has avoided a costume-y look.
Nor do the clothes suggest a dip into ancient history.
Everything has a modern sensibility, including a chiffon dress ending in knotted silk fringe.
These dresses do not hang loosely on the body like the flapper's chemise of the 1920's.
They are in the calf-length typical of the 1930's and they cling to every curve.
The fringed piano shawl returns as a body wrap.


Rockwell International Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


SPI Pharmaceuticals Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


CAE Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Gay Areas Are Jubilant Over Clinton
After a bitter year in which homosexual issues figured in a Presidential election for the first time, men and women took to the streets Tuesday night in gay enclaves like San Francisco and West Hollywood, weeping, dancing and hugging to celebrate the victory of Gov.
Bill Clinton.
Gay and lesbian leaders described the election of Mr.
Clinton, an advocate of homosexual rights, as a historic moment in the history of gay politics.
As recently as a decade ago, strong advocacy of gay rights was considered political suicide for just about any candidate, let alone one for the Presidency.


Rangers' Defense Finally Shows Up
Late in the third period of last night's game at Madison Square Garden, Jay Wells of the Rangers checked Philadelphia's Garry Galley so fiercely that the Plexiglas rattled loose in the corner and tumbled to the ice.
Maybe it was a message to the Flyers, who thought they would be more successful against the Rangers if they played a checking-style game this time.
More likely, it was an answer to the criticism the Ranger defense has been hearing, loudly, the last week and a half.


EduSoft Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


As for All That Lore About Foolproof Predictors, '92 Made It Look Foolish
Like shamanism and advanced medicine, election lore and modern polling have been matching their predictive powers against each other for decades.
On Tuesday night, the competition ended.
It was a rout.
The infallible New Hampshire primary rule failed.
The prophetic Weekly Reader survey yielded an incorrect prophecy.
And the voters of Crook County, Ore., who had picked the winning Presidential candidate for the last 27 elections, this time chose the loser.


Money Market Fund Yields Are Higher in Latest Week
Yields on money market funds moved higher in the week that ended yesterday, according to the latest IBC/Donoghue's Money Fund Report survey of more than 864 tax-exempt and taxable market funds.
Tax-exempt yields are up for the second consecutive week.
But they are still below the levels of early October, when investors seeking tax-exempt paper drove yields lower by pouring money into the money market funds, normally the largest buyers of short-term tax-exempt paper.
In the last few weeks, however, there has been a slight runoff of cash from the funds and an increase in supply of tax-exempt paper that is outpacing demand and putting some upward pressure on yields.


After Voting Day, It's Moving Day


Long-Scarf Syndrome Still Claims Lives
To the Editor:
You report the death of a 47-year-old woman, dragged for 90 feet along a subway platform and onto the track when her pocketbook got caught in a train door (news article, Oct. 6).
Unfortunately, this type of bizarre death has occurred many times on New York City subway trains and buses, resulting in litigation for personal injuries and wrongful deaths.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Cassandra Wilson and the Martin Luther King Jr.
Fellowship Choir  Aaron Davis Hall Harlem
For the finale of its Sacred Spaces series on Saturday, the Caribbean Cultural Center brought together a jazz singer, Cassandra Wilson, and a Harlem gospel choir, the Martin Luther King Jr.
Fellowship Choir, directed by George Canton Jr.
The concert reached its peak when the choir joined Ms.
Wilson and her group, Redbone, to sing "Kumbaya" and "Oh Happy Day."


Hudson Foods reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 3


Morden &amp; Helwig reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Foreign Affairs; Who Gets What Jobs
While the world waits to hear who will be Bill Clinton's Secretary of State, the President-elect is thinking more about strategy than names.
His strategy will flow from two premises:


Calendar: Mums, Architects, Chairs
Mums Under Glass
New York Botanical Garden, 200th Street and Southern Boulevard, Bedford Park section of the Bronx; (212) 220-8777.
More than 3,000 chrysanthemum blooms including those in yellow, red, maroon and bronze will be on display in the Enid A. Haupt Conservatory from Saturday through Nov. 29.
The garden and the conservatory are open Tuesday through Sunday, 10 A.M. to 4 P.M.
Grounds admission is by contribution of $3 for adults or $2 for students, those 62 years old and older and children 6 to 16.
Conservatory admission is $3 and $2, respectively; no charge on Saturdays from 10 A.M. to noon.
One Architect's Influence
Urban Center Galleries of the Municipal Art Society, 457 Madison Avenue (51st Street); (212) 935-3960.
An exhibition of photographs of buildings, fabric and a book by the architect Stanford White starts on Tuesday and runs through Dec. 4.
Open Monday through Saturday, 11 A.M. to 5 P.M. (closed Thursday).
No charge.
There will be a walking tour of White buildings in lower Manhattan on Nov. 14, from 1 to 3 P.M.
Fee is $14.
Reservations are required.
Benefit Auction
Felissimo, 10 West 56th Street; (212) 427-1290.
An auction of 20 chairs designed by Clodagh, Dakota Jackson, Adam Tihany, Vicente Wolf and others will be held on Tuesday from 6 to 8 P.M.
Proceeds will benefit the Partnership for the Homeless.
Reservations are required.
Tickets are $100.
Inside Tour
Seventh Regiment Armory, 643 Park Avenue (66th Street); (212) 535-2526.
The Friends of the Upper East Side Historic Districts is sponsoring a tour on Nov. 14 of the Victorian-period rooms in the armory, including furnishings, decorative objects and regiment memorabilia.
Lisa Weilbacker, the armory curator, will lead the tour.
Reservations required; fee, $15.
Plant Family
Brooklyn Botanic Garden, 1000 Washington Avenue, off Eastern Parkway, Prospect Heights; (718) 622-4433.
The rose plant family will be highlighted in the garden's fall show, which starts on Saturday and runs through Nov. 29 in the Steinhardt Conservatory.
The rose family includes fruits like apples, peaches, raspberries and quince.
On Nov. 22, there will be a tour of the show at 1 P.M., then a lecture on apples at 2:30 P.M.
The conservatory is open Tuesday through Sunday, 10 A.M. to 4 P.M.
No charge.
The garden is sponsoring an overnight bus trip on Dec. 6 and 7 to historic houses in Philadelphia, all decorated for the holidays by garden clubs.
Participants will also visit Congress Hall and the Pennsylvania Academy of Fine Arts.
Fee is $275; for members, $250.
To register, call (718) 942-4044, ext. 243.
Pennsylvania Crafts
Park Avenue Christian Church, at 85th Street; (212) 249-3107.
A show and sale featuring quilts, hand-knotted rugs, toys and folk art by Amish and Mennonite artists will be held on Friday from 11 A.M. to 8 P.M. and on Saturday from 10 A.M. to 4 P.M.
Proceeds will benefit Heartsease Home, a foster care agency.
No charge for admission.
Appraisals
Old Merchant's House, 29 East Fourth Street, between Lafayette Street and the Bowery; (212) 777-1089.
People can bring their decorative and fine art objects -- except for jewelry -- to the house museum for an appraisal on Saturday from 10 A.M. to 3 P.M.
There will be a $5 fee per item.
Admission is $3, with no charge for children 16 and younger.


Ex-President Is of Two Minds About Bush's Loss
Ronald Reagan issued statements today congratulating Gov.
Bill Clinton on his Presidential election victory and praising President Bush for "distinguished service to the country."
But privately, according to close associates, the former President and his wife, Nancy, were described as upset, even angry, over how his former Vice President led his failed Presidential re-election campaign.


Midwest
ILLINOIS - CLINTON
In its votes for national offices, the Land of Lincoln repudiated the party of Lincoln.
It gave its 22 electoral votes to Mr.
Clinton and elected Carol Moseley Braun, who will be the first black woman in the United States Senate.


In Russia, the Coup Against Yeltsin Has Begun; Peasants vs. Power
To the Editor:
Re "Free-Market Ideas Grow on Russian Farms" (front page, Oct. 6):


Corrections
An article in The Home Section yesterday, about new Federal Communications Commission rules for automated dialing systems, misidentified the party planning to file a lawsuit challenging the rules.
It is the National Association of Telecomputer Operators, not Raymond Kolker, the founder of Kolker Systems Inc. in Carlsbad, Calif., which makes autodialing systems.


Tesoro Petroleum reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


DS Bancor reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Reviews/ Art; Brashly Modern Vision in an Ancient Chinese Landscape
The Metropolitan Museum of Art calls the great Chinese painter Tung Chi-chang (1555-1636) "the Picasso of the Ming Dynasty." The comparison may not leap immediately to mind when seeing the monochrome ink landscapes and calligraphy in "The Century of Tung Chi-chang," but in many ways it is apt.
Like Picasso, Tung was an artist of protean energies and a synthesizing disposition, and a figure as often reviled as revered.
He had a profound respect for the art of the past; at the same time he had a magpie's eye for its most daring and scintillating pictorial effects, many of which he unhesitatingly adapted to his own bold vision.
Through his example, he changed the course of Chinese landscape painting, establishing a highly personal interpretive approach to the genre and shifting it away from representation toward abstraction.


In a Shift, Amy Fisher Asks to Go To Prison
Less than a week after she pleaded for the chance to spend Thanksgiving with her parents, Amy Fisher appeared in Nassau County Court today and asked to be sent to prison.
She was immediately remanded to the Nassau County Jail.
Miss Fisher, who was to have been sentenced next month for the shooting of Mary Jo Buttafuoco, also asked that her sentencing be moved up.


Vitamin Array Is Found to Aid Elderly
People 65 years and older who took modest daily amounts of a broad array of vitamins, minerals and other supplements had markedly fewer infections and stronger immune defenses than those who did not receive them, a new Canadian study says.
The study, involving 96 healthy men and women who lived on their own, examined the role of 18 vitamins, minerals and other supplements that were suspected of influencing the immune system.


Performing Arts Bazaar
Rare Beatles memorabilia, hard-to-find classical recordings and vintage theater Playbills are among the items that will be on sale at the 20th Performing Arts Bazaar on Sunday.
It will run from 10:30 A.M. to 4 P.M. at the New York Public Library for the Performing Arts, 40 Lincoln Center Plaza, at 65th Street and Amsterdam Avenue.
Offered for sale will be duplicates from the library's holdings, as well as donated items.
Prices start at 25 cents and the proceeds will benefit the library.
Admission: $3.
Information: (212) 870-1630.


BUSINESS DIGEST
International
The Bush Administration announced a 200 percent import tax on all still white wine from the European Community, retaliating for what it says are barriers to American farm exports.
The tax, which takes effect in 30 days, could triple retail prices.
But the impact is not likely to be felt until next year, because importers of wine, Cognac and other distilled spirits have been stocking their warehouses, anticipating a trade war.  [ Page A1. ] The Economy
A Federal appeals court dealt a major blow to Hollywood, rejecting a rule that restricted the major television networks from owning and selling the rerun rights to their prime time programs.
The decision could allow the networks to sell their reruns to local and cable stations without any restrictions.  [ A1. ]


Leader Defeated, Irish Government Collapses
The coalition that has governed Ireland since 1989 collapsed today after Prime Minister Albert Reynolds lost a vote of confidence in Parliament.
After he lost the vote, Mr.
Reynolds had the Presidential Commission dissolve the 166-member Parliament and set elections for Nov. 25.
A referendum on the hotly disputed issue of whether to ease a constitutional ban on abortion was set for the same day.


A Hurricane's Long-Lasting Impact
Two and a half months after Hurricane Andrew swept through South Florida, officials say the daily lives of virtually all of Dade County's two million residents have been altered in fundamental ways.
And while the cleanup is progressing, county and other officials predict it will be three to five years before residents begin to feel that their lives have returned to normal.


BUSINESS DIGEST
METRO DIGEST  NEW YORK CITY  TIMES TO BUILD PLANT IN QUEENS
The New York Times, which had considered moving all of its printing operations out of New York City, has decided instead to build a $280 million printing plant on city-owned land in College Point, Queens, company executives said.
The city and state will grant tax incentives, low-cost energy and other benefits worth a total of $29 million over the course of a 35-year lease.
B3.
GERALDINE FERRARO'S BATTLE
It was the morning after the morning after Senator D'Amato's victory over Robert Abrams, and seven weeks after her own loss in a Democratic primary that she says will be her last campaign.
But Geraldine A. Ferraro was still refighting the bittersweet Senate race that continues to consume her and seems destined to haunt her days.
B3.
PLEADING NEW YORK'S CASE
Now that he has "a friend in the White House," Mayor Dinkins is wasting no time trying to capitalize on that friendship, writing President-elect Clinton to promote some of the city's programs as national models and urging him to spend billions more on urban centers.
B2.
POLICE COMMISSIONER SEEKS ADVICE
Police Commissioner Raymond W. Kelly invited a group of black ministers to review the Police Department's training and testing procedures and make recommendations to help increase minority recruiting.
B3.
REGION  HUNTING DOWN NONRESIDENTS
Faced with a surge of students fleeing the New York City school system, the Sewanhaka Central High School District on Long Island is one of many financially troubled suburban school systems that have embraced spying to identify children who are not residents.
A1.
IN HARTFORD, MORE OF THE SAME
Connecticut's House and Senate are still firmly in Democratic control after Tuesday's elections, and all the signs suggest it will continue a tradition of grousing about Governor Weicker and his independent party.
B4.
QUESTIONS ABOUT CONSENT
In a new round of cross-examination of a psychologist in the Glen Ridge, N.J., sexual-assault case, a defense lawyer argued that the mildly retarded young woman at the heart of the case was able to consent to sex.
To support his argument, he cited a state psychiatric report on the young woman and her testimony before a grand jury.
B4.
SUSPECT IN RACIAL-ASSAULT CASE TESTIFIES
One of five white men charged in the near-fatal beating of a black high school football star appeared in court as a surprise witness against the man accused of leading the assault.
The victim, Alfred Jermaine Ewell, was attacked 18 months ago on an Atlantic Beach, L.I., boardwalk after he socialized with a white teen-age girl.
B4.
CHILD TELLS OF AN ABDUCTION
A 3-year-old girl has told the police that she and her mother were abducted Tuesday evening when a man forced his way into their minivan in Piscataway, N.J.
The girl was dropped off in front of a day-care center and the van was found later.
As the police searched for the mother near New Brunswick, they found the body of another woman.
B4.
Our Towns by Andrew H. Malcolm B5  Chronicle B5


MAF Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Weston (Roy) F. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Suspicious Blaze in Lower Manhattan Warehouse Injures 17 Firefighters


U.S. Drops Case Against Guide for 16 Jailed Tourists
The Federal Government today dropped all charges against a Malaysian tour guide accused of smuggling illegal aliens into the United States, ending a painful and puzzling ordeal for members of a tour group who had been held in jail here for more than two weeks as material witnesses.
The surprise decision to dismiss the charges against the tour leader and release the 16 Malaysian tourists who remained incarcerated out of an original group of 24 was made by A. John Pappalardo, the United States Attorney here.
Mr.
Pappalardo acted after the Government had come under increasing criticism from the Federal magistrate hearing the case as well as defense lawyers, human rights campaigners and Malaysian diplomats.


National Penn Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Officer Shoots Teen-Ager
A police officer shot a 16-year-old youth in the knee last night after the youth pointed a revolver at several officers who were chasing him down a Brooklyn street, the police said.
The youth, identified as Hasshim Andrews, was shot once at 8:18 P.M. in front of his residence, at 1198 Pacific Street in Prospect Heights, said a police spokeswoman, Sgt.
Tina Mohrmann.
Mr.
Andrews was in stable condition early this morning at Kings County Hospital.
Sergeant Mohrmann said the officers had spotted Mr.
Andrews with a gun and began pursuing him when he turned toward them, gun in hand.
The police said they recovered a .32-caliber handgun.


Ford Motor Credit Prices Certificates
The Ford Motor Credit Company priced $1 billion of asset-backed certificates through underwriters led by Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company.
Issued through a Ford Credit Auto Loan Master Trust 1992-3, the senior asset-backed certificates have a 5.625 percent coupon and are priced at 99.88 to yield 5.672 percent, or 67 basis points more than the when-issued three-year Treasury note.
A basis point is a hundredth of a percentage point.


Sybase Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Reviews/Film; A Serial Killer, a Blind Girl and a Footloose Detective
Andy Garcia has a profile to recall Barrymore's, which is as good a reason as any to watch "Jennifer 8," in which he steps up to a starring role.
As Detective John Berlin, Mr.
Garcia smolders his way through this story of a serial killer, a beautiful blind witness (Uma Thurman) and a footloose detective trying to make his way in a new town.
Professionalism is not necessarily John Berlin's strongest suit.
"I'll tell you what," he says to Helena, the blind girl.
"If I promise to stop being a cop, will you promise to stop being a witness?"
Most detective thrillers keep an eye toward the extracurricular, but in "Jennifer 8" this tendency goes unusually far.
The writer and director Bruce Robinson, who also directed "How to Get Ahead in Advertising" and "Withnail and I," seems strongly drawn to his supporting characters and their colorful lives.
Sometimes this can go too far: the fact that Berlin's boss (Kevin Conway) sports a scraggly beard and likes to paint by numbers probably reveals more about him than any audience wants to know.
Still, Mr.
Robinson has created a lively array of small-town figures in northern California, and given them stories that stretch beyond the limits of a suspense plot.


Reviews/Fashion; On Opposite Sides Of the Cutting Edge
Anna Sui and Adrienne Vittadini provided a study in contrasts on Wednesday.
And what contrasts!
Women who are designers like to say their strengths lie in knowing what women want to wear.
These two designing women obviously have very different groups of friends.
The Sui woman is young and adventurous, willing to try anything new, no matter how daring.
The Vittadini customer wants to be in fashion but not on the cutting edge.


Canadian Tire reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 26


Court Says USX Tried To Avoid Paying Benefits
A Federal judge in Salt Lake City has ruled that the USX Corporation, operator of the nation's largest steel company, idled a mill in Utah five years ago in an attempt to avoid paying millions of dollars in pension benefits to 1,900 steelworkers.
The attorney for the steelworkers at a USX plant in Provo, Utah, said that as a result of the judge's decision the workers stood to collect more than $100 million in salaries and pensions.
But USX, based in Pittsburgh, said the damages were more likely to be $5 million to $10 million.


On Trade Ties to Hanoi, Japanese Jump the Gun
Jumping ahead of American policy in Asia, the Japanese Government announced today that it was resuming broad economic ties with Vietnam, including the offer of a major loan package, senior Japanese officials said.
The move comes in response to heavy pressure from Japanese business groups, which have urged the governing Liberal Democratic Party to pave the way for a variety of long-planned investments in Vietnam by Japanese companies.
Tokyo is expected to announce a $375 million package on Friday, and that may be followed by loans from its Export-Import Bank.


Topics of The Times; Senator Defendant
Howard Babbush is too ill to stand trial on charges relating to a jobs scandal but not too ill to run and win.
His re-election Tuesday to the New York State Senate certainly made the system look sick.
Having knocked his Democratic challenger off the September primary ballot through legal nitpicking, the Brooklyn lawmaker coasted unopposed to a ninth two-year term.
Mr.
Babbush was one of three lawmakers indicted in 1987 for abusing the legislative payroll.
The charges against his colleagues were dropped after the Court of Appeals declared the hiring of campaign workers to be highly offensive though not illegal.
But the charges against Mr.
Babbush stuck because of evidence that the person he hired was a pure no-show -- a former girlfriend who performed neither legislative nor campaign duties.


Critic's Notebook; Choice Snippets Sell Big Films
"NO one can see what Jennifer saw," intones an announcer, as Uma Thurman glides across the screen.
"No one can imagine what Jennifer felt." Now it just so happens that Ms.
Thurman plays Helena, not Jennifer, in "Jennifer 8," the thriller whose trailer we are discussing.
And Jennifer's thoughts and feelings are rather beside the point, since Jennifer is a never-seen character who is dead.
Furthermore, this trailer's two-minute intimation of a steamy, suspenseful crime drama is a lot more feverish than the actual two-hour-and-seven-minute "Jennifer 8" (review on C6) happens to be.
Never mind: when it comes to trailers (movie parlance for coming attractions), accuracy is not the issue.
Salesmanship is, and the onset of the Christmas movie season finds the hard sell in full flower.
Fierce seasonal competition forces trailer makers to cram as many big moments as possible into very brief promotional vehicles, all of them competing for an audience that is bound to be suspicious after such an uninspired movie year.
Outrageous claims, misleading images, false promises, seductive little lies -- did anyone think these things were now behind us?
Election Day may be over, but the Christmas blitz has only just begun.


Kemper Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Genetic Therapy reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Banister Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


UST Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


A Silent Start For N.B.A.'s Injured Stars
Kevin Johnson of Phoenix, Moses Malone of Milwaukee, Manute Bol of Philadelphia and Sarunas Marciulionis of Golden State will be among the wounded and the missing this weekend when the National Basketball Association season opens.
The Suns yesterday placed Johnson, their point guard and a two-time all-star, on the injured list along with forward Jerrod Mustaf.
Both must be sidelined at least 10 days; both will miss tomorrow's opener against the Los Angeles Clippers.


International Technology reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Nicholas J. Miranda; Newspaper Executive, 84
Nicholas J. Miranda, a former Long Island newspaper executive and columnist, and a founder of the Queens Baseball Alliance, died on Tuesday at his home in Millbrook, N.Y.
He was 84 years old.
Mr. Miranda died of heart failure, said his son, Richard.


The Art Market; Auction Houses Await The Upturn
IT has been a tense few months at Christie's and Sotheby's.
With the art market struggling to inch its way out of a two-year recession, putting together the fall sales of Impressionist, modern and contemporary art hasn't been easy.
Many sellers are still holding back, hoping that the market will show signs of a recovery, so it is estate property that the auction houses count on most.
Until just weeks ago, when the catalogues had to go to press, the two companies were vying for what little hot property was available.
While the pickings seem slim, the quality is not.
Indeed, the 1,260 works up for sale in the next two weeks include some of the strongest paintings, drawings and sculptures to come on the market since 1990.
The works go on public view this weekend at Sotheby's and Christie's in Manhattan, beginning tomorrow at 10 A.M.


Charged in L.I. Beating Case, Man Testifies Against Defendant
One of five white men charged in the near-fatal beating of a black high school football star appeared in court today as a surprise witness against the man accused of leading the assault.
The victim, Alfred Jermaine Ewell, was attacked on a hot summer night 18 months ago on an Atlantic Beach boardwalk after he socialized with a white girl at an end-of-school beer party.
The police characterized the attack as bias-related.


Koll Management Services reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


First Mortgage Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


3,000 Quit Bar Group Over Abortion Policy
Since August, when the American Bar Association's House of Delegates voted to oppose laws that restrict a woman's right to abortion, more than 3,000 lawyers have canceled their memberships in protest, officials said today.
The figure is more than double the number of people who resigned the last time the issue was taken up by the association, the nation's largest lawyers' group.


Review/Film; Like a Roller Coaster, All Inside an Airplane
Watching "Passenger 57," a film that wants to establish Wesley Snipes as the coolest action hero this side of Steven Seagal, is like taking a ride on a sleekly designed roller coaster.
There are lots of oohs and ahs in this nasty shoot-'em-up story of a psychopathic terrorist who hijacks a jumbo jet.
But beneath the thrill-by-numbers surface of the film, nothing makes much sense.
Mr.
Snipes plays John Cutter, an airline security expert with martial-arts training who happens to take the same flight as Charles Rane (Bruce Payne), an English terrorist and mass murderer being taken to Los Angeles in handcuffs by the F.B.I.
Somehow or other, a whole gang of Rane's evil accomplices, including a bogus flight attendant, has managed to board the plane.
It is up to Mr.
Snipes, who is in the lavatory when the hijackers take over the flight, to save the day.


Paul W. Walter, 85, Aide to Taft And Leader in Efforts for Peace
Paul W. Walter, a lawyer who led international peace efforts and was an adviser to former Senator Robert A. Taft of Ohio, died Wednesday at his home in Bratenahl, Ohio, near Cleveland.
He was 85 years old.
He died of heart failure and cancer, his family said.


Eastern Conference
ATLANTIC DIVISION


In Suburbs, a Stealthy War Against Infiltrating Students
With the stealth and precision of agents on a drug raid, private detectives and security guards fanned out through Elmont, L.I., in unmarked cars one recent morning.
Their quarry was not crack dealers or violent thugs.
It was teen-agers from Queens who had crossed the border into Nassau County in search of a better education.


Learning Not to Look A Mount in the Eye
She describes herself as "the Donald Trump of the horse show world," buying and selling horses like so many pieces of real estate, pocketing a profit and never shedding a tear as she watches her property being trucked away.
She even went bankrupt once, if only emotionally.
Debbie Shaffner's heart was broken when Abdullah, the jumper she developed but couldn't afford to own, was assigned to a more accomplished rider for the 1984 Los Angeles Olympics.
When Conrad Homfeld and Abdullah won a gold medal, Shaffner, unable to break her attachment to the horse, watched and wept from the sideline.


Art in Review
Michelle Stuart  Fawbush Gallery 76 Grand Street SoHo Through Nov. 14
All the work in Michelle Stuart's lovely show dates from the 1970's, and like some of the most memorable art of that decade it is concerned with the theme of time passing and nature changing.


General Re Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Review/Photography; Paradox of Freezing the Essence of Movement
At first blush, photography might appear singularly unsuited to the challenge of capturing the dynamic thrust and flow of dance.
And for many years, photographers, hampered by slow films and lenses, were limited to recording dancers in essentially static poses.
When Edward Steichen photographed Isadora Duncan framed by the columns of the Parthenon in 1921, the image served to evoke a mood rather than record a performance.
In recent decades, though, photographers have been able to capture the gestures and movements of dance with ever greater exactitude.
But photographs still record only moments from an event that unfolds over time, and the art of dance photography remains primarily an evocative one.


Setting the Table for the Arkansas Travelers
Even before the election, it was happening.
Bookstores displaying the novels of Bill Clinton's favorite mystery author, Walter Mosley, in their windows.
Music stores selling out of saxophone lapel pins.
Joggers in Clinton-Gore T-shirts sweating their way down K Street.
By Wednesday, "Arkansas stew" was on the menu, and selling out, among power lunchers at Mo Sussman's.
Faster than you can riffle through a Rolodex, the world of Washington is realigning itself.
But to what?
Watermelons and drop-those-final-g's Ozark chic?
Jesuitical, community-minded Georgetown University chic?
Languid, intellectual Oxford chic?
Or brown-bag-lunching, policy-parsing, Federal Register-toting geek chic?


Foreign Policy Test
To the Editor:
On Oct. 18, you reported Moscow continues to proliferate nuclear and missile technology to China.
On Oct. 25, President Bush signed into law $500 million in aid to the former Soviet states, to foster democracy.


Grateful Blue Jays Give Gaston New Pact
The world champion Toronto Blue Jays went to relatively great lengths yesterday to express their appreciation for the job turned in by Manager CITO GASTON.
They did so by signing Gaston to a three-year contract.
The club said that the pact is for two years plus an option year, making Gaston the first Blue Jays manager ever given a contract exceeding one season.


BankWorcester Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


INSIDE
End of Cipollone Smoking Suit
A major suit against the tobacco industry was dropped; some lawyers said it was because the case was too expensive to continue.
Page B1.
Exodus From Haiti Resumes
The number of Haitians trying to reach the U.S. in boats has risen again, perhaps because of a pending change in the White House.
Page A3.
Rise in Subway Ridership
After declining for 32 months, subway ridership in New York has increased for three months -- possibly an early sign of an economic upturn.
Page B1.
Big Changes for Macy
R.
H.
Macy brought out an ambitious plan to get out of bankruptcy by profoundly changing the way it conducts its business.
Page D1.
Fischer Wins Chess Series
Twenty years after beating Boris Spassky, Bobby Fischer has done it again, 10 games to 5.
Page C27.
Open Season on the Bulls
Who can dethrone the Chicago Bulls?
Answers start tonight as the N.B.A.'s 47th season gets under way.
Page B9.


EASTERN COLLEGE REPORT
Lafayette
The Leopards' aims are clear in their game at home tomorrow against Holy Cross, which will very likely decide the Patriot League championship.
They will either give the ball to Erik Marsh, the tailback whose fine season reached a peak last Saturday when he gained 225 yards rushing against Colgate, or try play-action faking and have Tom Kirchhoff throw deep to Eric Perry.


Vishay Intertechnology reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Why Perot Thrived in Fertile Kansas
One of the original Kansas populists, an orator named Mary Elizabeth Lease, reportedly urged farmers in the 1890's to "raise less corn and more hell." That's exactly what Kansans did on Election Day, when they turned out in record numbers and gave Ross Perot 27 percent of their vote, one of the highest percentages for him in any state.
While not the only factor contributing to Mr.
Perot's success here, the Kansas tradition of prairie populism clearly made the state a fertile field for the seeds that he broadcast.
At least partly because of Mr.
Perot's influence, President Bush won the state by only 5 percentage points over Gov.
Bill Clinton, less than half of the 13-point margin of victory enjoyed here by Republicans in the last two Presidential elections.


Digital to Form Separate Units
Robert B. Palmer, the president and chief executive of the Digital Equipment Corporation, said today that the company was being restructured into 8 to 10 "customer focused" business units.
Managers of the units would have "complete responsibility for business strategy, investments, revenue generation and profit and loss statements," he said.
Digital reported a loss of $2.8 billion for its last fiscal year.


Judge Rules Against Visa In Sears Suit
Sears, Roebuck &amp; Company won a battle yesterday in its efforts to expand its credit card business by issuing Visa cards, when a Federal court jury in Salt Lake City ruled that Visa U.S.A. was violating antitrust laws by excluding Sears.
The lawsuit charging antitrust violations was filed by Dean Witter Financial Services, a unit of Sears that issues the Discover Card but wants to issue Visa cards as well.


Algoma Central reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Books of The Times; Trying to Separate Fact From Myth About Jesus
Jesus A Life By A. N. Wilson 269 pages. W. W. Norton &amp; Company. $22.95.


Demers Wakes Up Team of His Dreams
Jacques Demers keeps going home again.
This season, he is back in Montreal, the city of his youth, coaching the Canadiens, the team of his dreams.
This week, he was back in Detroit, his home for four years in the late 1980's, where he enjoyed the most success of his coaching career.
Charming in two languages and bubbling with enthusiasm, Demers showed his "boys" around this old border town, treating them to dinner at the suburban restaurant that still bears the name Jacques Demers.
They treated him to a 4-3 victory over the Red Wings on Wednesday night, Montreal's fifth consecutive victory and ninth consecutive game without defeat.


American International Group reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Corrections
A picture caption yesterday with a review of competing designs for a new Whitehall Ferry Terminal omitted illustration credits for the designs.
The large drawing was by Tom Schaller; the inset drawing was by Mike Womack.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-10  RAISING TAXES ON EUROPEAN WINES  The U.S. fired the first shot in what may become a trade war, announcing that in 30 days it will begin collecting a 200 percent import tax on all white wine from members of the European Community.
A1  TOUGH TIMES IN UKRAINE  Ukrainians find that the romance of nationhood is hard to sustain when the economy is in shambles.
And virtually no new economic policies have been put into effect after 14 months of independence.
A1


Weatherford International reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


The Making of a French Literary Legend
Danny Huston's "Becoming Colette" purports to be the story of how Sidonie-Gabrielle Colette, an innocent country lass with a fervid imagination, grew up to be the worldly-wise grande dame of French letters known simply as Colette.
The film, which opens today at the Sutton, is not quite a nonstop scream but, in its determinedly flatfooted way, it's as saucy a piece of movie baggage as has turned up in two or three decades.
It's almost as if Mr.
Huston, who was born in 1962, a son of the great John Huston, were re-inventing a movie genre that had all but disappeared by the time his voice changed.
"Becoming Colette" is one of those heavily filtered soft-core porn flicks that the French used to export to us in the 1950's and 60's, before the old Production Code was junked.


Dallas Journal; Is the Doctors' Anxiety Pathological?
The test takers are edgy; some chain-smoke and gulp coffee from large Styrofoam cups.
Others admit they have taken tranquilizers to ease the stress.
"Don't talk to me," snaps one woman on her lunch break. "I don't want to talk."


Encor Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Arrow Automotive Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 26


Gunmen Kill 8 People in Attacks in South Africa


Handy &amp; Harman reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


In Fatalistic Fashion, King Tells Jordan of Cancer
In his first report to the nation about his illness, a pessimistic-sounding King Hussein told Jordanians today that his cancerous left ureter and his kidney had been removed, and that he had to undergo further treatment in the United States.
In a speech heavily laced with Koranic verses and fatalistic expressions, the King noted that "the life of an enlightened people and a vibrant nation cannot be measured by the life of any individual."


Be Fabulous (but Make Money, Too)
SOME people look at Metro-North's cavernous, year-old Maintenance of Way Equipment Repair Shop here with its 19,000 square feet of space, its 600 feet of indoor railroad track, its rail saws, floor drains, diesel engines, oil stains and multi-ton industrial cranes and say, "Yup, this is definitely a railroad repair shop."
Then there's Melinda Bena.
She sees a simply wonderful setting for the Westchester Arts Council's 1992 Benefit Dinner-Dance.


United Postal Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


With Tight-End Variation Clicking, Jets Enjoy a Rushing Renaissance
In the last two weeks, the Jets' rushing attack has returned to the form that vaulted it to the top of the National Football League charts in the first six weeks of last season, when they cruised past opponents for an average of 164 yards a game.
They are not quite back to that level, but they did average 151 yards per game against Buffalo and Miami.
By comparison, the Giants are leading the N.F.L. in rushing with an average of 158.3 yards per game.
Through the first six games, the Jets were averaging 97 yards on the ground, 20th in the league.
In two weeks, they have moved up to No. 12.


More Haitians Trying to Reach U.S.
After a lull of four months, the number of Haitians seeking to reach the United States aboard small boats has again begun mounting rapidly.
Experts attribute the increase to a seasonal calming of the seas as well as expectations in Haiti that a Clinton Administration may treat them more generously.


Topics of The Times; Retro Rollers
One morning last week a youngish, soberly dressed woman carrying a supermarket bag was seen roller-skating along a New York street.
That wheels were her transport was no surprise: there are as many Roller bladers whizzing around town these days as demon bicyclists.
But this woman was no whizzer.
She was a coaster.
Her skates were the old kind, wheels set two by two, on which with short lunges one builds up speed and then coasts.
They were the sort of skates Fred and Ginger danced on, the sort that one tightens with a key.


Review/Dance; From Japan, Scaling Down the Grand
Takarazuka, which opened at the Joyce Theater on Wednesday night, is a subgroup of the famed all-female Takarazuka Revue Company of Japan, which appeared at Radio City Music Hall in 1989.
Mizuki Oura, a star of that visit, is the current headliner and she is again seen in one of the male roles that is a Takarazuka specialty.
But those looking for the Takarazuka Revue's grand spectacle, with its array of showgirls amid a Japanese appropriation of Broadway and Western music-hall styles, should be forewarned.


United Healthcare reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


TV Weekend; Sinatra: The Good, the Bad, and Mostly the Music
Take a kid from Hoboken, N.J., and follow him from singing in his father's saloon through a stormy career that, despite setbacks and scandals, makes him an international superstar.
It's a sure-fire formula, and even more so when the title tells it all: "Sinatra." Frank Sinatra's life, at least up to his triumphal 1974 concert at Madison Square Garden, has now been deftly squeezed into a five-hour CBS mini-series being broadcast Sunday evening from 8 to 11 and Tuesday from 9 to 11 P.M.
More than a few snickers were set off when it was announced that Tina Sinatra, the singer's younger daughter, would be the executive producer.
Would this be the Sinatra family's way of counteracting a best-selling and generally unflattering biography written by Kitty Kelly, its sometimes scabrous details condemned by Sinatra supporters but never entirely refuted?
The good news: Tina Sinatra has not gone the powder-puff route.
Although often diplomatically sketchy, this absorbing portrait of her father, using a script by William Mastrosimone, takes a hard look at its subject and rarely blinks.


Hawker Siddeley reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Windmere Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Continental Materials reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 2


Serv-Tech Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Alden Press reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Ferraro, Looking Back and Ahead
By Geraldine A. Ferraro's lights, Elizabeth Holtzman's fierce attacks on her reputation were "absolutely" an effort to keep her from winning a race that Ms.
Holtzman never could.
Robert Abrams ran a lame campaign against Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato and was not hurt by Ms.
Ferraro's refusal to endorse him until three days before the election, since she had been "gracious enough" to him in defeat.
It was the morning after the morning after Mr.
D'Amato's victory over Mr.
Abrams, and seven weeks after her own loss in a Democratic primary that she says will be her last campaign.
But Ms.
Ferraro's hands were flying, sifting through letters and note cards and news clippings, rummaging for ammunition to refight the bittersweet Senate race that still consumes her and seems destined to haunt her days.
Words came tumbling out of her, but no regrets.


CITICORP WILL SELL 20% OF STUDENT-LOAN BUSINESS
Citicorp said yesterday that it planned to sell 20 percent of its student loan business in a public stock offering that could raise up to $76 million.
The offering, to be handled by Smith Barney, Harris Upham, is for a new company, the Student Loan Corporation, that previously was part of Citibank and specialized in issuing Government-guaranteed student loans and handling the collection of those loans.
In a Securities and Exchange Commission filing, Citicorp said the stock might sell for a maximum of $19 a share.
Citicorp remains in talks to sell the rest of its student loan business to the Student Loan Marketing Corporation, known as Sallie Mae.


DARTMOUTH GETS $30 MILLION GIFT
Dartmouth College announced yesterday that it had received a combined gift of $30 million from two benefactors, the largest gift in its 223-year history.
The gift consisted of $27 million from an alumnus, John W. Berry of Dayton, Ohio, and his family and $3 million from George F. Baker 3d of New York City, who is not an alumnus.
The money will be used to build a new library on the college's campus in Hanover, N.H.


Sterling Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Dynascan reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


2 G.O.P. Senators Jockey Over a Leadership Post
In a sign of post-election squabbling in Republican Senate ranks, Mitch McConnell of Kentucky is challenging Phil Gramm of Texas for the leadership of the effort to elect Republican senators.
Mr.
McConnell has not yet announced his candidacy for chairman of the National Republican Senatorial Committee, but Republican senators say he has been actively lobbying for six weeks.


Briton Holds Off Vote on Europe Until May
A day after winning support in Parliament for the European unification treaty, Prime Minister John Major said today that he would not seek ratification of the pact by Britain until at least May.
Mr.
Major had previously suggested that he wanted to ratify the treaty quickly, perhaps even by the end of the year.
The timetable he outlined today disappointed most other members of the European Community, who had been hoping for swift action.


Major Lawsuit On Smoking Is Dropped
The most closely watched damage suit against the tobacco industry was dropped today, more than 9 years after it began and months before it was to be retried in Federal District Court here.
While lawyers involved in the case would not discuss why they dropped it, others said it was because the plaintiff's firm believed it was too expensive to continue the fight.
A lawyer at the firm did say that the family of the late Rose Cipollone, who died of lung cancer in 1984, felt that the suit had accomplished its purpose, in warning other smokers of the dangers of their habit.


Napa Valley Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Corrections
An article on Oct. 22 about the indictment of a former Internal Revenue Service agent on charges of obstruction of justice referred incompletely to the background of a man who has accused the agent, Frank T. Primerana, of singling him out for prosecution because he is gay.
The defendant, Bruce Mailman, was indicted on charges of tax evasion, but the charges were later dropped.


Dispute in Clinton Camp
Bill Clinton's aides are badly split over who should head his transition team.
To quell the dispute, he may announce his choice today.
Page A19.


CB&amp;T Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Critic's Choice; Gentler 'Juno,' But It Sings
Sean O'Casey's tragicomic masterpiece "Juno and the Paycock" is a drama of such depth and poetic weight that any attempt to turn it into a musical would inevitably soften its devastating portrait of an impoverished Dublin family in the early 1920's.
When the composer Marc Blitzstein and the book writer Joseph Stein turned the play into the musical "Juno" in 1959, the show lasted for only 16 performances on Broadway.
Since then, however, Blitzstein's score has won many admirers through an original-cast recording.
Now the Vineyard Theater is giving "Juno" its first New York production since 1959, with a revised book and some musical additions.
Although the revised "Juno" lacks the play's Shakespearean grandeur, on its own, more modest terms, it is a well-made musical in which the songs and the dialogue are woven together with an impressive fluency.
And the performances of Anita Gillette as the matriarch of the embattled Boyle family and Dick Latessa as her lazy, drunken husband have a richness and subtlety too seldom found on the musical stage.


CHRONICLE
Just because he was elected to the United States Senate on Tuesday, Representative BEN NIGHTHORSE CAMPBELL, Democrat of Colorado, saw no reason to cancel a prior engagement.
So, he will be appearing at Fortunoff, the jewelry and silver emporium on Fifth Avenue, today through Sunday.
The first American Indian to serve in the Senate in 60 years and presently the only one in the House of Representatives, he will be showing and selling jewlery that he designs and that his son COLIN ARROWTAKER makes.
He will also participate with other jewelry designers, a weaver and a sculptor in a presentation at the store called "The Spirit of Southwest Native American Culture."


Ghana's Leader Wins Election as President
The leader of Ghana, Jerry J. Rawlings, was assured today of a victory in the presidential election.
With results from 99 percent of the districts, Mr.
Rawlings, a 45-year-old former air force pilot, received 58.7 percent of the vote.
His closest rival, Albert Adu Boahen, a history professor, received 30 percent.


Oak Hill Sportswear reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Thrown Into Frying Pan, Favre Is Doing Just Fine
The Green Bay Packers, who will play the Giants here Sunday, have struggled to a 3-5 record this season.
But they have one of pro football's most promising young quarterbacks in Brett Favre, and the Giants have often been stung by lesser teams and young, inexperienced quarterbacks.
Favre can make trouble for anyone.
He is big (6 feet 2 inches and 220 pounds) and competitive, with a big-league arm.
He is a strong athlete playing quarterback.
He plays in a sophisticated offensive without a healthy line, so he has taken many hits.
But in Mike Holmgren, he has an understanding head coach who has cut back on the offense so Favre can concentrate on the immediate task.


Accounts
*
Ron Delsener Enterprises, New York, to Grey Entertainment and Media, New York, to handle the concert promotion company's $2 million account, previously at Sloan Design Group, New York.


Art in Review
Mitch Epstein  Tenri Cultural Institute 575 Broadway (at Prince Street) SoHo Through Nov. 11
Will Vietnam ever be just another country to Americans?
In his new color photographs, Mitch Epstein presents Vietnam in a surprisingly gentle light, depicting a verdant countryside with jagged rows of blue mountains on the horizon and flame trees covered with bright orange blossoms.
Virtually the only reminders of the long war are scrap-metal scavengers in the former demilitarized zone.


Western Conference
Midwest Division
Utah Jazz
Last season: 55-27, lost in conference finals.
New faces: G Jay Humphries, F Larry Krystkowiak, rookie G John Crotty.
Key returnees: F Karl Malone (28.0 ppg.), G John Stockton (13.7 assists), G Jeff Malone.
Projection: Addition of the very solid Humphries, who can play both backcourt positions, will ease burdens on Stockton and Jeff Malone, making Stockton much more dangerous in the fourth quarter.
Deeper frontline with Ty Corbin, David Benoit and Krystkowiak.
As usual, Karl Malone must be a dominant player every night, and now he must deal with perception of him as the key man in the move to force out Magic Johnson.
Center Mark Eaton is out 4-6 weeks, but if he makes a healthy return, this is clearly the best team in the division with a chance to finally breakthrough to The Finals.
San Antonio Spurs
Last season: 47-35, lost in first round.
New faces: Coach Jerry Tarkanian, G Dale Ellis, G Vinny Del Negro, G Lloyd Daniels, F Larry Smith, F David Wood.
Key returnees: C David Robinson (23.9 ppg), F Sean Elliott (16.3).
Projection: With mainstays Terry Cummings and Willie Anderson injured, this is a rebuilt team, albeit around Olympian Robinson.
Tarkanian's college teams played excellent defense, but don't bet on that happening here.
There's talent, though the long-range shooting Ellis is going down the hill while Daniels, the troubled New York City prodigy, is just beginning his climb.
Forty-five victories would be an overachievement.
Houston Rockets
Last season: 42-40, did not make playoffs.
New faces: G Scott Brooks, C Tom Copa, rookie F Robert Horry.
Key returnees: C Hakeem Olajuwon (12.1 rbs, 4.34 blocks), F Otis Thorpe (17.3 ppg) G Vernon Maxwell (17.2 ppg), G Kenny Smith.
Projection: Coach Rudy Tomjanovich is not in for a happy season with this bunch.
There's talent, but the misery index has been sky rocketing, with Olajuwon demanding a new contract every 5.7 seconds.
The point guard, Smith, took 910 shots last year, and his partner off the ball, Maxwell, heaved up 1216 to the tune of 41 percent.
Ugly.
Explored trades for Olajuwon all summer and could still pull the trigger, if salary cap obstacles can be overcome.
Denver Nuggets
Last season: 24-58, did not make playoffs.
New faces: Coach Dan Issel, rookie F LaPhonso Ellis, rookie G Bryant Stith, rookie C Robert Werdann.
Key returnees: C Dikembe Mutombo (12.3 rbs), F Reggie Williams (18.2 ppg), G Mark Macon, G Chris Jackson.
Projection: Hometown favorite Issel takes over a team with a foundation but not much more.
Mutombo remains a raw but intimidating presence who should improve, and rookie Ellis should help considerably on the boards.
Stith, a player everyone likes, could eventually be a fine big guard, but the other young guards, Jackson and Macon, have been disappointing and reclammation project Williams shoulders too much of a scoring burden.
A learning experience, for coach and players.
Minnesota Timberwolves
Last season: 15-67, did not make playoffs.
New faces: F Chuck Person (18.5 ppg), G Michael Williams (8.2 assists), rookie F Christian Laettner, rookie G Chris Smith, rookie G Gundars Vetra.
Key returnees: F Gerald Glass (11.5 ppg), F Thurl Bailey, C Felton Spencer.
Projection: As a result of being in the league's worst divisions, the T-Wolves actually have an opportunity to out of the basement for the first time in their fourth season.
Having traded their two leading men, Pooh Richardson and Tony Campbell, there will be shots aplenty for Person, who will gladly take them, and the chance for Laettner to establish himself as a force right away.
It's too bad the Wolves badly blew their two previous drafts on pivotal stiffs like Spencer and Luc Longley.
It set them well behind other expansion teams in the race to be competitive.
Dallas Mavericks
Last season: 22-60, did not make playoffs.
New faces: rookie G Jim Jackson, rookie C Sean Rooks.
Key returnees: G Derek Harper (17.7 ppg), G Fat Lever, F Doug Smith
Projection: While a team like Denver is clearly rebuilding, the Mavericks haven't quite finished collapsing.
It's hard to be much worse than 22 victories, but the Mavs, without the departed Rolando Blackman, will give it a run.
Drafted as a potential multi-talented savior, Jackson, like the Nets' Kenny Anderson last season, will play his first season without the benefit of a training camp.
Who's the center?
Donald Hodge.
Who can help matters?
Last year's No. 1 pick, Doug Smith, perhaps.
Pacific Division
Portland Trail Blazers
Last season: 57-25, lost in N.B.A. Finals.
New faces: G Rod Strickland, G/F Mario Elie, rookie F Tracy Murray, rookie F Dave Johnson.
Key returnees: G Clyde Drexler (25.0 ppg), G Terry Porter (18.1 ppg), F Buck Williams (8.8 rbs), F Jerome Kersey, C Kevin Duckworth.
Projection: Three deficiencies, all at varying degrees, have kept this team from winning it all.
One, shaky perimeter shooting, which explains summer deal for Murray.
Two, point guard Porter is more of a scoring guard (his 5.8 assist average is not even in top 20), which is why former Knick and Spur head case Rod Strickland was signed.
Three, the level of Duckworth's performances flucuates wildly from night to night.
Too talented and deep a club to count out for another return to The Finals,but when picking a championship team, too flaky and unstable to count on.
Phoenix Suns
Last season: 53-29, lost in second round.
New faces: Coach Paul Westphal, F Charles Barkley (23.1 ppg, 11.1 rbs), G Danny Ainge, C Tim Kempton, rookie C/F Oliver Miller.
Key returnees: G Kevin Johnson (19.7 ppg, 10.7 assists), F/G Dan Majerle (17.3 ppg), F Tom Chambers (16.3 ppg), C Mark West, F Cedric Ceballos.
Projection: With Barkley, the Suns move into their new arena confident they have, at last, the final piece to a championship puzzle.
Barkley certainly gives Phoenix a post-up threat and the power rebounder they sorely lacked, and lends his celebrity presence to a team with three 1992 All Stars -- Sir Charles, Johnson and Majerle, plus former All Stars Tom Chambers and Danny Ainge.
Negatives: smallish frontline, no center who could even make the All Star ballot, poor defensively and Chambers, at 33, being prone to injuries.
More entertaining but no lock for conference finals.
Golden State Warriors
Last season: 55-27, lost in first round.
New faces: G/F Jeff Grayer, rookie F Byron Houston, rookie G Latrell Sprewell.
Key returnees: F Chris Mullin (25.6 ppg), G Tim Hardaway (23.4 ppg., 10.0 assists), F Billy Owens (14.3 ppg, 7.9 rbs).
G Sarunas Marciulionis, F Tyrone Hill.
Projection: Best nucleus of multi-dimensional mid-size talented in the league, in Mullin, Hardaway, Marciulionis and the emerging star Owens, who led the team in rebounding as a rookie, which, of course, speaks volumes about the rest of the frontline.
However,, Don Nelson has no post-up game to speak of, and not even a functional intimidator in the Chris Dudley mold to compensate for defensive mistakes.
There will continue to be nights when the Warriors simply chew up the opposition in transition, and Owens could take them to the next level.
Conventional thought suggests, however, there is not enough size for them to grind their way to The Finals.
Seattle SuperSonics
Last season: 47-35, lost in second round.
New faces: rookie G Doug Christie
Key returnees: F Shawn Kemp (15.5 ppg, 10 rbs), G Ricky Pierce (21.7 ppg), F Eddie Johnson (17.1), F Derrick McKey, C Benoit Benjamin.
Projection: Reputedly one of the young, coming teams in the league, based on a strong second half of the season under new coach George Karl and the Sonics' takeout of Golden State in the first round of the playoffs.
But its rising star Kemp has tremendous speed and power, though he's hardly a fundamentally sound player.
Benjamin will ultimately break their hearts in the middle and the point guard situation seems forever unsettled with Gary Payton trying to wrest it from Nate McMillan.
Fifty wins is not out of the question but the division's too tough and there are too many flaws.
Los Angeles Lakers
Last season: 43-39, lost in first round
New faces: head coach Randy Pfund, C James Edwards, F Sean Higgins, rookie G Anthony Peeler, rookie G Duane Cooper.
Key returnees: F James Worthy (19.9 ppg), F Sam Perkins (16.5 ppg), G Sedale Threatt (15.1 ppg, 7.2 assists), C Vlade Divac, C/F Elden Campbell.
Projection: Not the hopeless mess people would think, though the loss of Magic Johnson so close to the season again could have a demoralizing effect.
The key to a playoff run is getting contributions from the rookie guards and the health of Worthy, Perkins and Divac.
Complete, this is still a first-class frontline and it should be remembered that the Lakers were building a pretty decent record until their best players began going down, one-by-one, following the All Star break.
Still, without Magic, their goals must be readjusted to between 45 and 48 victories.
Los Angeles Clippers
Last season: 45-37, lost in first round.
New faces: G Mark Jackson (8.6 assists), C Stanley Roberts, F John Williams, F Kiki Vandeweghe, rookie C Elmore Spencer.
Key returnees: F Danny Manning (19.3 ppg), G Ron Harper (18.2 ppg), F Kenny Norman (12.1 ppg).
Projection: Considering the turnover of personnel, Larry Brown's team could actually take a couple of steps back, especially if Roberts's and Williams's continue to eat themselves to mediocrity or worse.
Not an auspicious perimeter shooting team, though Jackson will be a preferred floor leader to holdover Gary Grant and the departed Doc Rivers.
Manning, his surgically repaired knee getting stronger and stronger, seems ready for a big year, but the rest of this crew could wear on the impatient Brown in a L.A. minute.
Sacramento Kings Last season: 29-53, did not make playoffs.
New faces: Head coach Garry St.
Jean, F Marty Conlon, G Vincent Askew, rookie G/F Walt Williams.
Key returnees: Mitch Richmond (22.5 ppg), Lionel Simmons (17.1 ppg, 8.1 rbs), F Wayman Tisdale (16.6), G Spud Webb, C Duane Causewell.
Projection: Unless the rookie Williams is the second coming of Magic, the Kings are in for another long, depressing season.
Beyond Richmond, a dynamic player whose game has to suffer simply from hopelessness, and the underrated Simmons, everyone else is flawed or lucky to be in the league.
Harvey Araton's Picks: East - Utah over Phoenix West - Cleveland over Chicago Final: Cleveland Cavaliers


National Western Life reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Healthsource reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Police Seek Edison Woman, Apparently Kidnap Victim
Middlesex County officials have begun a search for a woman who has been missing since Tuesday evening when, the police say, a man approached her and her 3-year-old daughter at a traffic light in Piscataway and forced his way into their minivan.
He later dropped the girl off in front of a day care center and abandoned the van.
Early this morning, as the police scoured the area for the woman, Gail F. Shollar, 35 years old, of Edison, they happened upon the body of another woman off a dirt road near the Rutgers University Athletic Center in New Brunswick.
The body was identified as that of Dorothy Ann Grand of Ocala, Fla., who had been shot in the right temple and had been dead for at least a month.


A Top I.B.M. Executive Is Retiring Early
Terry R. Lautenbach, a 54-year-old I.B.M. senior vice president and a member of the company's four-member management committee, decided yesterday to join some 40,000 other employees of the computer giant who chose to take early retirement this year.
Mr.
Lautenbach's retirement, though somewhat earlier than expected, was not a surprise, analysts said.
But the announcement that he will not be replaced on the management committee, they say, is a further sign that the International Business Machines Corporation is streamlining its management.


Money Store reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Boesky Settles Maxus Suit; Agrees to Pay $50 Million
For Ivan F. Boesky, the price of insider trading in the early 1980's just went up by 50 percent.
Mr.
Boesky, the former arbitrager who has already paid $100 million in penalties to the Government, added on another $50 million yesterday in settling a lawsuit brought by the Maxus Energy Corporation, an oil company that said it had been injured by the illegal trading during a 1983 acquisition.


Review/Film; Anthony Hopkins vs. Friendly Inefficiency
After his first tour of Ball's, a small factory in Melbourne, Australia, that has been turning out casual footwear for 30 years, Wallace (Anthony Hopkins), a tough-minded efficiency expert, is almost in despair.
It's the sort of place where the employees gather to sign a sentimental going-away card for a fellow who is leaving after three weeks.
The men in the engineering shop spend more time worrying about a toy-car race than their jobs.
The women, who sew the moccasins and pastel bunny slippers for which Ball's is known, favor long lunches that turn into tea breaks.
The appalled Wallace says when he arrives home that night, "It's like visiting my grandfather's house and finding it full of people."


AmBase Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Consumers Water reports earnings for 12mo Sept 30


Books of The Times; Trying to Separate Fact From Myth About Jesus
Jesus A Life By A. N. Wilson 269 pages. W. W. Norton &amp; Company. $22.95.


Thomas Nelson reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


The End Of Cynicism
It was only a false alarm, 1988.
It had only the potential for national revelation, when we would decide as a country to leap into or withdraw from the future.
A different sort of discussion that year -- between Mario Cuomo and Jack Kemp, for instance -- might have fulfilled that potential or confirmed why some of us believed that, at the end of the Reagan era with no incumbent seeking the Presidency for the first time in 20 years, it was Leap Year.
In the four years since, it has become clear that in 1988 the 20th century still had to play itself out.
In the four years since, the century reduced itself to the cockeyed reverie of a historical nanosecond, in which walls that once seemed to have gone up forever came down in a day.
Countries that once invented themselves in an explosion of revolution and sustained themselves in a rage of nuclear power uninvented themselves.


CompUSA Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 26


Arctco Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Art in Review
Jan Groover Robert Miller Gallery 41 East 57th Street Through Nov. 14
In her first show since moving to the French countryside a year ago, Jan Groover continues to explore the intricacies of photographic form.
Working with a custom-made camera that produces long horizontal pictures, Ms.
Groover photographs still lifes of such objects as toy animals, bottles, bunches of grapes and an animal's jawbone.
The resulting images are printed on tissue, in the soft, silvery tones of the palladium process.


Sports of The Times; Self-Image Could Shift For the Nets
THIS was at a Nets game a year or two ago, on an obscure wintry night against Sacramento or Charlotte or Tucumcari.
Yours truly came in from the steppes to be greeted at courtside by somebody who worked for the Nets who said, "What are
you
doing here?"
What, indeed.
It was unlikely this Netsperson knew of my aversion to bridge-and-tunnel schlepping to the modern-day sports mecca in New Jersey.
This was more a case of somebody saying: "I've got to. But you?"


New York Also Needs a West Coast Film Office
To the Editor:
I am a screenwriter living in, and working out of New York City.
Scenes from a couple of my movies have been shot here, and I've had a comedy set in Queens, "Out Cold," that was shot in the port of Los Angeles (for economics and state of mind).


Centex Telemanagement Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Transatlantic Holdings Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Third Party's Leaders Say It Had an Impact
After Tuesday's election, leaders of Connecticut's legislature concluded that Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr.'s independent third party was not materializing as a potent force in state politics.
Today, leaders of Mr.
Weicker's party said that the voting proves exactly the opposite and that lawmakers were just defending their outmoded two-party turf.
In other words, nothing has changed: Connecticut's House and Senate, remaining firmly in Democratic control, will also continue their tradition of anti-Weicker grousing, and Mr.
Weicker's tiny group will grouse back just as loud.


T. Chad Farris, 37, A Lawyer for Unions
T.
Chad Farris, a lawyer for unions, a public policy advocate and the former Chief Deputy Attorney General of Arkansas, died Wednesday at his home in Little Rock, Ark.
He was 37 years old.
He died of cancer, his family said.
Mr.
Farris was a partner in Youngdahl, Trotter, McGowan, O'Connor &amp; Farris, a law firm representing unions in several states.
He spent 1991 helping the new Attorney General, Winston Bryant, reorganize his agency, with new emphasis on consumer law and environmental protection.


All Mattingly Touches Turns to Gold Again
Don Mattingly wanted to talk defense.
He wanted to discuss the sparkling play at first base for the Yankees that helped him earn the vote of American League managers and coaches for his seventh Gold Glove award yesterday.
But Mattingly conceded that defense is often ignored and some fans consider it boring.
So the subject quickly strayed from defense to the topics that perk up the ears of Yankee fans.
Topics such as the futures of free-agent outfielder Barry Bonds, who did not attend the Rawlings news conference in Manhattan to receive his third Gold Glove, and pitchers David Cone and Jim Abbott, and even owner George Steinbrenner.
Mattingly smoothly changed from award-winning fielder to soothsayer.


AIDES SAY CLINTON WILL SWIFTLY VOID G.O.P. INITIATIVES
President-elect Bill Clinton aims to convey an impression of boldness and change during his first days in the Oval Office by issuing a whirlwind of executive orders on abortion rights, White House perquisites and government ethics, his aides predict.
They sketch an ambitious domestic agenda for his first weeks, during which Mr.
Clinton has said he will "focus like a laser beam on this economy" and "foreign policy will come into play in part as it affects the economy."


Net Declines At 2 Insurers
The American International Group, a giant insurer, reported yesterday that third-quarter net income fell 8.6 percent because of losses from three major storms.
Separately, the Kemper Corporation reported that net income plunged 93 percent because of storm-related losses and lower investment income.


Meditrust reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


BHC Communications reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


PRO BASKETBALL: High Hopes Along Hudson as N.B.A. Takes Court
It wasn't so much that Bill Fitch was too old to relate to the New Jersey Nets last year.
It was that he was from another era, of one-year contracts and no free agency, when coaches talked and players trembled.
Chuck Daly, Fitch's successor as the New Jersey coach, is actually three years older than Fitch.
But as the 62-year-old Daly likes to say, "I was anonymous until I was 58." He was a career college coach who joined the National Basketball Association as an assistant in 1978 and was 53 when he became head coach of the Detroit Pistons in 1983.


Future Now reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Better-Armed Muslims Warn Croats
In this war-ravaged city, where Muslims and Croats joined forces in June to break a Serbian siege, the leaders of the main Muslim party say the prospect of long-term violence and terrorism will head off any possibility that the Croats will join the Serbs in carving up Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Embittered by recent fighting between Croats and the Muslim-dominated forces of the Bosnian Government, and by indications that the Croats are tightening their grip in parts of the 20 percent of Bosnian territory now under their control, many Muslims have started equating the republic's Croatian forces with the Serbs, who have seized 70 percent of the country.


Hollywood Park reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Molson Cos. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


A Heileman Account Goes to Deutsch
The G. Heileman Brewing Company yesterday named Deutsch Inc. in New York to handle its Rainier beer account outside the Pacific Northwest.
The account, previously unassigned, is Deutsch's second from the brewer in less than two months after being awarded the Colt 45 Malt Liquor account.
Steve Dworin, Deutsch's president, estimated the Rainier billings at $4 million to $5 million, adding that there is potential for growth to $10 million as the brand expands nationally.


Review/Music; A Young Group Explores the New World
For all its financial and demographic problems, the American orchestra is still an object of envy elsewhere in the world.
Technically superior, quick to learn, flexible in its response to different styles and relatively unencumbered by bureaucratic intrigue, this home-grown urban institution has done as much as any European one to uphold a European tradition.
Now to find American symphonic music worthy of its time.
The New World Symphony under Michael Tilson Thomas attempted something of the kind at Avery Fisher Hall on Sunday afternoon.
Two of the pieces were by Argentines, but both demonstrated the long arm of North American culture and the powerful African influences that all of the Americas share.


Zenith National Insurance reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


TRANSACTIONS
Hockey  National Hockey League
NHL -- Suspended New York Rangers center Doug Weight four days without pay and fined him $500 for cross-checking Philadelphia Flyers defenseman Garry Galley on Nov. 4.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about the impact of Ross Perot on the Presidential race misstated Mr.
Perot's vote totals in some copies.
He finished second in one state, Utah; in the 49 other states he finished third.


Off for the Weekend


October Sales Give Retailers a Brighter Holiday Outlook
The nation's big chain stores reported further sales gains in October, continuing a trend that began in August and raising hopes among analysts that for the first time in four years retailers will not have a cold Christmas.
Still, doubts about the future remain, largely because most of the October sales came in the first half of the month.


Doubling the Number of Women Etched in Stone


TPI Enterprises reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Suiting Up in N.B.A.: Finding the Right Fits
When the New York Knicks open their 1992-93 season tonight against the Atlanta Hawks at the Omni, Marv Albert will sport a double-breasted gray pinstriped suit.
It is not just any suit.
No, it is one David Letterman paid $1,000 for.


Credit Where It's Due for Cold War's End
To the Editor:
In "The G.O.P. Won the Cold War? Ridiculous" (Op-Ed, Oct. 28), George F. Kennan states that neither political party can claim credit for victory in the cold war: it belongs to the people who resisted Communism, to Americans of both parties willing to bear the human and material costs, to their allies.
But if President Bush takes the blame for America's plight in the global economic recession, why deny him recognition for a happy event that occurred on his watch?


Nerco Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Treasury Official to Join First Boston
In one of the first post-election retirements of a high Bush Administration official, David C. Mulford, Under Secretary of the Treasury for International Affairs, announced today that he would be joining CS First Boston Inc. in New York.
Mr.
Mulford, known for his Savile Row suits, bright suspenders, detachable collars and gold cuff links, will become vice chairman of the First Boston Corporation and deputy chairman of Credit Suisse First Boston, two CS First Boston units.


D.M.B.&amp; B. Promotes 2 Executives to Shore Up Basics
D'ARCY MASIUS BENTON &amp; BOWLES is promoting two top executives to newly created positions with worldwide responsibilities, in a move to strengthen the giant agency's capabilities in fundamental areas like landing new business and improving creative output.
Richard V. Hopple, 45 years old, who rejoined D.M.B.&amp; B. in April, is being named vice chairman of corporate strategic development.
And John Nieman, 43, who has been vice chairman and chief creative officer at the agency's North American division, is being named vice chairman and worldwide creative director.


Birth Pangs Of a Nation -- A special report.; Ukraine Facing the High Costs of Democracy
Fourteen months into independence, Ukrainians are learning that the romance of nationhood is hard to sustain when the economy is in shambles.
The proud blue-and-yellow flags and national emblems are all in place now, and schoolchildren are nurtured on Ukrainian legend and lore from the first grade.


Abroad at Home; The New Landscape
"In victory, magnanimity." So Winston Churchill advised.
But for Bill Clinton it will have to be watchful magnanimity.
Anyone who thinks the gracious concession speeches on Election Night presaged an Era of Good Feeling for the Clinton Presidency -- a suspension of partisanship -- has a short memory.
To win, Mr.
Clinton had to survive an exceptionally vicious campaign against him.
Republicans, embittered and divided, are not going to be kind and gentle to the Clinton Administration.


Two Panels to Discuss Role of TV in Election
The role television news coverage and advertising played in the election of President-elect Bill Clinton will be the subject of two panel discussions this weekend at the American Museum of the Moving Image, 35th Avenue at 36th Street, Astoria, Queens.
The museum's current exhibition is "The Living Room Candidate: A History of Presidential Campaigns on Television, 1952-1992."


Patrick's Dilemma: Injury Adds to Insult
James Patrick knows the minutes are not what they used to be.
Oh, the ice time is almost the same -- almost, but not quite.
It just isn't prime time any longer.
He does not skate the first shift of the power play.
He does not play in the top defensive duo, which is made up of Jeff Beukeboom and Brian Leetch.
The goals haven't been coming.
Things aren't the same.
"You don't deal with it," Patrick said today at Rye Playland, shortly after his teammates completed practice.
"You just do the best you can under the circumstances. That's the way it is."


Devils Shoot and Shoot and Take a Loss
Almost an entire hockey game was spent in Kelly Hrudey's lap tonight.
The New Jersey Devils penetrated the Los Angeles defense for more than 40 fairly simple shots here at the Forum, but Hrudey -- his blue bandanna flopping out of his protective mask -- was a capable barrier.
By game's end, Hrudey had shoved away 48 shots in the Kings' 5-2 victory in front of 14,592 fans.
The most lavish stop of all was Hrudey's knee-padding of a four-foot Stephane Richer shot as the second-period horn blared, securing a two-goal lead.
The closest New Jersey ever came after that was within three, on Claude Lemieux's rebound goal with 2 minutes 21 seconds remaining in the game.


B.C. Keeping Its Eyes on the Prize: A Major Bowl Bid
How big is this?
For the athletes who play for Boston College, for the people who follow the Eagles, how meaningful is their trip this weekend to South Bend, Ind.?
Considerably big, for this is the only neighborhood in the nation that can think of Notre Dame as the
other
Catholic university to play major-college football.


PRO BASKETBALL: High Hopes Along Hudson as N.B.A. Takes Court; Riley Gives Knicks a Blunt Message: Win
They have heard the predictions.
They are aware of the expectations.
The Knicks know that many people, especially New Yorkers, expect them to be very good this season, perhaps good enough to dethrone the Chicago Bulls.
That is an ambitious goal, especially for a team with seven new players and an entire roster that has never played on a National Basketball Association championship team.
Winning a title may be too much to ask this soon.
But Coach Pat Riley, while stopping well short of predicting a championship, made it clear on the eve of Friday's season opener in Atlanta that he expected the Knicks to mesh quickly, seven new players or not.


Ruling by Court Backs Networks On Rerun Issue
A Federal appeals court dealt a major blow to the Hollywood studios today in their effort to keep the big television networks out of the $5 billion business of selling reruns of popular programs.
The unanimous decision by a three-judge panel rejected a rule adopted by a sharply divided Federal Communications Commission in 1991 that restricted the networks from owning and selling the rerun rights to their prime time programs.


The Spoken Word
URBAN SYMPOSIUM, Whitney Museum of Art, 945 Madison Avenue, at 75th Street.
"Los Angeles: Identity, Community and Cultural Activism," a discussion of the disturbances last spring and the role of the arts in addressing urban problems.
With Renee Tajima, a film maker and critic; Wanda Coleman, a writer; Ruben Martinez, a journalist and poet; Avital Ronell, a professor of comparative literature; Joel Wachs, a Los Angeles City Councilman, and Jerry Yoshitomi, the executive director of the Japanese-American Cultural and Community Center.
Sunday at 6:30 P.M.
Admission: $10; $8 for museum members and students.
Information: (212) 570-3652.
FICTION READING, Arts at St.
Ann's, 157 Montague Street, Brooklyn Heights.
Richard Price, the author of "Clockers," will read from his novel.
Part of the "Prophetic Voices" series.
Sunday at 4 P.M.
Tickets: $15.
Information: (718) 858-2424.


Citadel Holding Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Commissioner Asks Black Clergy To Review Police Testing System
Police Commissioner Raymond W. Kelly yesterday asked a group of black ministers to review the Police Department's training and testing procedures and make recommendations to help increase minority recruiting.
The offer was made at an hour-and-a-half breakfast meeting in Brooklyn for the new Commissioner and two dozen ministers that was organized by the Rev.
Al Sharpton, an often outspoken critic of the police.
Mr.
Sharpton had met privately with Mr.
Kelly within days of the career police officer's taking office last month.


Serbs Are Reported to Fly 18 Flights in Bosnia Despite U.N.'s Ban
Serbian forces fighting in Bosnia and Herzegovina have flown 18 to 20 unauthorized flights since Oct. 22 in apparent violation of restrictions imposed then by the Security Council, United Nations officials said today.
A report on the violations has been sent to the United Nations Secretary General, Boutros Boutros-Ghali, for submission to the Security Council, where the Bush Administration has been pushing for a new resolution authorizing countries to enforce the restrictions by shooting down offenders.


Fordham's Evolving Role at the Heart of the Bronx
Institutions have memories that shape the present, and at Fordham University some of those memories are frightening ones: At night in the early 1970's, students would gaze from the top floors of Walsh Hall as the fires of the South Bronx crept slowly northward.
That incendiary decade forever changed the Bronx.
It also remade the university at the borough's geographical heart.
Demands for Diversity
For more than a century, Fordham had pursued a mission as surely solid as the Gothic buildings of its Rose Hill campus: teaching the ways of the Jesuits to the immigrant children of the borough around it.
By the early 1980's, Fordham found itself forced in opposite directions, strengthening its Lincoln Center campus in Manhattan and recruiting students from far beyond the Bronx even as it initiated a host of programs to bolster a community collapsed in its own ashes.


LifeSouth Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Blessings Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 3


It's the Final Four
Florida State linebacker MARVIN JONES, Washington offensive tackle LINCOLN KENNEDY, Alabama defensive end ERIC CURRY and West Virginia center MIKE COMPTON have been selected as finalists for the Lombardi Award as the nation's top college lineman.
The winner will be announced Dec. 3. (AP)


Kemet Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Jacob Fox; Lawyer, 94
Jacob Fox, who founded the Newark law firm of Fox &amp; Fox in 1920, died yesterday at St.
Barnabas Medical Center in Livingston, N.J.
He was 94 years old and lived in Verona, N.J.
He died after a brief illness, his family said.


On My Mind; Clinton Meets the Sage
On Election Night, at the victory party in Little Rock, a very old man came up to Bill Clinton and said he wanted to ask just two questions.
"Ask," said the President-elect.
"Thank you," said the old man.


United Bankshares reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Diner's Journal
Etats-Unis
Etats-Unis is one of those snug, stylish East Side newcomers that raise hopes for guileless home-style fare at reasonable prices.
Well, almost.
This five-month-old establishment is the creation of a father-and-son team -- Tom Rapp, a former architect, and and his son, Jonathan, who holds a degree in art history -- who took a small square space and gave it life through clever wall glazing and artful lighting.
It should be noted that patrons need extreme patience to tolerate the service in this 30-seat dining room.
One amiable but overwhelmed waiter serves as greeter, coat checker, waiter and busboy.
We languished interminably between courses with dirty plates on the table, losing our appetites and patience.


On Stage, and Off
A Labor Dispute
An arcane, longstanding labor argument may have cost Broadway an opening.
"The Song of Jacob Zulu," a play about apartheid that had been developed and presented in Chicago by the Steppenwolf Theater Company, was on track for a spring opening at the Plymouth Theater.
But negotiations ended this week between the Shubert Organization, the owner of the Plymouth, which had also agreed to produce the show, and the Society of Stage Directors and Choreographers.
The stumbling block was whether the show's director should receive a percentage of the show's subsidiary rights, and where his share would come from.
Both sides said that the amount of money involved was insignificant and that the dispute was a matter of principle; the Shuberts contend that the union is using this play to establish a precedent it would never give up, and the directors' union says that the producers' intractability is a function of simple greed.


Arden Group reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 26


CHRONICLE
The elevator at the Upper East Side building where OSBORN and INGER ELLIOTT were giving a party for SCHUYLER CHAPIN on Wednesday evening had just broken down when BROOKE ASTOR arrived.
So, Mr.
Chapin went from the penthouse to the lobby to greet her and to sign her copy of his new book, "Leonard Bernstein: Notes From a Friend," published by Walker &amp; Company.
Luckily, the balky elevator functioned well enough most of the evening to carry dozens of recognizable personages, among them Beverly Sills, Mike Wallace, John Jay Iselin, Henry A. Grunwald, Richard Holbrooke, Morley Safer, John V. Lindsay, Carlos Moseley, Bishop Paul Moore Jr., Richard Oldenburg and Joan Didion, as well as the three Bernstein children, Alexander, Jamie and Nina.


James E. Gerstner Sr.; Executive, 48
James E. Gerstner Sr., an executive at Bristol-Myers Squibb, died on Wednesday at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in Manhattan.
He was 48 years old and lived in East Amwell, N.J.
He died of complications from stomach cancer, his family said.


United Asset Management reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


N.H.L. Suspends Weight
If nothing else, the new National Hockey League system under President Gil Stein moves quickly.
Hours after holding a meeting with forward Doug Weight and Coach Roger Neilson of the Rangers, Stein ruled yesterday that Weight would be suspended for four days for his blood-inducing cross-check on Philadelphia's Garry Galley at the close of the second period Wednesday night.
After dumping Phildelphia's Dmitri Yushkevich into the Ranger bench, Weight turned and fended off Galley by cracking his stick into Galley's mouth, prompting Galley to leave the ice spitting blood.


Terms, Already Limited
Ninety-three percent of the House members on Tuesday's ballots were re-elected.
On its face, that seems to say nothing much has changed, despite all the noise about a national anti-incumbent mood.
Nothing changed?
Not so.
There will be at least 110 new faces in the House, and not because of arbitrary term limits like those just adopted in 14 states.
The largest freshman class since 1948 will give the House more women and better racial and ethnic diversity than ever.
Also, nearly three-fourths of the new members have already held public jobs -- an encouraging sign that voters don't automatically view "career politician" as disreputable work.


Cambridge Biotech reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


BDM Holdings Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Is G.M. Fate Still Crucial to U.S.?
"What is good for the country is good for General Motors, and what's good for General Motors is good for the country," Charles E. Wilson, the G.M. president who was to become President Eisenhower's Secretary of Defense, is said to have told the Senate Armed Forces Committee.
The pronouncement by Engine Charlie Wilson instantly became a symbol of corporate arrogance for a nation that simultaneously loathed and worshiped big business, for there was rough truth in his words.
America was the world's largest consumer of cars, and G.M. was the world's largest producer, a mighty engine of prosperity for G.M. stockholders and the families and communities of workers.


Sounds Around Town
The Beat Goes On
Bo Diddley, Tramps, 51 West 21st Street, Chelsea, (212) 727-7788.
No matter where Bo Diddley roams or what style of music he plays, he never strays too far from the chugging beat that bears his name.
Over the years, the Bo Diddley beat has been borrowed by everyone from the Rolling Stones to Motorhead; these days the originator still plays it with an extra pride and oomph that can't be rivaled.
It's not high-class, but it can soothe the soul.
Shows are tonight at 8:30 and 11:30.
Tickets are $15.
Celtic Fiddlers
Kevin Burke and Johnny Cunningham, Symphony Space, 2537 Broadway, at 95th Street, (212) 864-5400.
Both these Celtic fiddlers have extensive resumes that speak volumes about their allegiance to traditional music: Kevin Burke was a member of the Bothy Band and Patrick Street, and Johnny Cunningham played in Silly Wizard.
But the real truth is in their touch, and in the songs their fiddles sing.
Their airs transport to a time and place of mists and tranquillity; their reels crackle and spring.
Whether they're playing fast or slow, they enliven each moment and melody with virtuosity, passion and dizzying grace.
Tomorrow night with Christian LeMaitre at 8 P.M.
Tickets are $15.
Attitude of No Attitude
Action Swingers.
Wetlands, 161 Hudson Street, TriBeCa, (212) 966-4225.
Rock-and-roll without the pretenses is punk; punk without the pretenses is the Action Swingers.
Brutally elemental and patently obnoxious, the Action Swingers just nail riffs together, stick a drumbeat on top and let the singer Ned Hayden rail about whatever misfortunes are on his mind.
The attitude is no attitude: the first song on the Swingers' 1991 album is titled "Song," and their recent EP is simply called "More Fast Numbers." At their best the Swingers boil punk down to a groove so tight and nasty it's essential.
Sunday at 5 P.M. with the Coats along with Fifth Column.
Admission is $6.


Coors (Adolph) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 4


Death of Petra Kelly Must Be Investigated
To the Editor:
If ever a case existed for international investigative journalism, it is the death of Petra Kelly and Gert Bastian (front page, Oct. 20).
To condemn two pacifists to murder and suicide, or both, is to cheapen their contribution and memory.
Having known Petra and Gert, I'm sure they would have opened their doors to anyone -- and apparently did in late September or early October.


Pitt-Des Moines Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Garrison Helped Extend Freedom of Speech
To the Editor:
Your Oct. 22 obituary of former New Orleans District Attorney Jim Garrison omits perhaps the most significant contribution of his public life.
Well before the investigation of John F. Kennedy's assassination, Mr.
Garrison won a vital battle for free speech and criticism of government.


A Deer Hunter Takes His Quarry


No Headline
There will be a lot of sweet-potato pie and fried green tomatoes and all that, but these are serious people.
The talk at dinner parties will be the Canadian health plan and permanent replacement of strikers, things like that. -- FRANK MANKIEWICZ, on the new mood in Washington.  [ A1:3. ]


Pioneer Financial Services reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Glacier Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Critic's Choice/Dance; A Dance Center Reborn
The demise of the 14th Street Dance Center, an active and imaginative producing organization in the Emanu-El Midtown Y, brought consternation in December.
But the center is back in business, starting this weekend, at the Educational Alliance on the Lower East Side.
Dance concerts will be presented in the intimate Art Deco theater of the alliance, a center for education in the visual arts since its founding in 1920's by Moses Soyer.
The theater seats 197 and has not been used for some time.
It has been renovated, with new curtains, an enlarged stage and upgraded electrical equipment.
The Kevin Wynn Collection is to baptize the dance space tomorrow and Sunday.
"Kevin agreed very graciously to be our first guinea pig," said Oceola Bragg, director of the dance program.
She may be taking a chance.
Mr.
Wynn, a dance faculty member at the State University College at Purchase and a choreographer with 10 years' experience in the United States and Europe, is known for roof-raising, high-energy modern dance.
He is to present two premieres.


Deltona Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 25


ImageAmerica Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Pacificorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Defense Lawyers Attack Heart of Glen Ridge Sex Assault Case
Defense lawyers today attacked the prosecution's contention that the mildly retarded woman in the Glen Ridge sex assault case is incapable of refusing sex because she is mentally defective.
A defense lawyer, Michael Querques, in a new round of cross-examination of a key prosecution psychologist, argued that the young woman was capable of consenting to sex.
To support his contention, Mr.
Querques cited a state psychiatric report on the young woman and her testimony before a grand jury on Nov. 15, 1989, eight months after the events at the heart of the case.


New England Business Service Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 25


Sounds Around Town
Band Leader or Clown?
The Lew Anderson Big Band, Red Blazer Too, 349 West 46th Street, (212) 262-3112.
Clarabell the Clown, of "Howdy Doody" show fame who still makes occasional appearances at shopping malls, will come out of semi-retirement to help Lew Anderson and his Big Band celebrate their third year of appearances at the Red Blazer Too tonight.
Mr.
Anderson should have no trouble reactivating Clarabell since, in addition to being the leader of the band, as well as arranger and star saxophonist, he
is
Clarabell.
Most members of his band are playing in the pit bands of Broadway musicals and, since the Red Blazer is in the heart of the theater district, they can do a warm-up session with Clarabell on their way to their theatrical jobs.
This polished mixture of veterans and up-and-coming newcomers plays at the Red Blazer from 6 until 7:45 P.M. tonight and then runs to make the curtain at their theaters.
There is a $5 minimum but no cover charge.
Half and Half
Ted Rosenthal and Friends, Blue Note, 131 West Third Street, Greenwich Village, (212) 475-8592.
The pianist Ted Rosenthal, winner of the Thelonious Monk International Jazz Piano Competition two years ago, is to lead a sextet on Sunday afternoon in a preview of a concert he will perform on Monday evening at the Merkin Concert Hall, 129 West 67th Street.
The program will be made up of what Mr.
Rosenthal calls an "exposition" in two parts.
The first part is a suite of the music of Thelonious Monk, "Images of Monk," recomposed and arranged by Mr.
Rosenthal.
The second part, "Reflections of Myself," is a group of compositions by Mr.
Rosenthal.
The performing groups will be made up of the saxophonist Dick Oatts, the trumpeter Brian Lynch, the violinist Mark Feldman, the bassist Scott Colley and the drummer Marvin (Smitty) Smith, with Mr.
Rosenthal at the piano.
Performances will be at 1 and 3:30 P.M. on Sunday.
Tickets are $14.50.
In Tune and Swinging
Howard Alden-Dan Barrett Quintet, J's, 2581 Broadway, at 97th Street, (212) 666-3600.
With Chuck Wilson playing clarinet and alto saxophone, Frank Tate on bass and Jackie Williams on drums, the A.B.Q. plays three sets tonight at 9, 10:30 P.M. and midnight.
There is no cover charge, but the minimum for food and drink is $12 at the tables and $7 at the bar.


Interwest Savings Bank reports earnings for Year to Sept 30


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows, performances and art exhibitions in the New York metropolitan region that close soon.
Closing This Weekend  "THE MAGIC FLUTE" and "DIE FLEDERMAUS," New York City Opera, New York State Theater.
The final "Magic Flute" of the season is tomorrow at 8 P.M.
The final "Fledermaus" is Sunday at 1:30 P.M.
Tickets: $10 to $68.
Information: (212) 870-5570.


Market Place; Looking at IHOP: Not Just Pancakes
FIRST, start with the company's oft-mentioned negatives: Operating standards are inconsistent; the chairman recently unloaded 12,000 shares of his stock, and the buyout firm that brought the company public in 1991 sold a huge 80 percent stake in the offering, perhaps signaling a lack of faith in the company's future.
So with all these danger signs, why is Wall Street getting so hot on the International House of Pancakes?
Largely because this is one time the signs don't mean what they seem.


William T. Woodhull; Advertising Executive, 80
William T. Woodhull, a former newspaper advertising executive, died Nov. 3 at Charlton Memorial Hospital in Fall River, Mass.
He was 80 years old and lived in Little Compton, R.I.
Mr. Woodhull died of congestive heart failure, said his wife, Harriet.


At the Bar; Knitting Circle In A Conference Room: With An Eye On Winter, A Law Firm Thinks Of The Needy.
Lawyers are often accused of making things out of whole cloth.
Or of tearing at the social fabric.
Or of embroidering the truth.
Or of spinning yarns.
But here is a story of a law firm in which some sleights-of-hand are serving humanitarian ends.
Every Tuesday at lunchtime, several dozen women gather in a conference room at Debevoise &amp; Plimpton, armed only with crochet hooks and knitting needles.
Together, they are transforming skeins of yarn into afghans for the homeless, lap blankets for the elderly, baby blankets for Mother Hale.
In a sense, the phrase "pro bono publico" is stitched into every item.


Inter-City Products reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Affymax NV reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


COMPANY BRIEFS
ARMCO INC.  said its Armco Steel 50-50 venture with Kawasaki Steel would cut 575 jobs by year's end.
LORAL CORP.  said a unit had won a $134 million contract to develop an improved fire-control system for the Multiple Launch Rocket for the Army.


A Provocative Defense Wins for Fischer
By coolly parlaying an audacious defense into a victory, Bobby Fischer defeated Boris Spassky yesterday and won their exhibition match in Belgrade.
It was perhaps a new beginning for the world champion of 20 years ago, who gave up a dazzling career for solitude.
In this series, neither Fischer nor Spassky equaled the brilliant play that graced their world championship match in 1972.
But Fischer has indicated he wants to keep on playing, and so the question now is: how does he match up against opponents who are stronger than Spassky?
There is Judit Polgar, the 16-year-old Hungarian chess whiz against whom Fischer is reportedly negotiating to play in a few months.
And Viswanathan Anand of India, Vasily Ivanchuk of Ukraine or Gata Kamsky of the United States also come to mind.
All are young, all are extraordinarily talented and all would give Fischer a tough match.


Philip Alampi, Agriculture Chief In Trenton for 26 Years, Dies at 80
Phillip Alampi, who served three Democratic and two Republican Governors of New Jersey as Secretary of Agriculture, died on Wednesday at the Mercer Medical Center in Trenton.
He was 80 years old and lived in Titusville, N.J.
His family said he died of heart failure.


Fischer Beats Spassky and Carves a New Niche for Himself in Chess
Bobby Fischer, the temperamental American chess genius, defeated his old rival Boris Spassky tonight, winning a 30-game, two-month exhibition match and re-establishing himself as a force among the world's better grandmasters.
Tonight's victory came after 27 moves when Mr.
Spassky, in a hopeless position after accepting a Fischer dare to attack and being crushed by a solid defense, resigned to give Mr.
Fischer his winning 10th victory.
Mr.
Spassky won five games and the rest were drawn.


J. P. Morgan And Insurer Start Venture
The Marsh &amp; McLennan Companies and J. P. Morgan &amp; Company opened a major reinsurance company in Bermuda yesterday, hoping to take advantage of a world catastrophe reinsurance market that is dramatically shrinking after years of huge losses and the recent tolls taken by Hurricanes Andrew and Iniki.
The Mid Ocean Reinsurance Company goes into operation with more than $350 million in capital from a host of private and corporate investors and with managers who have long experience in the insurance industry.


U.S. Puts a 200% Punitive Tax On White Wines From Europe
After years of skirmishing over European farm subsidies, the Bush Administration fired the first shot today in what may become a trade war, announcing that in 30 days it would begin collecting a 200 percent import tax on all still white wines from the European Community.
The new taxes cover popular wines like Chablis from France, which currently sells for about $13 a bottle; riesling from Germany, about $10, and verdicchio from Italy, about $9.
In addition to about $270 million in wine, about $30 million worth of cooking oil and pet food ingredients will also be taxed.
Sparkling wines, including Champagne, are not affected.
While the taxes would triple the prices that consumers pay, the impact is not likely to be visible until sometime next year.
Importers of wine, French Cognac and other distilled spirits have been stocking their warehouses in anticipation of the trade war, fearful that if they have to sell the wine at higher prices many customers may turn elsewhere -- perhaps to the white wines of California, Australia and South America.
Current Shipments Not Affected
Carla A. Hills, the United States trade representative, said the delay before the taxes were actually collected would allow for the arrival of wine already bought by American importers and would allow time for further negotiations.
With one exception, similar delays in the past have not resulted in negotiated settlements and the United States has gone ahead and collected the punitive taxes.
But there is added pressure for a settlement this time because the amount of money and the prestige of the exports involved are greater than in previous disputes.
The United States decided to single out white wines because France, the European Community's leading shipper of white wine to the United States, with sales of $125 million last year, has been the most steadfast opponent of compromise in the subsidies dispute.
France's farmers are a potent political force and general elections are scheduled for the spring.
The American decision today means a wine importer in the United States who buys a bottle of European wine for $5 will have to pay a $10 tax, in addition to the Federal excise tax of 7 cents a bottle that is already in place.
Retailers usually charge about 87 percent more than the importer's price of the wine, industry executives say, so a bottle for which an importer now pays $5.07 now is likely to be sold by a retailer for about $9.50.
When the importer is paying $15.07, the retailer is likely to sell it for about $28.25.
Harry F. Mariani, the president and chief operating officer of the Banfi Products Corporation, a large wine importer in Old Brookville, L.I., said prices could climb this winter as white wine stocks dwindle.
"Whoever has some white wine left will probably raise the price at the end, even if they didn't pay the tax," he said.
Dispute Over Subsidies
Mrs.
Hills also released a list of $1.7 billion worth of manufactured goods, including perfume and construction materials, on which the United States may also impose taxes.
The Bush Administration's willingness to impose punitive tariffs rather than find a compromise with the European Community's insistence on continued subsidies is a sign of the Government's determination to punish countries that do not open their markets to American exports.
Over the last 30 years, the United States has repeatedly complained that European farm subsidies unfairly reduce demand for American exports.
The disintegration of the Soviet Union and its diminution as a military threat have freed the United States to take a more aggressive stand.
Tran Van Thinh, the European Community's Ambassador to the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, the organization in Geneva that oversees world trade, said Wednesday that the broad trade talks that have been struggling for six years to try to reduce trade barriers could be severely hurt if the United States went ahead with the taxes.
The European Community challenged the legality of imposing import taxes without GATT's permission.
"In effect, this constitutes an illegal position according to GATT rules," Frans Andriessen, the European Community's External Relations Commissioner, said today.
The foreign ministers of the community's 12 members will meet on Monday in Brussels.
Two GATT panels have ruled that the European Community has violated world trade rules with its indirect subsidies for soybeans, rapeseed and other oilseeds.
But the European Community has used its veto to block American efforts to get GATT approval for its retaliatory taxes.
Europeans Refused Arbitration
Robert E. Hudec, the Melvin C. Steen Professor of Law at the University of Minnesota, said the Bush Administration appeared to be on strong legal ground in imposing duties.
"If you offer to arbitrate the action you propose to take and the other side turns you down, then under international law you have the right to take the action," he said.
Agriculture Minister Jean-Pierre Soisson of France called today for the European Community to raise taxes on an equal amount of American goods.
Mrs.
Hills said the community would have no legal basis for such action but refused to say what the United States would do if the European Community did retaliate.
Mrs.
Hills said she had not discussed today's move with any representative of Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas, the President-elect.
She noted that Mr.
Clinton had emphasized on Wednesday that President Bush remained in charge until Inauguration Day.
Mr.
Clinton strongly supports the strategy of punishing nations that do not open their markets.
The American action today comes after the failure on Tuesday night of talks in Chicago between Agriculture Secretary Edward R. Madigan and Ray MacSharry, the European Community's Agriculture Commissioner.
Mr.
MacSharry stepped down today as the community's negotiator on GATT agricultural issues.
After France, Italy is the largest exporter of white wine to the United States, with $97 million in sales, followed by Germany with $36 million and Portugal with $5.5 million.
Mrs.
Hills identified the 251 wines on the list today as white wines.
But as the French Embassy here pointed out to her office this afternoon, several of the wines, such as Sancerre, are also available as red wines.
The red wines also appear to be subject to the taxes, given the wording of Mrs.
Hills's official order this morning.


Eastern Conference
ATLANTIC DIVISION


Camacho Is Arrested
HECTOR (MACHO) CAMACHO, the former World Boxing Council superfeatherweight and lightweight champion, was arrested early yesterday in Miami after battling two police officers in a hotel parking lot, authorities said.
Camacho was yelling "I'm the Macho Man!" in the lobby of the Miami International Airport Hilton Hotel when police tried to quiet him down, said a Metro-Dade police spokesman, JUAN DEL CASTILLO.


Art in Review
Peter Hristoff  Penine Hart Gallery 152 Wooster Street SoHo Through tomorrow
Most of Peter Hristoff's ink drawings are on small sketchbook pages.
In one case, several are stitched together with black thread; in another, nearly three dozen of various sizes are attached directly to the walls in a corner of the gallery.


Look at Polls as a Fever Chart of the Electorate
To the Editor:
"The Sure Thing That Got Away" by David Moore (Op-Ed, Oct. 25) questions the validity of polling because voters change their minds in the course of an election campaign.


RESULTS PLUS
HOCKEY  Lemieux Rolls On  Mario Lemieux resumed his torrid early-season scoring pace with a goal and three assists, leading the Penguins to an 8-4 victory over the St.
Louis Blues last night in Pittsburgh.
Lemieux, coming off his first scoreless game of the season that stopped a club-record 12-game goal streak, helped the Penguins break open the game with five straight goals after St.
Louis had tied it at 2-2. (AP) BASEBALL  Grace Powers U.S.
Mark Grace of the Chicago Cubs hit two-run homers in consecutive at-bats yesterday, and a team of major leaguers routed the Japan All-Stars, 10-2, in Fukuoka, Japan. (AP) TENNIS  Courier Beats Stich  Top-seeded Jim Courier fought off 13 aces from Michael Stich of Germany to win by 7-6 (7-3), 6-1 at the Paris Open yesterday.
Stefan Edberg, who is seeded No. 3, rallied to defeat Derrick Rostagno of the United States, 7-6 (7-2), 7-6 (8-6). (AP) GOLF  American Team Coasts  Things went extremely well for the Americans yesterday in the World Cup of Golf in Madrid.
Fred Couples shot a six-under-par 66, combining with Davis Love 3d, who fired a 68, as the United States team opened a two-shot lead after the first round of the event at La Moraleja Golf Club. (AP) COLLEGE FOOTBALL  Kansas State Wins  Kitt Rawlings and Tom Randolph blocked Iowa State's first two punts and Eric Gallon rushed for 164 yards as Kansas State beat the Cyclones, 22-13, last night in Manhattan, Kan.
Gallon broke a 56-yard touchdown run in the fourth period as the Wildcats (4-4 and 1-3 in the Big Eight) snapped a four-game losing streak. (AP)


Macy Pins Hope for Rebound on 5-Year Plan
Reflecting the tenor of the times, R. H. Macy &amp; Company yesterday took the wraps off a five-year plan that promises profound and crucial change in the way the 134-year-old retailer conducts its business.
Macy plans to hoist itself out of bankruptcy by tightly controlling expenses to improve its cash flow.
Much of its business plan is devoted to a new system under which merchandise is being purchased and allocated more accurately.
In addition, the company is eliminating a layer of management at its stores and is scaling back its scheduled openings of new stores.
The company estimates that the plan will increase sales over five years by 33 percent and restore it to profitability.


Clinton May Quickly Name Transition Chief in Effort to End Dispute Within Staff
President-elect Bill Clinton may announce his choice of a transition planning chief as soon as Friday in order to quell a dispute that has broken out among his top advisers about who will oversee the transfer of power from the Bush White House.
Aides to Mr.
Clinton said his closest advisers were badly split over whether the Clinton campaign chairman, Mickey Kantor, should run the transition office.
Officials familiar with the President-elect's thinking said he has been urged to announce the decision, which he has apparently already made.


William Phillips 3d, Professor of Sociology
William M. Phillips Jr., a professor emeritus of sociology at Rutgers University, died on Tuesday at his home in Skillman, N.J.
His family said he was in his late 60's.
He died of pancreatic cancer, said a son, William M. 3d, of Kingston, Jamaica, who is a Foreign Service officer.


Child Sex Abuse: Hard to Prove, to Much Dismay
In a case that has stirred public anger and underscored the difficulty of prosecuting sexual abuse cases involving small children, state prosecutors here gave a man his freedom in September in exchange for his signed statement admitting that he had repeatedly raped his 3-year-old daughter.
The case gained wide attention after the child's mother spoke about the accusations in an unusually candid discussion with reporters and criticized the prosecutors.
Afterward, the authorities took the rare step of issuing an eight-page account of their actions that amounted to a defense.


Stephen Sheridan, 80, Electrolux Executive
Stephen S. Sheridan, the retired chief operating officer of the Electrolux vacuum cleaner company, died on Wednesday at White Plains Hospital.
He was 80 years old and lived in Scarsdale, N.Y.
He died of congestive heart failure, his family said.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about President Bush's vetoes referred incorrectly to several measures killed by the President.
Those bills -- including campaign finance reform, removal of most-favored trading status to China and the lifting of an Administration ban on federally financed research using fetal tissues -- were vetoed before adjournment, not since adjournment.


Art in Review
Rafael Ferrer  Nancy Hoffman Gallery 429 West Broadway (near Spring Street) SoHo Through Dec. 2
The latest paintings by Rafael Ferrer underscore his strengths.
His subject is again the Dominican Republic, where he spends part of each year.
In his case, the island is not a picturesque paradise for tourists.
The only hint of a vacationer in this show is a blond in a beach chair in "Isabel de Torres," a painting whose principal subject is a vendor balancing a basket of fruit on her head, a figure of lyric dignity in Mr.
Ferrer's strongly outlined rendition.
For the most part, the locales of these paintings are tumbledown shacks and neighborhood grocery stores, and the people are just as unprepossessing on the surface.


Expediters International reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Clinton Gets A Letter From Dinkins
Now that he has "a friend in the White House," Mayor David N. Dinkins is wasting no time trying to capitalize on that friendship, writing President-elect Bill Clinton to tout some of New York City's programs as national models and urging him to spend billions more on urban centers.
Most of Mr.
Dinkins's 24-page letter, written less than a day after the polls closed, amounted to a plea for more Federal financing for housing, bridges, roads, health care, schools, job training, police officers and drug treatment.
He also asked for the passage of legislation he supports that has been mired in Congress, including a Federal ban on machine guns, bigger tax credits for the poor and a broad-based energy tax.


Serbia: Blowing Up the Balkans
Even while the blood bath of ethnic cleansing continues in Bosnia, the danger of a new horror arises: that Serbia will spread the war to the province of Kosovo.
While the Serbian strongman Slobodan Milosevic tries to use his control of parliament to undermine rivals, his power is ebbing in the streets of Belgrade.
To arouse nationalist fervor and distract from the economic misery he has inflicted he needs a new whipping boy.
Kosovo seems a likely choice.
If Kosovo blows up, neighboring Macedonia won't be far behind.
Urgent steps are needed to contain a wider war.


Golden Moments of the Philharmonic
AT the start of a magical program that CBS broadcast on Jan. 30, 1960, Leonard Bernstein led the New York Philharmonic in the opening of the Beethoven "Eroica" Symphony.
The reading was brisk, agitated and crackling with drama, but after 36 bars, Bernstein stopped, turned to the camera and asked his audience to think of the performance as "the interpretation of Maestro A." Then he conducted an alternative, the carefully shaped, velvety, lyrical reading favored by Maestro Z.
"Now," Bernstein asked, "how can these two performances be so different?" And for the next 50 minutes, with the collaboration of Glenn Gould, Eileen Farrell and Igor Stravinsky, he gave his viewers an easily grasped but sophisticated and sometimes provocative lesson in how musical interpretation works.


Becton, Dickinson reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


N.C.A.A. Takes On Auburn
A year after former Auburn cornerback Eric Ramsey released secretly recorded tapes indicating that he had received illicit financial assistance and that Coach Pat Dye had done nothing about it, the National Collegiate Athletic Association has filed formal charges embracing Ramsey's allegations.
The charges were disclosed yesterday by the university's president, William Muse, who said the football program had been accused of nine major rules violations, among them that a student athlete, presumably Ramsey, had received cash payments from athletic officials and that Dye had failed to act after being notified of the improper payments.
That charge is apparently based on a tape in which Ramsey is heard telling Dye about various assistance he had received from assistant coaches.


Home Oil Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Islanders Come Up Empty Yet Again
Spin doctors looking for work in the political post-season can apply for jobs with the Islanders.
They can point out the positive: that the team is playing well defensively, giving up only five goals in its last two games.
They can ignore the negative: that the team lost again, this time by 3-0 to the North Stars.
It was the second consecutive shutout against the Islanders and their third consecutive defeat.
The Islanders have not scored in 134 minutes 10 seconds.


Outdoing Republicans, Democrats Raised Record Sum for Campaign
The Democrats raised about $71 million for the general election, Bill Clinton's finance director says, exceeding the party's record money drive of 1988 by 40 percent and collecting about $9 million more than the usually more prosperous Republicans.
Rahm Emanuel, the finance director, said Tuesday that the final figures, to be filed soon with the Government, would show that the Democrats collected $20 million in October alone, a record for any party in a single month, as large and small donors scrambled to contribute to a ticket that appeared to be winning.
Breakdown of Budget
The October figure was particularly surprising because the Clinton forces did virtually no fund raising of their own, preferring instead to concentrate on campaigning.
Mr.
Emanuel said $6.2 million came into the party's coffers last month from direct-mail solicitations and the remainder came in a variety of fund-raising events.


Mr. Coffee reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 27


Repap Enterprises reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Review/Theater; A Lout, but a Lout Who Means Well
Aubrey Piper, the title character in "The Show-Off," is a braggart buoyed by misplaced self-confidence.
But with his blissful unwillingness to accept discouragement, he also has an engaging side.
The full dimension of this eternal optimist is captured by Boyd Gaines in the revival of the George Kelly comedy at the Roundabout Theater Company.
The danger in playing the character is to make fun of him instead of simply allowing him to mock himself.
Mr.
Gaines avoids that possibility as he joins with Pat Carroll to offer a mirthful duel of opposites.
Ms.
Carroll plays the honest, confrontational Mrs.
Fisher, who becomes Aubrey's mother-in-law and chief critic.


CCL Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Katy Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


U.S. RECALLS ENVOY TO BURKINA FASO
Concerned that a civil war in Liberia may be developing into a wider regional crisis, the Bush Administration recalled its Ambassador from Burkina Faso today, asserting that the country is supplying weapons to the Liberian rebel leader Charles Taylor.
The State Department spokesman, saying covert military aid was undermining Liberian peace efforts, also said President Blaise Compaore of Burkina Faso had been asked to cancel plans for a new envoy to Washington.
The Ambassador recalled by Washington is Edward P. Brynn.


Review/ Film; First Love And Sartre, As a Youth Grows Up
John Duigan's "Flirting" is the second low-key, easy-to-take installment in the Australian film maker's projected trilogy about the coming of age of Danny Embling (Noah Taylor), the sensitive young fellow introduced in "The Year My Voice Broke," released four years ago.
The new film opens today at the Carnegie Hall Cinemas.
In "Flirting," set in 1965, Danny has been packed off to a fairly fancy boarding school where life is no easier than it was at home.
As he notes on the soundtrack, there is no privacy at the school: "You're surrounded 24 hours a day. Either you become a herd animal or you dig a cave deep inside your head" in which to hide.
Danny is still a very idealized odd-kid-out.
He reads Sartre.
When he has to assume a fake identity, he calls himself Camus.


Jaipur Journal; Maharajahs Ask Benefits, Saying They're Entitled
Were it not for the central procession of marble columns, the scattering of Brobdingnagian silver-encrusted wine vats, a Lalique table and a warehouse worth of overstuffed furniture, Bhawani Singh could comfortably play a set of mixed doubles in his living room.
Down the hall are another 1,500 rooms or so, some bigger, some smaller.
"It is home," Mr.
Singh said, sinking into a brocaded armchair.
"It is beautiful, and if you have beautiful objects, why lock them up?"


Key Centurion Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


For Capital Job Hunters, the Spoils of Victory Are Limited
With a civilian work force of more than two million people, the Federal Government would seem to offer an inviting source of employment to supporters of President-elect Bill Clinton, many of them no doubt struggling in a weak economy.
But the spoils of victory are neither as numerous nor as easy to obtain as is widely assumed.
Experienced capital hands caution that if Mr.
Clinton does a proper job mastering his transition, he will decide on policy priorities before picking people to put the policies into effect.
This could make going to work for the first one-party Government in 12 years an exercise in frustration.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
7.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
4.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
2.87
2.98
4.68
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.99
2.99
4.63
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.18
3.20
4.68
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.41
6.43
7.06
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.68
7.67
7.91
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.62
8.60
8.90
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.55
6.61
6.83
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Japan Scandal Grows on News of Big Bribe Offer
Prosecutors dropped a bombshell in Japan's latest political scandal today when they said in court that seven top officials of the governing party had offered as much as $25 million to persuade the head of a rightist group to halt mocking verbal attacks that were preventing their chosen candidate from becoming Prime Minister five years ago.
The prosecutors said the hush money was rejected.
But they disclosed last month that it ultimately took the intervention of one of Japan's most powerful mobsters to silence the rightists' blaring sound trucks, and the news threatened to engulf much of the Liberal Democratic Party leadership.
This fuels the scandal at a time when the party's largest faction is already riven by a furious power struggle that could paralyze the Government.


Summit Bancorp Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Tyler Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Art in Review
Suzanne Lafont  Museum of Modern Art 11 West 53d Street Through Nov. 15 Marian Goodman Gallery 24 West 57th Street Through Nov. 21
Suzanne Lafont's large, melodramatic photographs strain mightily after significance but never quite achieve it.
Ms.
Lafont, who lives in Paris, photographs her models in close-up, posed against simple backgrounds and engaged in actions that range from the obvious to the obscure.





Franklin First reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


EA Engineering Science/Tech reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Review/Film; Hopping Down the Bunny Trail With Hugh Hefner
The documentary "Hugh Hefner: Once Upon a Time" works nicely as a Rorschach test.
There are those who will find it an appreciative portrait of Playboy's founding father as pioneer, libertarian and social critic, a man "with a castle for a home and a dream for a life." There are also those who will find it a tale of eerie isolation and weird excess, revealing the spiritual emptiness in a life of full-time fun. (Comments like "Hef was having this great time playing pinball" are often heard.)
For the latter group, this film from Lynch-Frost Productions appears to be taking place in some lonely, oversexed outpost of "Twin Peaks." Slow-motion glimpses of Mr.
Hefner (seen in interviews, old photographs and elaborate home movies) seem to emanate from somewhere underwater, thanks partly to music recalling Angelo Badalamenti's "Twin Peaks" score.
And the subject's own comments about his life reinforce the sleepwalking sensation, as when Mr.
Hefner describes his 1985 medical emergency -- a stroke -- as "a stroke of luck."


Iran Continues to Deny Access to American Charged With Spying
Iran continues to deny consular access to an American arrested on charges of bribery and espionage in September, the State Department said today.
The State Department spokesman, Richard A. Boucher, said that the Swiss Embassy in Teheran, which handles American interests in Iran, had tried repeatedly without success to visit the man, Milton Meier, a 58-year-old Texan who has lived in Iran for 17 years.


For Children
New Library Branch
Riverside Branch  of the New York Public Library  127 Amsterdam Avenue (at 65th Street)  (212) 870-1810  Recommended for all ages
This new addition to Lincoln Center combines the Riverside Branch Library and the children's performing-arts collection from the New York Public Library for the Performing Arts across the street.
The new branch has a children's library on the second floor.


Restaurants
Docks Oyster Bar and Seafood Grill
Judging from the twice-daily tidal wave of customers at Docks Oyster Bar and Seafood Grill on Third Avenue, New Yorkers are certainly heeding advice to consume more fish and vegetables.
At around 7 P.M.
Docks's frenzied reservation desk resembles the betting windows at Aqueduct just before post time.
Yet while the clamorous scene there suggests a restaurant that is overwhelmed, it is not.
Reservations are usually honored immediately and once you are seated the service staff is punctual and pleasant.
Arriving without a reservation could be another matter, though.


In Possible Sign on Jobs, Subway Ridership Is Up
After declining for 32 months in a row, the number of people riding the subway has finally begun to pick up, climbing modestly for three consecutive months, transit officials said yesterday.
The increase, economists and transit officials said, may be an early signal that New York City's long-suffering economy is turning around: above all other reasons, passengers board the subway when they have a job to go to and stay home when they do not.


Washington Energy Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Bond Traders Await Data on Jobs
They may not be reading entrails or putting pins in voodoo dolls, but bond traders and dealers are preparing in their own restrained way with forecasts, analyses, trading strategies -- and maybe even some crossed fingers -- for the October unemployment report that is scheduled to be released today.
The expectations of what the numbers will show are all over the lot and there is an opportunity for the market to be surprised.
"One of the Ten Commandments of trading is not to have a position going into a number like this," said Stephen Maher, the head of fixed income at Nikko Securities.


Times Plans to Build a Plant in Queens
The New York Times, which had considered moving all of its printing operations out of New York City, has decided instead to build a $280 million printing plant on city-owned land in College Point, Queens, company executives said yesterday.
Under an agreement announced yesterday at a City Hall news conference with Mayor David N. Dinkins, The Times will lease 31 acres in a city-owned industrial park just west of the Whitestone Expressway.
The city and state will grant tax incentives, low-cost energy and other benefits worth a total of $29 million over the course of a 35-year lease.
The Times currently employs about 1,000 people in press and delivery operations for the daily newspaper at its corporate headquarters, at 229 West 43d Street in Manhattan.
When the new plant is completed -- which company officials said would probably not be until late in the decade, at the earliest -- the printing and distribution operations now in Manhattan will be shifted entirely to College Point.
Company officials said they did not know exactly how many people would work at the new plant, which they said was needed to accommodate high-speed color presses.
Another Plant in New Jersey
The business and news operations of The Times, which employ about 2,000 people, will remain on 43d Street, just west of Times Square.
The Times recently completed a $450 million printing plant in Edison, N.J., where advance sections of the Sunday paper are now printed.
When that plant is in full operation early next year, the newspaper will begin shutting down an older plant in Carlstadt, N.J.
The Sunday sections and some copies of the daily paper have been printed in Carlstadt.
The incentives offered by the city and state to The Times are larger, in proportion to the number of jobs involved, than comparable incentive packages offered recently to other major New York corporations.
But city officials contended that the expense was reasonable because of the large capital investment that The Times will make in the new plant and because manufacturing jobs are particularly hard to attract and keep.
The incentives also cover a much longer period than other agreements.
The Times searched for more than 10 years for a large site in the city for a new printing plant for the daily paper, said Arthur Sulzberger Jr., the publisher of The Times.
Company officials said they had also considered sites in Westchester County and had contemplated rebuilding the Carlstadt plant and equipping it with high-speed color presses. 'Host of Reasons'
That option, which Mr.
Sulzberger said would have been less expensive than relocating within New York City, even with the financial incentives, was ultimately dropped in favor of the Queens site.
"For a host of reasons, among them better distribution and a fundamental commitment to this great city, we believe this decision is in the best long-term interest of The Times," Mr.
Sulzberger said in a letter to the staff yesterday.
Arthur Ochs Sulzberger, the chairman and chief executive of The New York Times Company, described the land in College Point -- now the site of a Police Department automobile pound -- as "the perfect size and shape" for a modern printing print.
"We had long hoped to keep some manufacturing operations in New York City," he said at the news conference.
Initially, he said, it appeared that retaining the printing operation of the daily paper in New York would be far more expensive than shifting all production and distribution to New Jersey.
The incentives helped close the gap, he said.
"The New York Times and the city go back a long way -- to 1851, in fact," he said.
"So it's extra fun to stand here and talk about a project that will take us well into the next century. As you must see, we have faith in the city's future and its long-term vitality." 'Take Great Pride'
The Mayor noted that The Times's announcement followed decisions in recent months by other major corporations, including the Morgan Stanley Group, Prudential Securities and four of the five commodities exchanges, to remain in New York.
"We take great pride in serving as the world's communications capital," Mr.
Dinkins said.
"Today I am especially proud to reaffirm that status in announcing that all the news that's fit to print in The New York Times is going to be fitted and printed in the borough of Queens."
Of the $29 million in incentives, slightly less than $9 million is incentives that the city would offer automatically to any business that would lease the site, said Carl Weisbrod, president of the city's Economic Development Corporation.
The remaining $20 million in incentives are discretionary.
About $11.3 million will come from the state, in the form of low-cost electricity from a state-owned nuclear power plant and exemptions from state sales taxes on construction materials, Mr.
Weisbrod said.
Poor Soil Conditions
The city will provide an additional $8.7 million in incentives, including a $4.7 million grant to help build a foundation for the building.
Soil conditions on the marshy site are very poor, Mr.
Weisbrod said.
The city will also provide relief from some city sales taxes and payments in lieu of taxes, he said.
The cost of the agreement to the city and state is relatively high, compared with incentives to other corporations.
Morgan Stanley agreed last month to a $39.6 million package of incentives to keep 4,100 jobs in Manhattan for 10 years -- or slightly less than $10,000 per job.
Prudential Securities is to receive $106 million in tax incentives and energy savings over 20 years to retain 5,000 jobs, or about $21,000 per job.
The incentives offered to The Times would come to about $29,000 per job over 35 years if all 1,000 production and distribution jobs now at 43d Street were transferred to Queens.
But Mr.
Weisbrod contended that retaining manufacturing jobs was much harder in New York City than retaining white-collar jobs at financial-services companies like Morgan Stanley and Prudential Securities.
He also said he could not recall a similarly large investment in a manufacturing plant in the city.
"These jobs are awfully important to keep in the city," he said.
"They are hard to keep in the city."


Hologic Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Review/Film; Father, Son and One Dead Fish
"Fathers and Sons" is actually about only one father -- Max Fish (Jeff Goldblum), a former bad-boy movie director now living in mock-modest circumstances on the Jersey Shore -- and one son (Rory Cochrane).
Beyond that, it is in no way succinct.
As written and directed by Paul Mones, this is the torpid, myopic story of two brooding loners in a cute setting, to which the film pays unhelpfully rapt attention.
"Things change; things remain the same," says the teen-age son, Ed, as the camera lingers lovingly on a bleak shot of the beach.
Mr.
Mones, who manages to incorporate both a dead fish (get it?) and a fortuneteller (Rosanna Arquette, mincing showily in a needless role) into his film, has described "Fathers and Sons" as "a tapestry" and "a fugue." He also boils down his original inspiration to this: "ED FISH. Sixteen-year-old kid sits on the porch. Large, liquid eyes." Around this vision, the film maker has constructed a strained story of Max's efforts to cope with his son's growing independence while also getting back on his own two feet.
The death of Max's wife has reminded Max that he must strive to be a better, simpler person, which is why he has turned his back on film making and the big city.


Wynn's International reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


PATH Put the Safety Of Its Passengers First
To the Editor:
"Why You Can't Trust the Port Authority" (letter, Oct. 21) by Bill Hine, on the Port Authority Trans-Hudson emergency ventilation facility on Morton Street, neglects the reason the facility was built: the safety of the thousands of commuters who travel between New York and New Jersey daily.
Yes, the facility could have been constructed with most of the fan equipment underground.


Reviews/Fashion; Dell'Olio's Soft Spin Enlivens Sportswear
As the spring fashion openings moved into the home stretch, Louis Dell'Olio struck a fervent blow for the new sportswear -- all in soft, gauzelike fabrics, without a rigid line.
The basic pieces in his collection for Anne Klein have been re-evaluated.
Jackets are no longer firmly constructed; they're as simple as shirts.
Dresses, also supple, are called tunics, probably because they are slit up the sides, forming curved panels over pants.


Granite Construction reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


The Winds of War, 90's-Style
War with Europe: an inconceivable thought that suddenly isn't so inconceivable.
This war, however, would be of the post-cold-war variety -- fought not with bombs and bullets but with escalating barrages of trade restrictions.
The Bush Administration was firm and right yesterday when it announced it would impose punitive tariffs on European white wines.
That may lead to a trade war and jeopardize completion of the Uruguay Round of international trade talks.
But these immense risks have to be taken.


Iran Sues U.S. Over Gulf Attacks
Iran filed a lawsuit this week against the United States at the World Court, demanding reparations for American attacks on three oil platforms in the Iran-Iraq war, Iranian radio reported today.
The attacks, which occurred in the latter part of the 1980-1988 war, were seen by Iranian leaders as part of an effort to press them to agree to a United Nations peace resolution.


Classical Music in Review
Anner Bylsma
Cellist  Weill Recital Hall


Transactions
Baseball  National League
CINCINNATI REDS -- Purchased the contract of Greg Cadaret, pitcher, from the New York Yankees.
FLORIDA MARLINS -- Agreed to terms with Charles Johnson, catcher.
Basketball  National Basketball Association
BOSTON CELTICS -- Named Tom McGrath director of special events.
Continental Basketball Association
CBA -- Reinstated Duane Washington, guard.
COLUMBUS HORIZON -- Signed Mark Baker, Richard Morgan and Sedric Toney, guards; Sam Hill, Kermit Holmes and Ed Horton, forwards.
FARGO-MOORHEAD FEVER -- Signed Alton Lee Gipson, forward; Keith Wilson and Everette Stephens, forwards.
FORT WAYNE FURY -- Signed Eddie Anderson, Kevin Stevenson and Reed Crafton, guards; Tracy Foster, Torgier Bryn and Jeff Rekeweg, forwards.
Placed Travis Williams on the injured reserve list.
Football  National Football League
NEW ENGLAND PATRIOTS -- Activated Scott Bowles, offensive lineman, from the practice squad.
PITTSBURGH STEELERS -- Placed Jerry Olsavsky, linebacker, on injured reserve.
Activated Alan Haller, cornerback, from the practice squad.
TAMPA BAY BUCCANEERS -- Signed Mike Barber, wide receiver.
Waived Willie Culpepper, wide receiver.
Hockey  National Hockey League
CHICAGO BLACKHAWKS -- Announced the resignation of Mike Keenan, general manager.
Named Bob Pulford general manager.
NEW YORK RANGERS -- Traded Dave Archibald, left wing, to the Ottawa Senators for a fifth-round draft choice in the 1993 entry draft.
PITTSBURGH PENGUINS -- Traded Jeff Chychrun, defenseman, to the Los Angeles Kings for Peter Ahola, defenseman.
Colonial Hockey League
FLINT BULLDOGS -- Purchased the contract of Corey Lyons, left wing, from the Brantford Smoke.
Soccer  National Professional Soccer League
MILWAUKEE WAVE -- Signed John Garvey, forward, and Tim Martin, defender, to two-year contracts.
College
NCAA -- Placed the Lamar University women's basketball program on two years probation for major rules violations committed during the 1990-91 season.
MILLERSVILLE, Pa. -- Named Brenda Bumgardner assistant cross country and track and field coach.
REGIS -- Announced that it will add women's intercollegiate golf in 1993-94.
ST.
THOMAS AQUINAS -- Named Derek Mitchell men's assistant basketball coach and Jeff Osterman women's assistant basketball coach.
STETSON -- Announced the resignation of Mike Mugavero, men's soccer coach, effective Dec. 11.


Classical Music in Review
John Cage Tributes  S.E.M. Ensemble  Carnegie Hall  'Cagemusicircus'  Symphony Space


Boston Names a Banker
The president of Fleet Bank's Massachusetts operations was named to head a Boston bid to stage the 2004 Summer Olympics.


Walter J. Mahoney, Executive, 76
Walter J. Mahoney, a retired Wall Street executive, died on Thursday at his home in Jupiter, Fla.
He was 76 years old.
He died of heart failure, his family said.


Hungary Rejects Anti-Semitic Articles
To the Editor:
In "Termites Are Devouring Hungary" (Op-Ed, Oct. 5), you publish a letter by George Soros, Wall Street financier and philanthropist, to Prime Minister Jozsef Antall of Hungary, about attacks made against Mr.
Soros and his foundation in Hungarian newspapers, principally one edited by Istvan Csurka, who is a member of Parliament and one of six vice presidents of Hungarian Democratic Forum, the governing party.


Bernard Kalinkowitz, Psychology Expert, 77
Prof.
Bernard N. Kalinkowitz, a psychologist and psychoanalyst at New York University, died on Wednesday at Tisch Hospital of New York University Medical Center.
He was 77 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died of heart failure, the university reported.


Japan Can't Teach Us Much About Baseball
To the Editor:
Americans feel compelled to compare their country with Japan, usually with good reason.
Americans have also recently started saying that America needs to become better at being itself and should not try to become Japanese.
Which doesn't rule out the usefulness of comparisons.
In sports and athletics, though, I wonder if Japan has much to offer, as suggested in "Land of the Rising Fastball" by Robert Whiting (Op-Ed, Oct. 7).
I recently returned from Tokyo, where I lived and worked more than a year, watching baseball and other sports in person and on television.


THE TRANSITION: The Old Team; Gates Announces He Will Retire as Director of Central Intelligence Early Next Year
Robert M. Gates, who survived extraordinarily difficult confirmation hearings to become Director of Central Intelligence a year ago, will retire next year, a spokesman for the C.I.A. said today.
In announcing Mr.
Gates's plans, the spokesman, Peter Earnest, said: "The Director expects to leave in January. If the new Administration were to ask him to stay on for a short period of time to help with the overlap, he would be happy to cooperate."


Doctors Consider a Specialty Focusing on Women's Health
Dr.
Adriane Fugh-Berman, a general practitioner in Washington, says that on her first day in medical school a few years ago, a lab instructor told students to cut off the female cadaver's breasts and discard them.
How many of her fellow students, she now asks, took away the message that despite the epidemic of breast cancer, women's breasts had no medical significance?
There is no way of telling how common such attitudes are in medical schools.
But incidents like these have convinced many female doctors like Dr.
Fugh-Berman that medicine has such a profound male bias that women's health needs are being ignored -- and that there needs to be a new medical specialty devoted to women's health.


American Enchants Dublin With an O'Neill Play
Hickey arrived in town three weeks ago, not a particularly well known character among Dublin theatergoers.
Well, boys and girls, as the protagonist of "The Iceman Cometh" might say, that's all changed now.
Brian Dennehy, the American movie and television actor, has been playing Hickey, Eugene O'Neill's glib and ultimately guilt-ridden salesman, to full houses six nights a week in a four-week run ending Saturday night at the Abbey Theater, and the critics and the audiences have made the four-and-a-half-hour American classic the talk of the annual theater festival here.
This is no mean deed, as the Gate Theater has a highly praised production of "Tartuffe," and several new works are also doing well.


Retirees Often Face Barriers In Fight for Pension Benefits
Almost two years after retiring, Jim N. still does not know where his pension money went.
But what he really can't figure out is why no one else seems to care.
"I must have called I don't know how many agencies," he said.
"Government agencies, private agencies. You can't find help. Nobody knows anything."


When Preferreds Are Convertible
Preferred stock has a preference over common stock in dividends and other matters, but convertible preferred stock has an extra feature.
It can be exchanged for the common at a set price until a set date.
Because convertible preferreds pay dividends at a fixed rate, have an opportunity for price increases and present limited downside risk, they are considered safer investments than their underlying common.
These hybrids also generally offer higher income than common stock and greater appreciation potential than bonds.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 2-6  TRANS-ATLANTIC IMPASSE
News analysis: Leaders of the seven giant industrial nations have said for years that the world trade talks are too important to leave to technicians, so many are now looking to President-elect Bill Clinton and Germany's Chancellor to save the day.  1  OIL MONEY REVITALIZES IRAN
Rebounding from an eight-year war, Iran has reclaimed its place as the world's second largest oil exporter.
Now it is angling -- and ominously rearming -- to become the top power in the Persian Gulf.  1  Iran wants compensation for U.S. attacks on three oil platforms.  6  JEWS RAID NEO-NAZIS IN ROME
Wary of retaliation, the police increased patrols outside Rome's synagogue after Jewish youths ransacked the headquarters of one of the city's neo-Nazi groups.  3  GERMANY PLANS REPARATIONS
The German Government has quietly signed an agreement to pay millions of dollars to European Jews who survived Nazi persecution but were never compensated or received minimal compensation.  3  ONE FOOT IN THE PHILIPPINES
The Philippines agreed to give American fighting ships, aircraft and troops access to military installations in the Philippines after the United States pulls out of its last military base there this month.  2  U.S.
ENVOY BIDS RUSSIA LUCK
After a tempestuous 15 months as United States Ambassador to Russia, Robert Strauss is leaving with the conviction that it is in the right hands and on the right track toward an economic transformation.  2  APARTHEID'S MARK ON TEST SCORES
To the black students undergoing them, graduation exams are a dispiriting ritual by which South African blacks measure how little they have advanced since their ostensible liberation from apartheid.  4  National 7-10  CLINTON PICKS TRANSITION CHIEFS
The President-elect chose Warren Christopher for the day-to-day job of managing the transfer of White House power and named Vernon Jordan as the transition team's chairman.  1  In Christopher, Clinton has chosen a consummate diplomat.  9  In his own life, Jordan has made some notable transitions.  9  Within the G.O.P., prognostications for '96.  8  After a brief Republican tenure, the C.I.A. chief plans to retire.  8  A PARDON FOR WEINBERGER?
White House supporters of Caspar Weinberger, the former Defense Secretary, are pressing for a pardon on charges arising from the Iran arms deal, a senior official says, but the suggestion has not yet reached President Bush's desk.  1  A White House theory: the Iran-contra prosecutor as saboteur.  8  A PUSH FOR A NEW MEDICAL FIELD
Many female doctors are convinced that medicine has so profound a male bias that the health needs of women are being ignored and that there should be a new medical specialty devoted to them.  1  A FIRST UNDER DISABILITIES LAW
The Government filed its first lawsuit under the new Americans With Disabilities Act.
The suit was brought on behalf of an executive who lost his job after his employer, a security-guard company, learned that he had brain cancer.  7  TROOPS WILL PATROL A FREEWAY
Hoping to halt sniper and stone-throwing attacks that have killed one person and alarmed tourists, the Governor of Florida ordered the National Guard to begin patrolling a bypass of the main Interstate highway linking Florida and the Northeast.  7  ECHOES OF LOS ANGELES
A black motorist was beaten to death in Detroit after being stopped by the police.
Two white officers suspected of killing him were suspended without pay, as were five officers who witnessed the beating.  7  Religion Notes: A rabbi's many-faceted legacy.  10  A Federal study found that childhood asthma was on the rise.  10  Metro Digest 23  FERRY TERMINAL DESIGN CHOSEN
With a clock face large enough to change the whole face of lower Manhattan, a design by two of America's most adventurous architects has been chosen for the new Staten Island Ferry terminal.  1  NO HELP FOR PENSION PROBLEMS
Many retirees with problems or complaints about their pensions discover that pursuing their claims can be a long and fruitless chase.
Government agencies do not pursue individual claims, and private lawyers generally will not help, either.  1  A SURPRISE IS IN STORE FOR CHINA
About New York: Thanks to the Wonton Food company of Brooklyn, China will soon have fortune cookies.
Until now the cookies, which cap off meals in most of America's 30,000 Chinese restaurants, have been unknown in China.
About New York.1  Business Digest 35  Fashion 27  Calvin Klein floats into the future.
Insects by Lars, Nostalgia by Duke.
Benjamin C. Riggs, a psychiatrist and an educator.
Editorials/Op-Ed 20-21  Editorials  The networks get their due.
China: Five years wasted.
Hate's hold on Yugoslavia's news.
Letters  Russell Baker: He's right, Emma.
Theodore Sorensen: Charting the new New Frontier.
Celinda Lake: Women won on the merits.
Susan Sandler: The West Side has lost patience.
Paul Cellupica: The political dawn arrives for gays.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  A NEW FACE  IN LOWER MANHATTAN
With a clock face large enough to change the whole face of lower Manhattan, a design by two of America's most adventurous architects has been chosen for the new Staten Island Ferry terminal.
The design, by Robert Venturi and Denise Scott Brown, won an unusual municipal competition to replace the old ferry building, which was devasted by fire in 1991.
The new terminal would be the first building in New York designed by Mr.
Venturi, who designed the Sainsbury Wing of the National Gallery in London.
Page 1.
A TASTE OF AMERICA
Fortune cookies, which cap off just about every meal served in most of America's 30,000 Chinese restaurants, are untasted in China.
Like hot dogs, pizza and more particularly, chop suey, they are essentially American concoctions.
But Wonton Foods, which produces a million fortune cookies a day in New York, has decided that it's time to change all that.
About New York by Michael T. Kaufman, page 1.


Benjamin Riggs, 78, Leader in Psychiatry In the South, Is Dead
Benjamin C. Riggs, a psychiatrist and educator who helped introduce psychoanalytic training in South Carolina, died Tuesday at Charleston Hospital in Charleston, S.C.
He was 78 years old and lived in nearby Wando.
He died of prostate cancer, his family said.


A Confident U.S. Envoy Prepares to Leave Moscow
When Robert S. Strauss arrived here to take up his post as the United States Ambassador, there was a coup going on, so on the drive in from the airport he settled back for a nap.
"There won't be much time to sleep later on," he explained to his surprised wife.
Leaving Moscow a tempestuous 15 months later, Mr.
Strauss said he was still not sure when there would be rest.
But he said he was convinced that if Russia could hang tough through an additional 18 to 24 months without an explosion, the country's economic crisis would begin to lift.


Immigrants' Fear of Forms Imperils Aid to Schools
When Lyubov Golant was told to sign a standard government form to qualify her son for free lunch at a Brooklyn public school last fall, her first reflex was fear.
After years of having to answer prying questions from Soviet authorities before getting a job or even a library card, she was suspicious of giving the school personal information like her family's income, the number of people in her household and whether they were on welfare.


THE TRANSITION: The White House; Bush Aides Urging Weinberger Pardon In Iran-Arms Affair
White House supporters of Caspar W. Weinberger, the former Secretary of Defense, have suggested that President Bush grant him a pardon on charges arising from the arms-for-hostages deal with Iran.
A senior White House official said today that the matter had not gone beyond discussions at middle levels in the Administration.
He said it had not reached President Bush's desk and that it was not likely to be considered soon.


Late Rally by Nets Gets Daly Era Off to 1-0 Start
Down the stretch, where they faltered so often in recent seasons, the Nets had the right stuff tonight in their season opener against Philadelphia and the 76ers did not have Charles Barkley.
So the Chuck Daly era in New Jersey began with a 114-111 victory at the Spectrum.
Daly, who took over the coaching reins from Bill Fitch this season, saw his team rally in the final minutes and then survive a shot at the buzzer, the kind Barkley made so many times before he was traded to Phoenix in the off season.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
The unemployment rate dropped by one-tenth of a point for the fourth straight month in October, to 7.4 percent, but the creation of new jobs remained at a near standstill.
Analysts said the report could be seen as not contradicting tentative signs pointing to a pickup in the economy.  [ Page 35. ]
Consumer credit grew at an annual rate of 2.7 percent in September.
It was the first increase in eight months, suggesting that people were beginning to increase spending.  [ 35. ] International
European diplomats look to Bill Clinton and Helmet Kohl, Chancellor of Germany, to save the day before a trade war erupts.
But it is unclear what either man intends to do.
News Analysis.  [ 1. ]
American wine makers fear they will be harmed, not helped, by a punitive tax on European wine.
Some wine executives fear retaliation on exports of California wine to Europe.  [ 35. ] Companies
The Los Angeles Times plans to drop its San Diego County edition and to eliminate 500 jobs through a voluntary buyout program and attrition.
The moves are a result of an advertising slump.  [ 35. ]
BellSouth plans to reduce its work force by 8,000 employees, or more than 8 percent of its 97,000 employees, within four years.  [ 37. ]
General Motors has reduced the age of eligibility for early retirement for some salaried employees to 50.  [ 37. ]
Food Lion's stock fell after "Prime Time Live" accused it of poor sanitation practices.
The company disputed the report.  [ 37. ]
Motorola's Iridium unit plans to sell 85 percent of its stock to telecommunications companies that would share in profits.  [ 39. ] Markets
Blue-chip stocks slipped, although over all more issues advanced than declined.
The Dow lost 3.78 points, to 3,240.06.  [ 36. ]
Treasury bond prices tumbled.
In part the market was cautious before the Treasury's quarterly refunding.  [ 43. ]
The dollar rose.
Traders said that as bond yields rise, the dollar will keep going higher.  [ 44. ]  Soybean futures were higher.  [ 44. ]  Your Money
Personal bankruptcies have grown sharply as the country's economic weakness has persisted.  [ 33. ]
Some firms are less than candid about differences between C.D.'s and "C.D. alternatives." Susan Antilla: Investing.  [ 33. ]
Bank deposits are less protected because of changes involving the F.D.I.C.
Michael Quint: Banking.  [ 34. ]


First Police Cadets Graduate From CUNY Program


THE TRANSITION: The New Team; Jordan: a Capital Insider With Civil Rights Roots
Vernon E. Jordan's first moment in the public eye was a stormy one.
In the grainy films that show the history of the civil rights movement, Mr.
Jordan can be seen as the tall, strikingly handsome man escorting a young black woman, Charlayne Hunter, into the University of Georgia to the jeers of whites in 1961.
The year after the University of Georgia was integrated, Mr.
Jordan, who was a young law clerk fighting for integration, became the field secretary for the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People in Georgia.
It was the beginning of a career that took him to the top echelons of the civil rights hierarchy.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  A Shock From Becker  Playing nearly perfect tennis, Boris Becker beat the No. 1-ranked player in the world, Jim Courier of the United States, yesterday to advance to the semifinals of the Paris Open.
The German wasn't the only one to have a banner day.
The defending champion, Guy Forget of France, after being down by 4-0 in the second set, saved two match points to defeat Stefan Edberg and also advance in the $2.1 million event.
Becker, diving to make winning volleys as if he were at Wimbledon, won, 7-6 (7-5), 6-3.
Forget prevailed, 7-6 (5-7), 7-6 (7-3), 6-3. (AP) GOLF  3-Stroke Lead for U.S.
Birdies on the same hole late in the round yesterday by Fred Couples and Davis Love 3d gave the United States a three-shot lead over Spain after the second round of the World Cup of Golf in Madrid.
The Americans birdied the par-5 16th hole at 6,955-yard La Moraleja No. 2 course.
Couples shot a one-under-par 71 that included two double-bogeys.
Love had his second straight 68 to give America's top two players a two-round total of 15-under-par 273.
Both Jose Rivero and Miguel Angel Jimenez shot 70 for Spain.
The defending champion, Sweden, closed fast to move into third place at 277 as Anders Forsbrand fired a six-under-par 30 over the back nine to finish with 66.
Total medal score over the four-round, $1.1 million tournament, which ends tomorrow, will determine the team winner. (AP)


Jobless Rate Is 7.4% For Month
The nation's unemployment rate dropped by a tenth of a point in October for the fourth straight month, to 7.4 percent, but job growth remained at a near standstill, the Labor Department said today.
Analysts found an assortment of good and bad in the latest figures as they waded through crosscurrents that included the end of federally subsidized summer job programs, the return to work of striking school employees, a Postal Service early-retirement program and the cleanup of Hurricane Andrew.


Corrections
An article on Oct. 14 about James B. Stockdale's performance in the Oct. 13 Vice-Presidential debate quoted his remark on education incorrectly.
Mr.
Stockdale said, "In schools, bureaucracy is bad and autonomy is good"; he did not say "economy."


Rangers' Archibald Is Traded to Ottawa
The Rangers yesterday traded forward DAVID ARCHIBALD, who has been playing for their minor league affiliate in Binghamton, N.Y., since the season opened, to the Ottawa Senators for the Senators' fifth-round pick in the 1993 draft.


Stevens Is Out
Pittsburgh Penguins left wing KEVIN STEVENS will be sidelined for three to four weeks while he recovers from arthroscopic surgery yesterday to repair torn cartilage in his left knee.
Stevens scored 14 goals and assisted on 19 others through the Penguins' first 14 games.
He is second in N.H.L. scoring with 33 points, trailing only linemate Mario Lemieux, who has 42 points.
His 13-game scoring streak ended when he hurt the knee Thursday night in the opening minute of the Penguins' 8-4 victory over the St.
Louis Blues.


Dan Erkkila, 51, Dies; Flutist and Composer
Dan Erkkila, a flutist and composer, died on Sunday at the home of a friend in Manhattan.
He was 51 years old.
He died of AIDS, said the friend, Judith Michael.


Review/Pop; The Soda Bottle And the Conch
Dressed to suggest an Aztec warrior, Sergio Arau picked up a conch shell as if he would toot an ancient fanfare.
He huffed, tried again, gave up and put the shell down; then he picked up a Coca-Cola bottle, took a swig, and blew a hearty note.
That vignette, of a Mexican heritage meeting American consumer culture, presented one theme of Mr.
Arau's good-humored show at S.O.B.'s on Monday night.
He leads a band that plays blues-based hard rock but also includes an accordion for occasional hints of Mexico's norteno music.
His costume, with frequent changes, placed him somewhere between heavy-metal leathers and mariachi glitter.
A silent dancer-cum-sidekick, and sometimes band members, wore masks akin to the skeletons of Mexican Day of the Dead lore.


Alternatives to C.D.'s: The Ads Skip the Risks
THE C.D. alternative.
Talk about winning words.
Investors who have become disgusted with low rates on safe money-market accounts and certificates of deposit are eager for investments to replace the high yields and low risk they used to enjoy.
Little surprise, then, that advertising copywriters are responding with pitches that sound just right.
"Good news for C.D. Holders!" shouts one ad for a bond fund.
"C.D. coming due? Sick of 3 percent?" asks another pitch, this one for a highly risky mortgage investment.


Detroit Suspends Policemen In Fatal Beating of Motorist
A black motorist was beaten to death here Thursday night after being stopped in a police stakeout of a crack house, and today the Police Chief suspended without pay two white officers suspected of killing him as well as five officers who witnessed the beating.
Although an internal Police Department inquiry into the beating is still under way, the Police Chief, Stanley Knox, made clear at a news conference today that the investigators had already concluded that there was wrongdoing by at least some of the officers involved.


A New Fischer Match? It Depends, He Says
Bobby Fischer, the mercurial American chess genius who may face prosecution in the United States for playing here in breach of United Nations sanctions against Yugoslavia, refused today to say when he was going home.
But he did indicate he was open to another match.
At a news conference the day after he defeated Boris Spassky in a 30-game exhibition match, Mr.
Fischer was asked about a letter he had received from the United States Treasury warning that he might have acted illegally by taking part in a match offering $5 million in prize money.
He replied: "I understand they haven't done anything yet. I'm taking a wait-and-see attitude."


If Given a Choice


William Phillips Jr., Professor of Sociology
William M. Phillips Jr., a professor emeritus of sociology at Rutgers University, died on Tuesday at his home in Skillman, N.J.
His family said he was in his late 60's.
He died of pancreatic cancer, said a son, William M. 3d, of Kingston, Jamaica, who is a Foreign Service officer.


Japan Can't Teach Us Much About Baseball; How to Save the Game
To the Editor:
I agree with Jack Sands in "Wake Up and Play Ball" (Op-Ed, Oct. 17), that baseball, our national pastime, is well worth saving and wish to make several suggestions:


American Enchants Dublin With an O'Neill Play
Hickey arrived in town three weeks ago, not a particularly well known character among Dublin theatergoers.
Well, boys and girls, as the protagonist of "The Iceman Cometh" might say, that's all changed now.
Brian Dennehy, the American movie and television actor, has been playing Hickey, Eugene O'Neill's glib and ultimately guilt-ridden salesman, to full houses six nights a week in a four-week run ending Saturday night at the Abbey Theater, and the critics and the audiences have made the four-and-a-half-hour American classic the talk of the annual theater festival here.
This is no mean deed, as the Gate Theater has a highly praised production of "Tartuffe," and several new works are also doing well.


No Headline
Women's health is a separate body of knowledge and deserves to be treated as a legitimate area of inquiry. -- DR.
KAREN JOHNSON, a San Francisco psychiatrist.  [ 10:3. ]


Stephen Sheridan, 80, Electrolux Executive
Stephen S. Sheridan, the retired chief operating officer of the Electrolux vacuum cleaner company, died on Wednesday at White Plains Hospital.
He was 80 years old and lived in Scarsdale, N.Y.
He died of congestive heart failure, his family said.


In Southeast Turkey, Rival Terrorists War
To the Editor:
Re "In Turkey, Journalists Do Their Job in Peril" (letter, Oct. 8) by Senators William Cohen and Bob Graham and Representatives Bill Green and John Lewis: It is unfortunate to see unfounded allegations and disinformation used to accuse Turkish security forces of human rights violations.
That Turkish security forces may be responsible for attacks on journalists in southeast Turkey is ludicrous.
In southeast Turkey the P.K.K., a Marxist-Leninist terror organization, clashes with rival terrorist groups, primarily Hezbollah, a fundamentalist terrorist organization.
Their attacks on one another have left 45 Hezbollah members and 72 P.K.K. dead, while 19 Hezbollah members and 45 P.K.K. members have been wounded.


Golf Looks Good
Golf moved closer yesterday to inclusion in the 1996 Games as the International Olympic Committee asked Atlanta organizers to submit a formal proposal.
While debate on the merits of the plan were put off until later, golf appeared to be gaining enough high-level backing within the IOC to overcome the opposition of vice president KEVAN GOSPER.


Letter: On Law Enforcement; Drug Assets Serve Poetic Justice
To the Editor:
"The Case of the Prosecutor's BMW" (editorial, Oct. 8) criticizes the general limitation on the use of criminals' forfeited assets for law enforcement purposes, and suggests that "drug treatment or school programs could use such money even more than district attorneys or police." In fact, both law enforcement and social services programs have benefited directly from the forfeiture of real property by drug dealers.


Classical Music in Review
'Faust'
Amato Opera  319 Bowery, at Second Street  Through Nov. 22


Review/Music; Messiaen Premiere: Mysticism And Birds
Olivier Messiaen once wrote that whenever he experienced an "hour of gloom," whenever he became aware of his own futile efforts, whenever all of human music seemed inadequate, nothing was left for him but to seek out the "true, lost face of music," somewhere in the forest, fields, mountains or seashore, among the sounds of birds.
That quest came to mind during Messiaen's "Eclairs sur l'Au-Dela. . . . ," which was given its world premiere by the New York Philharmonic under Zubin Mehta's direction on Thursday night in Avery Fisher Hall.
Commissioned by the orchestra to celebrate its 150th anniversary, and completed just a few months before Messiaen's death last spring, the work, "Illuminations of the Beyond," seems meant as a sort of summation of the composer's career.
It marks the end of a lifetime of composition in which the artifice of human music was used to point to something beyond artifice, to evoke something beyond earthly experience.
Mr.
Mehta prefaced the performance by speaking of Messiaen's vision of death, of his faith that he would finally come to understand "the invisible."


Notre Dame and Boston College: Tears or Tier One?
The football seasons for Notre Dame and Boston College should reach a much clearer defining point by late Saturday afternoon.
The Eagles will know if their trip through the fall will continue to be a joy ride.
The preservation of an undefeated record for the 7-0-1 Eagles could place them in the heights of the New Year's Day elite.
Or, in the language of the new coalition of bowl games: tier one.


Top 10 U.S. Government Bond Funds
United States Government bond funds are regarded as the safest of all mutual funds.
Investors in these funds seek an assured steady income.
As of June 30, the latest data available, Treasury bonds made up 41.8 percent of the holdings in the funds.
The bulk of the other holdings were in mortgage-backed securities issued by the Government National Mortgage Association, or Ginnie Mae, (23.5 percent); the Federal National Mortgage Association, or Fannie Mae, (9.8 percent), and the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation, or Freddie Mac, (8.4 percent).


Thompson Is Injured
Mets outfielder RYAN THOMPSON, acquired in the trade with Toronto for pitcher DAVID CONE last August, injured his right elbow during an Arizona Fall League game.
The Mets said Thompson sustained a sprain of the medial collateral ligament in his right elbow.


Accuser's Identity Shielded in Johnson Case
A Federal judge ruled yesterday that the name of the woman who has accused Magic Johnson of infecting her with the virus that causes AIDS must not be disclosed by court personnel and lawyers involved in the case, but that Johnson could be identified as the defendant and that the woman's complaint would be unsealed.
The ruling by District Judge Richard Enslen in Kalamazoo, Mich., denied the key element of a motion filed by The Detroit News, The Detroit Free Press and the Michigan Press Association.
The newspapers and the association sought to overturn an order by a Federal magistrate on Oct. 30 at the time the complaint was filed.
Newspapers Would Reveal Name
Johnson, who previously confirmed that he was the defendant and acknowledged having had sex with the woman, was not represented in court yesterday.
His Los Angeles-based lawyer, Howard Weitzman, said that Johnson did not want to cause the woman any further pain by disclosing her name but believed that the court should not keep it secret.


Keenan Quits Hawks
The Chicago Blackhawks' general manager, MIKE KEENAN, resigned yesterday, reportedly because he suffered "withdrawal pains" from coaching.
The team's owner, WILLIAM WIRTZ, said at a news conference that BOB PULFORD, the team's senior vice president, would take over as general manager.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about relations between Croats and Muslims in Bosnia and Herzegovina referred incorrectly to their ethnic background in some copies.
Both groups are Slavic.


Hynes Voices His Frustration With Jury in Crown Heights Case
The Brooklyn District Attorney last night defended his prosecution of a black teen-ager in the killing of a Hasidic scholar and expressed frustration with the jury's rejection of police testimony in the case.
In a question-and-answer session following a speech at a synagogue in Park Slope, Charles J. Hynes fielded sharp questions from congregants who expressed anger that no one has been convicted in the killing of the scholar, Yankel Rosenbaum, 29 years old, on Aug. 19, 1991.


CHRONICLE
OPRAH WINFREY, the talk show host, announced in a television interview her engagement to her longtime companion, STEADMAN GRAHAM, in Hartford yesterday, admitting marriage still frightens her, The Associated Press reported.
"It does scare me a little bit, the whole idea of being married to somebody for the rest of your life," she told a friend, GAYLE KING, in an interview during a WFSB-TV newscast.
"You don't want to wake up 10 years from now and say, 'My God, who is this I've married.' So it scares me a little bit, but I think it's the right thing to do."


Juror Is Convicted of Selling Vote to Gotti
A former juror in a John Gotti racketeering case was found guilty yesterday of selling his vote to acquit the mob boss five years ago.
After less than three hours of deliberations, the jury convicted the juror, George Pape, of obstruction-of-justice charges in Federal District Court in Brooklyn.
Mr.
Pape was Juror No. 11 on the panel that acquitted Mr.
Gotti and several others on March 13, 1987.


Florida Guard to Patrol Highway to Halt Attacks
Hoping to halt a rash of sniper and rock-throwing attacks that has killed one person and alarmed motorists and tourists, Gov.
Lawton Chiles today ordered the Florida National Guard to begin patrolling a 13-mile bypass of the main Interstate highway linking Florida and the Northeast.
Gen.
Richard Capps, deputy commander of the Guard, said he expected 25 to 30 troops to be deployed in 10 jeep-like vehicles on the overpasses and side roads of the highway, Interstate 295, by early Saturday.
Tim Moore, director of the Florida Department of Law Enforcement, said the Florida Highway Patrol and local police would also step up patrols in an effort to solve the mysterious attacks that have plagued Jacksonville, Florida's most populous city, for the last nine months.


Review/Pop; Freedom Leads Up Or Down For Bands
The avant-garde is a tricky patch of woods to negotiate, even for the brash inventors of underground rock music.
When rock strays from its home ground of even beat and love-sex-death lyrics, its energy can blow open unexpected channels of expression.
On the other hand, the genre's very disdain for rules can tempt musicians to overindulge in wasteful meanderings and tempt audiences to declare mystical what is really just opaque.
At Maxwell's on Thursday night, two semi-lengendary underground groups traversed the extremes of this split between sunlight and mud.
Sun City Girls, an all-male Arizona-based trio known for creating arcane, misshapen rock opuses, showed the need for discipline.
The band's seemingly interminable jams punctuated by eccentric vocal outbursts, which can be charming at times, were mostly dull.
Clarity surfaced only occasionally amid the cannibalism jokes, cranky improvisation and Brechtian operatic interludes.
Clarity was not the point.
Enamored of themselves and their obscurity, Sun City Girls recalled the college-nerd comedy troupe called Firesign Theater: both acts feature routines that make a few insiders feel particularly included and the uninformed seem alienated and dumb.


Tax Revision a Priority, Says New House Speaker
The new Speaker of Connecticut's House of Representatives said today that reducing the state income-tax burden on middle-income families will be a priority when the Legislature returns in January, and that the measure will probably have the votes to pass.
The new speaker, Representative Thomas D. Ritter, Democrat of Hartford, said Tuesday's election had changed the dynamics of the Legislature.
As a result, he said, many income-tax opponents who last year blocked attempts to modify a concept they found objectionable have now decided that the law can be made fairer without compromising their opposition.


THE TRANSITION: The New Team; Christopher: a Courtly, Circumspect Man of the Establishment
The 67-year-old establishment lawyer chosen by President-elect Bill Clinton to manage the transition is the consummate diplomat: measured, circumspect, courtly, deceptively quiet, a man who plays his cards close to the vest.
The lawyer, Warren M. Christopher, has moved in and out of private law practice here and public service over the years.
Most recently he headed the Independent Commission on the Los Angeles Police Department that recommended sweeping changes in the department last year after the beating of a black man, Rodney G. King.


Johnson Says Malone Comments Hurt
Magic Johnson, saying he is lonely without basketball but does not want put a "black mark" on the sport, said tonight that the scratch he suffered in his final preseason game and the fear surrounding it convinced him to retire again.
And for the first time, Johnson expressed disappointment with Utah forward Karl Malone, who had previously said Johnson might, while on the court, infect other players with the virus that causes AIDS.
Johnson also said the Phoenix Suns' owner, Jerry Colangelo -- who Johnson said recently urged him to retire -- did so to give the Suns a clearer path to the league finals.


THE TRANSITION: Political Memo; Did New Iran Arms Data Do In Bush?
It lingers as one of the unsolved mysteries of the election.
Was last Friday's disclosure of new documentation about President Bush's involvement in the Iran arms-for-hostages deal an attempt by Lawrence E. Walsh, the independent prosecutor, to sabotage Mr.
Bush's campaign in its stretch drive?
In the finger-pointing ambiance of the post-election White House, the Walsh-as-saboteur theory has already risen to the status of received wisdom.


THE TRANSITION: The Old Team; Gates Announces He Will Retire as Director of Central Intelligence Early Next Year
Robert M. Gates, who survived extraordinarily difficult confirmation hearings to become Director of Central Intelligence a year ago, will retire next year, a spokesman for the C.I.A. said today.
In announcing Mr.
Gates's plans, the spokesman, Peter Earnest, said: "The Director expects to leave in January. If the new Administration were to ask him to stay on for a short period of time to help with the overlap, he would be happy to cooperate."


Giants Risk Activation of Rookie
The Giants will gamble Saturday and activate Corey Widmer, a rookie inside linebacker, from injured reserve.
Coach Ray Handley said Widmer would play on coverage teams, primarily on kickoffs, Sunday when the Giants (4-4) oppose the Green Bay Packers (3-5) at Giants Stadium.
It will be a gamble because it will be the Giants' second "free" activation of the season from injured reserve, and their next three are more or less reserved for Phil Simms, Myron Guyton and Mark Ingram.
Each team is allowed five free activations a season.
Beyond that, a player being activated from injured reserve must clear irrevocable waivers, raising the prospect that another team could claim him.


F.D.I.C. Changes Rules For Large Deposits
WHEN Paul Ramsier, a Manhattan psychotherapist, learned that his bank, the American Savings bank, had failed, he resolved to pay more attention to how much of his savings were covered by Federal deposit insurance.
"Seeing those people in line, waiting to get their money, was not a pretty sight," Mr.
Ramsier said.
"Most of them were elderly and, like me, they had no inkling that their bank and their deposits were in danger."


Yankees Send Cadaret To Cincinnati for Cash
The Yankees purged their pitching staff of an unwanted reliever yesterday when they sent Greg Cadaret to the Cincinnati Reds for an undisclosed sum of cash.
That they unloaded the left-hander for a token amount is not surprising because they had unsuccessfully tried to deal him for the last three months.
After they were unable even to secure a minor leaguer for the pitcher, the Yankees made their second deal with the Reds in three days rather than have to go to arbitration with Cadaret before next season.
Cadaret, who made $1.19 million last season, had a 4-8 record with a 4.25 earned run average in 46 games and could receive a raise if he goes to arbitration with the Reds.
Actually, the most revealing numbers on Cadaret were the proliferation of base runners against him as he allowed 104 hits and walked 74 in 1032/3 innings, making almost every outing adventurous.


Corrections
An obituary on Thursday about Robert Blattner, president of MCA Home Video, who died in the crash of a twin-engine plane on Oct. 31 in Grand Junction, Colo., misstated the number of people aboard.
It was three; the third was Kevin James of Salt Lake City, the pilot, who was also killed.


Corrections
An obituary headline in some editions yesterday about an emeritus professor of sociology at Rutgers University rendered his name incorrectly.
He was William M. Phillips Jr.; William M. Phillips 3d is his son. (The obituary is reprinted today on page 11 for readers who did not receive it.)


CHRONICLE
Along with all the questions about life under a new Presidential administration, one is repeatedly asked of ARNOLD SCAASI.
"Everyone wants to know, will I continue to dress Mrs. Bush?" the designer said yesterday.
"Of course I will," he insisted.
"I dressed her before she was First Lady, and I hope to dress her forever. I don't think she'll be ordering as many ball gowns to wear in Maine or Houston as she did for the state dinners at the White House, but I think she will continue to lead a public life."


BellSouth to Cut 8,000 From Work Force
The BellSouth Corporation, the largest regional Bell telephone company, said yesterday that it planned to reduce its work force by 8,000, or more than 8 percent of its 97,000 employees, within four years.
About 1,000 jobs will be eliminated by layoff but "a substantial number" of the rest are likely to result from normal attrition.
About one out of 100 jobs for managers and one out of 50 jobs for nonmanagement will be eliminated annually in this way.
Half the positions eliminated are expected to be management and half nonmanagement.


The Los Angeles Times in Retreat
The Los Angeles Times said today that it would stop publishing its San Diego County edition on Dec. 18 and eliminate 500 jobs through a voluntary buyout program and attrition in the next year.
The moves are a result of an advertising slump caused by the weak economy in Southern California and a decline in the circulation of the San Diego County edition, one of several zoned editions produced by The Los Angeles Times, which is owned by the Times Mirror Company.


Johannesburg Journal; For Blacks, Slightly More Equal Still Means Failure
To anyone who has merely had the dog eat his homework, Menzi Mazibuko's excuses for being behind in his studies seem Shakespearean in their tragic weight.
In August gunmen stormed a wake where his choir was singing in the black township of Alexandra, killing a teen-age girl and wounding 12 others, Menzi Mazibuko among them.
Two weeks later his older brother Pat, the family's only breadwinner, was stabbed to death by culprits unknown, for reasons obscure.


An Angel Meets Two Robots


Insects by Lars, Nostalgia by Duke
How many people have witnessed the metamorphosis of a six-foot-tall cocoon?
The 675 people who were at the Byron Lars spring show on Thursday at the Parsons School.
First, perfect stillness.
Then the cocoon started writhing, and a dancer's long leg broke through.
Next, she wriggled free and the room erupted in applause.


Driver Unhurt In Carjacking In Connecticut
A woman who had stopped in a highway rest area to buy a cup of coffee became the region's latest carjacking victim Thursday night when a man crept up behind her as she opened her car door and forced his way behind the wheel at knifepoint.
The woman was released an hour later, but the suspect and the woman's 1990 Lincoln Town Car are still being sought.


Movie Seating by Phone; Watching the Big Screen Without the Long Lines
Getting a seat at a hit movie, especially during the weekend or on a holiday, will soon be easier -- and more expensive -- as more theater chains in New York and Los Angeles sell assigned seating for showings through telephone ticket services.
Ticketmaster, the nation's largest ticket service, will begin selling advance tickets on Sunday for General Cinema's 11 complexes in the Los Angeles area.
The following Sunday, patrons of Cineplex Odeon's 22 theaters in New York and 8 in Los Angeles will also be able to buy advance seating through an automated phone service, Movie Fone.


Rome Police Step Up Security at Synagogue
Police patrols and security guards were increased outside Rome's synagogue today after Jewish youths ransacked the headquarters of one of the city's neo-Nazi groups.
The clash late Thursday was the third time in recent weeks that the police were called in to break up fighting between Jewish youths and right-wing radicals.
In the latest incident, the Jews, most in their teens or early twenties, smashed windows and confiscated Nazi paraphernalia of a group called the Western Political Movement, whose members the Jews blame for plastering Rome earlier this week with posters showing a yellow star of David and the words "Zionists out of Italy."


Handling the (Fragile) Story of Man With Care; Museum of Natural History Library Moves Its Million-Item Collection to a New Home
It could be the ultimate Manhattan moving story.
The American Museum of Natural History Library is transporting its million-item collection to a new building.
Will crumbling, century-old scientific journals rot to dust?
Will the tattered skin of the leopard that explorer Carl Akeley killed with his own hands be further torn?
Will delicate 1890 glass photographic negatives shatter or will highly flammable nitrate-stock film burst into flame?


Starks Starts, Superbly
John Starks did not start a single game last season for the Knicks.
No one could detect that from the way he played tonight.
Finishing with 18 points and 8 assists, Starks helped the Knicks to a 106-94 victory over the Atlanta Hawks in their season opener.
During a crucial 7-0 fourth-quarter New York run, he made a key steal and completed a 3-point play with a layup while being fouled by Mookie Blaylock.


Buying Warrants For Big Gains
Warrants, whose value is derived from their relationship to an underlying common stock, are widely considered a speculative investment.
These securities are typically issued by corporations at the same time they issue stock, but are often detached from the stock for separate trading.
A warrant gives its owner the privilege of buying additional shares of the company's stock at a specified price before a specified expiration date.
That exercise price is usually higher than the market price of the common stock when the warrant is issued.


A New Fischer Match? It Depends, He Says
Bobby Fischer, the mercurial American chess genius who may face prosecution in the United States for playing here in breach of United Nations sanctions against Yugoslavia, refused today to say when he was going home.
But he did indicate he was open to another match.
At a news conference the day after he defeated Boris Spassky in a 30-game exhibition match, Mr.
Fischer was asked about a letter he had received from the United States Treasury warning that he might have acted illegally by taking part in a match offering $5 million in prize money.
He replied: "I understand they haven't done anything yet. I'm taking a wait-and-see attitude."


Trans-Atlantic Impasse
At the economic summit meetings in each of the last three years, the leaders of the seven most powerful industrial economies have solemnly sworn to do their utmost to bring global trade negotiations to a successful conclusion by the end of the year.
The negotiations were too important to be left to technicians, the leaders agreed at their most recent meeting, in Munich in July.
Without firm guidance from the top, they said, the talks were bound to fail, and a dangerous trade war could ensue.


Reviews/Fashion; Calvin Klein Floats Into the Future
The millennium is not quite here yet, but Calvin Klein is acting as if it had arrived.
"We have a new Government, it's a new era," he said after his show yesterday morning.
"It is the time for a new fashion."
So he swept away all the normal gauges of day and evening dressing.
Nothing was lined, or even, it seemed, seamed.
Clothes floated.
The fabrics were so thin that even the slightest breath could have set them in motion.
Usually they were piled one on top of the other.
This layering merely made them translucent, not transparent.


Religion Notes
Silent He Was Not
Thursday night, two days after the Presidential election, three clergymen sat down before an audience of 300 at the Jewish Theological Seminary in Manhattan to discuss the legacy of the late Rabbi Abraham Joshua Heschel.


COMPANY BRIEFS
CIBA-GEIGY LTD., Basel, Switzerland, a pharmaceutical and industrial chemicals company, said its Ciba-Geigy Vision unit had acquired the remaining shares in Ricky Contact Lensof Japan.
Terms were not disclosed.
DEERE &amp; CO., Moline, Ill., signed an agreement with Yanmar Diesel Engine Co., Osaka, Japan, for the company to build and market industrial diesel engines for sale in North America.
VITALINK COMMUNICATIONS CORP., Fremont, Calif., will acquire the medical supply and institutional pharmacy business of Westend Family PharmacyInc., Ocean, N.J.,for about $25 milion.


Consumer Credit Grew In September
In a sign that consumers may have pared debt down to manageable levels, the Federal Reserve Board reported yesterday that consumer credit grew at a 2.7 percent annual rate in September.
It was the first increase in eight months.
Analysts said they were mildly encouraged by the report, although they also noted that monthly installment credit figures were volatile and subject to revision.
But the gain was the first since a rise of one-tenth of a percent in January.


Pennsylvania Adds Health and Welfare Funds
To the Editor:
You report that budget cuts have hurt private colleges near Philadelphia (Education page, Oct. 14).


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
7.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
4.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
2.81
2.92
4.50
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.05
2.99
4.62
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.25
3.18
4.09
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.53
6.41
7.06
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.75
7.68
7.87
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.70
8.62
8.90
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.54
6.55
6.81
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Classical Music in Review
Marion Sylvestre
Soprano  Florence Gould Hall


Observer; He's Right, Emma
As usual, I voted against my local Congressman Tuesday.
As usual, he was re-elected by a 2-to-1 majority.
He is not a bad Congressman, as Congressmen go.
In a long career of voting against my local Congressmen, I have voted against many far worse than he.
Some years ago a Congressman of mine was shot by high-minded international terrorists, not because they had anything against him personally, but just because he was there.
My emotions, upon hearing he had gone down, proceeded as follows:


U.S. and Philippines Agree to Continued Military Cooperation
The United States and the Philippines agreed today that United States fighting ships, aircraft and troops will continue to have access to military installations in the Philippines even after the United States pulls out of its last military base there this month.
The agreement, announced after a meeting of United States and Philippine military commanders in Manila, means that the American military presence in the Philippines will not end despite last year's vote by the Philippine Senate barring the renewal of the United States' leases on its sprawling naval base at Subic Bay and other installations in the Philippines.


Hate's Hold on Yugoslavia's News
As the war of aggression in Bosnia roars on with unchecked fury, the reviled Serbian strongman Slobodan Milosevic clings to power partly because of his iron-fisted control of the media, which continue to belch forth propaganda in support of his strategy of "ethnic cleansing."
Meanwhile his Croatian counterpart, Franjo Tudjman, tightens
his
grip on the media in order to justify grabbing his own slice of Bosnia and discriminating against thousands of Serbs who still live in Croatia.


Convoys Canceled, Stranding Thousands of Bosnian Refugees


Q &amp; A
Co-ops vs.
Condos  Q What are the major differences between co-ops and condos?
DURWOOD E. SANDERS, Manhattan  A A co-op is a corporation that owns and operates a building.
"A person who lives in a co-op apartment owns two things: a stock certificate for an interest in the corporation and a proprietary lease for a particular apartment," said Stuart Saft, a New York real estate lawyer.
"And the board has very broad discretion as to the operation of the property, including renovations and approval of purchasers and subtenants."


Motorman Gets 5 to 15 Years in Crash
The motorman whose subway train crashed near Union Square Station last year, killing five passengers, was sentenced yesterday to 5 to 15 years in prison for manslaughter.
Rising from his chair at the defense table in State Supreme Court in Manhattan, the motorman, Robert Ray, 39 years old, said he wished he had been killed instead of the victims, who died when the Lexington Avenue train he was operating jumped the tracks just north of the station shortly after midnight on Aug. 28, 1991.


THE TRANSITION: The Republicans; G.O.P. Leaders Start Picking for 1996
When President Bush's glum supporters wandered out of the Houston ballroom where he gave his concession speech Tuesday night, they were greeted by a vendor hawking "Kemp in '96" T-shirts.
Sales were brisk.
In Indianapolis the next morning, Vice President Dan Quayle's aides wasted no time repainting a Bush-Quayle '92 banner on a campaign bus to read "Push Quayle '96."


Frank Rossetti, 84, Ex-Chairman Of Manhattan Democrats, Is Dead
Frank G. Rossetti, a former labor leader, New York State Legislator and the Democratic Party chairman of Manhattan for a decade, died yesterday at Mount Sinai Medical Center in Manhattan.
He was 84 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died of complications of bone cancer after hip surgery, his family said.


First Returns Are In: Knicks and Nets Triumph
The Knicks have changed many faces, but their tenacious defense has a familiar look.
Holding Atlanta to only 10 points during the final eight minutes tonight, New York opened a season of great expectations with a 106-94 victory over the Atlanta Hawks at the Omni.
It was the first glimpse of what the Knicks hope to be: a team with a balanced offense coupled with a tenacious defense that can frustrate opponents.


THE TRANSITION: The Overview; CLINTON APPOINTS 2 TO OVERSEE CHANGE OF ADMINISTRATION
President-elect Bill Clinton today named Warren M. Christopher, a former official in the Carter and Johnson Administrations, to manage the transfer of power in the White House.
Vernon E. Jordan, who once headed the National Urban League, was named chairman of the transition team.
Mr.
Christopher, a corporate lawyer, said he would be based in Little Rock with Mr.
Clinton and his closest advisers.
Mr.
Jordan, a lobbyist with a Washington law firm, is to supervise the Washington end of the transition effort.


The View From Napa; U.S. Wine Makers Fear Backfire From Tariff
Here in the heart of the American wine industry, most wine makers fear the punitive tax on European white wine that the Bush Administration announced Thursday could do them more harm then good.
"It's a two-edged sword," Tor Kenward, a spokesman for Beringer Vineyards in St.
Helena, said of the tax.
"We've been able to build our export business very quickly in the last two years. You hate to think that here's one segment that is growing, and now we have the potential of losing it." Beringer's exports grew 40 percent last year, but still only account for 3 percent of total sales.
A List of Worries
Many wine executives said in interviews today that they feared retaliation on the small but growing exports of California wine to Europe.
Others said the tax would also distort domestic sales.


A Confident U.S. Envoy Prepares to Leave Moscow
When Robert S. Strauss arrived here to take up his post as the United States Ambassador, there was a coup going on, so on the drive in from the airport he settled back for a nap.
"There won't be much time to sleep later on," he explained to his surprised wife.
Leaving Moscow a tempestuous 15 months later, Mr.
Strauss said he was still not sure when there would be rest.
But he said he was convinced that if Russia could hang tough through an additional 18 to 24 months without an explosion, the country's economic crisis would begin to lift.


Face of Future At Ferry Dock Is 120 Feet Tall
With a clock face large enough to change the whole face of lower Manhattan, a design by two of America's more adventurous architects has been chosen for the new Staten Island Ferry terminal.
The design, by Robert Venturi and Denise Scott Brown, won an unusual municipal competition for a plan to replace the old ferry building, which was badly damaged by fire in September 1991.
The contest attracted some of the most important architects in the country, drawn by the opportunity to place their signature at one of the city's most visible portals.


Judge Faults Lawyer's Use of Testimony About Young Woman's Sexual Past
Another squabble erupted in the Glen Ridge sex-assault trial today between the judge and opposing lawyers over testimony dealing with the sexual history of the mildly retarded woman central to the case.
The dispute centered on a deletion in the transcript of a secretly recorded conversation between the woman and Mari Carmen Ferraez, a former girlfriend of Kyle Scherzer, one of the four defendants, in September 1989.
The judge, R. Benjamin Cohen, had ordered the deletion earlier in the case under New Jersey's rape shield law, which is designed to protect the reputation and character of victims of sexual assault.


CHRONICLE
"This is nice, but it's a bit embarrassing," said JEAN MAYER, reflecting on all the receptions, dinners and tributes that have been held for him since he stepped down from the presidency of Tufts University in August.
"You can only get so many compliments and go to so many festivities and hear so many nice things about yourself," said Dr.
Mayer, a French-born expert on nutrition.


About New York; A Fortune Will Greet You In an Endeavor Faraway
Thanks to the Brooklyn-based Wonton Food company, China will soon have fortune cookies.
Until now the cookies, which cap off just about every meal served in most of America's 30,000 Chinese restaurants, have been unknown and gone untasted in China.
Like hot dogs, pizza and more particularly, chop suey, they are essentially American concoctions.


Corrections
The first of four chessboard diagrams yesterday with an article about the match between Bobby Fischer and Boris Spassky reversed the players' colors.
Mr.
Spassky had the white pieces, Mr.
Fischer the black.


Review/Dance; A Choreographic Surprise Package
Alison Salzinger mixed together dancers of various ages, sizes and shapes in the program of two works that she presented Sunday night at St.
Mark's Church under the auspices of the Danspace Project.
The choreographic result was aptly titled "Mix."
In "Package," three little boys (Austrin Garcia, Daniel Litt and Andre Pope) struck bodybuilding poses.
So did two women (Debbie Laster and Madge Thompson) who, according to their biographies in the program, have studied bodybuilding.


Corrections
An article yesterday about the dismissal of a damage suit against the tobacco industry misidentified the husband of a smoker who died of lung cancer.
He is Antonio Cipollone.


When a Bankruptcy Is the Best Way Out
Tom and Annie resisted the decision for more than six months, but in the end they felt they had no option other than filing for bankruptcy.
In doing so, this Portland couple, who asked that their family name be withheld, joined more than a million Americans who are expected to file for bankruptcy this year.
Earlier, when Tom and Annie lived in Texas, the economy was terrible and Tom, who is 36, was unable to find a job in the advertising business despite nearly a year of searching.
His efforts to start his own ad agency in San Antonio were in trouble.
As a last resort, Annie, 32, took a property management job 300 miles away.


Sports of The Times; Monitoring The Knicks' X Factor
PAT RILEY became concerned earlier this week that there was a perception, from either his players or the news media, that the Knicks' blending process would take time, perhaps half the season.
"We want to win now," the coach said, bristling.
"We're not waiting for people to blend in. If you want to blend in, you can blend in on the bench."


Cautiously, Carole Mace Discovers An Interest in Real Estate
In 1987, Carole Mace, supervisor of hospital volunteers in Hackettstown, J.H., inherited $200,000 from her mother's estate.
She invested the money in two certificates of deposit, then yielding 11 percent, and used the monthly interest to help meet family expenses.
In 1991, the two ailing savings and loans that held her C.D.'s were closed by the Government and her deposits were redeemed before maturity.
With little knowledge of other investments, she settled for money market accounts offering 5 percent interest.
But rates have declined since then and the income from Mrs.
Mace's nest egg has shriveled.
Seeking better returns, shw has begun to pursue alternate investments.
Here's how she fared in her first venture. 1.
Follow the Lead: A tip from a friend - Mrs.
Mace learned from a friend, a real estate agent, of nearby properties to be auctioned by the agency overseeing the bailout of ailing savings and loans.
She arranged to see a 771-square-foot studio apartment in a condominium development near her home. 2.
Calculation: Market value - Comparing the apartment with others, Mrs.
Mace estimated its worth at $50,000.
She tallied its selling points and concluded it could be rented for $550 a month. 3.
Strategy: Bid low - With a plan to bid no more than $25,000 Mrs.
Mace attended the July 17 auction.
After a two-minute flurry of competitive bidding, she got the apartment for $23,000. 4.
It's Final: Closing the deal - Having paid a deposit of $1,150, she paid the balance at closing in September.
One-time expenses, including legal fees, title insurance and $250 in repairs, brought the total outlay to $24,350. 5.
Studio for Rent: Becoming a landlord - The apartment has been rented for $550 a month, beginning Dec. 1.
Mrs.
Mace's monthly costs are $208 for maintenance and dues, $60 in property tax, and $16 for insurance.
Net Monthly Income: $266 First-Year Return: $3,192, or better than 13 percent on her total outlay of $24,350. 6.
The Next Step: A plan to diversify - Heartened by this experience, Mrs.
Mace is looking for other ways to boost earnings from her nest egg.
"We want to diversify," she said.
"We might invest in mutual funds - something that is not high risk, but has a good track record."


Pumping Oil: Iran's New Muscle; Rebounding Iranians Are Striving For Regional Leadership in Gulf
"Welcome to the Islamic Republic of Iran," a sign says at the small, crowded arrival hall of this oil-exporting island in the Persian Gulf.
Outside under a bright sun, stretching for miles into the turquoise waters of the gulf, dozens of tankers line up to load crude oil.
On Kharg, occupied by the Iranian Army and only a skeleton crew of oil technicians during much of the Iran-Iraq war, hundreds of Iranian and foreign workers are building and repairing storage tanks and piers.


Germany to Pay Jewish Victims of Nazis
The Government of Germany has quietly signed an agreement to pay millions of dollars to European Jews who survived Nazi persecution but were never compensated or received minimal compensation.
The agreement between the German Finance Ministry and the Conference on Jewish Material Claims Against Germany was signed last week in Bonn and announced today in New York by Rabbi Israel Miller, chairman of the claims conference.
A German Embassy spokesman confirmed that the agreement had been signed.


China: Five Years Wasted
China's 88-year-old senior leader, Deng Xiaoping, got exactly what he wanted out of Beijing's recent Communist Party Congress.
Delegates endorsed Mr.
Deng's latest program of economic reforms, promoted political leaders he favors and removed some of the most rigid hard-liners from top leadership posts.
An identical agenda emerged from the previous congress in 1987.
Yet despite impressive economic gains, China has wasted the intervening five years politically, immobilized by the tragedy of Tiananmen and the strict limits Mr.
Deng enforces on the reform process.


The Networks Get Their Due
"Unreasoned and unreasonable . . . arbitrary and capricious." In a caustic but shrewd opinion written by Judge Richard Posner, a Federal appeals court struck down benighted rules that keep television networks out of the lucrative rerun business.
It was a well-deserved blow for the networks in their battle against the big Hollywood studios that control reruns.
The court vacated a 1991 decision by the Federal Communications Commission that preserved, in modified form, the rules that for two decades have prevented networks from owning and syndicating reruns of shows they broadcast.
The rules were designed to keep the once-dominant networks from monopolizing the business.
But Judge Posner showed why the F.C.C. decision would actually stunt competition and diminish the diversity of TV programming -- the very opposite of what the F.C.C. was supposed to accomplish.


James Allen, 87, Dies; Led Booz Allen Firm
James L. Allen, the first managing partner and former chairman of Booz Allen &amp; Hamilton Inc., an international management consulting firm with headquarters in New York, died on Thursday at his home in Gulf Stream, Fla.
He was 87 years old.
He died of a heart attack, said Mary Duhon, a spokeswoman for the firm.


Classical Music in Review
Ascension Music  Church of the Ascension  Greenwich Village


Catharine A. Yard, Executive, 48
Catharine A. Yard, president of the American Timber Company, died on Thursday at the Jersey Shore Medical Center in Neptune, N.J.
She was 48 years old and lived in Sea Girt.
Ms. Yard died of pneumonia, said Michael Cherenson, a family spokesman.


Hungary Rejects Anti-Semitic Articles; Jewish Benefactors
To the Editor:
I was disturbed by "Termites Are Devouring Hungary" (Op-Ed Oct. 5) by George Soros.
I met Mr.
Soros in England a few years ago.
My friends and I have since praised the creative accomplishments of his foundations.


Mitchell Takes Highlight Film on the Road
He is only a rookie and he has had only one game of note as a professional, but tight end Johnny Mitchell has a short but diplomatic answer for those who want to know who he thinks should be the starting quarterback for the Jets on Sunday in Denver: "Don't ask."
"My attitude is this," Mitchell, the team's first-round draft choice out of Nebraska, explained of the competition between Ken O'Brien and Browning Nagle, "whoever the quarterback is, just get the job done. I'm not into all that controversy. I just want to win. If it takes one man to do it or 10 men or 11 men or the whole 45 men, which it will take, I just want to get it done."


U.S., in Job Case, Files First Lawsuit Under New Disabilities Law
The Federal Government yesterday filed its first lawsuit under the Americans With Disabilities Act on behalf of a Chicago executive who lost his job after his employer, a security-guard company, learned he had brain cancer.
The Equal Employment Opportunity Commission filed the suit on Thursday against AIC Security Investigations Ltd., saying the company had illegally dismissed its executive director, Charles Wessel, because of his medical condition even though he was able to perform his job.


Don't Mix Up Palladium With Academy of Music
To the Editor:
Your Oct. 16 rock-and-roll tour of New York City musical landmarks identifies the Palladium, at 126 East 14th Street, as the former Academy of Music.
The high-tech disco occupies a renovated 1926 movie theater named for the venerable opera house, which stood across the street.


Bridge
If you have two aces and your opponents charge into a slam, it is time to beware.
Unless they are starry-eyed optimists, one of them surely has a void, and one of the aces is due to be ruffed.
Besides, an ace lead will frequently establish an important trick for the declarer.
As an example, consider the diagramed deal, played in September at the Town Club, 9 East 86th Street in Manhattan.
Sitting South was Mabel Frey of Manhattan, who bears a famous name.
Her husband, Richard Frey, who died in 1988, was one of the great player-writers in the game's early years.


Mitchell Takes Highlight Film on the Road
He is only a rookie and he has had only one game of note as a professional, but tight end Johnny Mitchell has a short but diplomatic answer for those who want to know who he thinks should be the starting quarterback for the Jets on Sunday in Denver: "Don't ask."
"My attitude is this," Mitchell, the team's first-round draft choice out of Nebraska, explained of the competition between Ken O'Brien and Browning Nagle, "whoever the quarterback is, just get the job done. I'm not into all that controversy. I just want to win. If it takes one man to do it or 10 men or 11 men or the whole 45 men, which it will take, I just want to get it done."


INSIDE
Jobless Rate Falls Again
The nation's unemployment rate dropped by a tenth of a point in October for the fourth straight month, to 7.4 percent.
Page 35.
C.I.A.
Chief Will Retire
Robert M. Gates, who survived extraordinarily difficult confirmation hearings a year ago, said he expected to leave in January.
Page 8.
U.S.
Sues on Disability
In the Government's first lawsuit under the new disabilities act, a company is accused of dismissing a man because he had cancer.
Page 7.
Guard to Patrol Florida Road
Hoping to halt sniper and rock-throwing attacks, Florida's Governor ordered the National Guard to patrol an Interstate in Jacksonville.
Page 7.
German Reparations for Jews
Germany plans to pay reparations to Jews who survived Nazi persecution but were never compensated or got minimal compensation.
Page 3.


POSTINGS: A Talk and a Tour, Too; Stanford White Exhibit
"If you seek his monument," declares the epitaph to Sir Christopher Wren at St.
Paul's Cathedral, "look around you."
The same might be said at the Urban Center galleries, 457 Madison Avenue, at 51st Street, where the exhibition "Stanford White's New York: A Celebration of the City" opens Tuesday.


Hampton Stepping Up In Class in the N.F.L.
The first time Rodney Hampton high-stepped with a football in his hands in a Pop Warner game, he darted and skipped for a 50-yard touchdown run.
In his first high-school varsity game in Houston, he cradled the opening kickoff and sped 80 yards to glory.
In his first game at the University of Georgia, on a third-and-9 play, he ran 20 yards for a first down.
On the next play, he finished what he had started, running 20 more yards into the end zone.


Sweet Are the Uses of Predictability
ONCE I had what Judith Viorst would have called a "no good, horrible, very bad day." Wounded, I straggled home, climbed into my oldest flannel pajamas, ate macaroni and cheese for dinner and chocolate pudding for dessert.
Then I pulled out my favorite book in the Betsy-Tacy series by Maud Hart Lovelace, "Betsy and Tacy Go Over the Big Hill," and read about Betsy and her sister Julia vying for the title of Queen of Summer.
Finally I fell asleep.
I was 41 years old.
For those who wonder about the popularity of series books, that's the answer.
They comfort and soothe.
Macaroni and cheese for the mind.
Just as some nutritionists might frown at that particular staple of the American diet, many high-minded types disdain series books, contending that they feed but don't fill.
Or that they fill but don't nourish.
Pity the people who can't experience the pleasure of cozy sustenance.


A la Carte; A Surprise or Two at the Rear of the Pizza Parlor
WHEN a group of Stony Brook professors was playing the "What's your favorite restaurant?" game, one said, after the predictable high-visibility luxury restaurants were named, "We like a little Italian restaurant in a shopping center."
"It's not the same type as those others, but the food is terrific," the professor said.
"It is called Carnival."


Just What the R.T.C. Is Up To
To the Editor:
"Caught in an S.&amp;L. Nightmare" (Oct. 18) sheds light on one of the most cynical activities ever engaged in by the United States.


Mary Lautenbach, Gregory Block
Mary Elizabeth Lautenbach, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Terry R. Lautenbach of Darien, Conn., was married there yesterday to Gregory David Block, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Jared Block of Columbus, Ohio.
The Rev.
Leonard Wenke performed the ceremony at St.
John's Catholic Church.
Mrs.
Block, 25 years old, is a marketing specialist in New York for Knowledge Ware, a computer software manufacturer.
She and her husband graduated from Emory University.
Her father is a senior vice president at the International Business Machines Corporation in Armonk, N.Y.


Where African Deities Meet the Satellite Dish
For those who understand Portuguese or read the translations provided with "Parabolic" (Tropical Storm/ WEA 76292; CD and cassette), Gilberto Gil's new album is a rumination on modernity and tradition, on history, cultural roots and the intoxication of the information age.
Its ideas are distilled in images like "chile pepper in Styrofoam bottle" or the satellite dish in the song "Parabolicamara." Mr.
Gil's music holds all those crosscurrents, too, transforming them into ebullient vamps that tickle the ear while they invoke both local and international styles.
"Madalena," a version of a well-known samba, opens the album with the rumba rhythms and curling guitar lines of Zairean pop; "I Want to Be Your Funk" grafts funk to smooth Brazilian pop-jazz.
But Mr.
Gil, who at times has grown so fond of foreign styles that he has simply imitated them, has returned to his northeastern roots.
He pays tribute to the orixas, or African deities, that are central to Bahia's candomble religion; he praises his idol, the songwriter Dorival Caymmi, as an African Buddha above the bubbly rhythm of "Nago Buddha," trading lines with the high voice of Mr.
Caymmi's daughter, Nana.


THE TRANSITION: The New Congress; Many Offer to Help New Lawmakers Get Acquainted With Capital's Mores
After months of wooing voters, the members of the biggest freshman class in Congress since 1948 are about to be courted themselves -- by elders of the institution that many of them ran against.
House leaders of both parties know that more than a quarter of their troops will be new and unpredictable, and they are quickly moving to explain the realities of Congressional life.
They want the new members to understand the sometimes-conflicting imperatives of upholding the party, appearing responsible and protecting their political flanks.


Whodunit


Sports of The Times; Knicks Open With Depth; Nets Listen
DEPTH.
Rotation.
Those have been two of Pat Riley's favorite words in assembling this Knicks team that, if it keeps improving over the 82-game season, looms as a challenger for the National Basketball Association championship.
During an 89-85 victory over the Philadelphia 76ers in their Madison Square Garden opener last night, the Knicks displayed the depth that enables Riley to create a rotation.
Ten different Knicks scored, with Patrick Ewing high with 16 points.
But when the game was at stake, point guard Greg Anthony and shooting guard Hubert Davis, the rookie from North Carolina, made the difference.


Guess What East Should Not Have Bid
SOME 65 years ago, a young Princeton graduate named Reginald Johnson was at a party in Brooklyn and feeling both jocose and mischievous.
He strolled past a table at which four elderly gentleman were playing bridge and quietly picked up the spare deck.
Two minutes later, after a little sorting, he returned it unobserved.
Now 92 years old, he recalls that shortly afterward a minor riot erupted when the players found that they each had a complete suit.
They promptly called the newspapers to report this remarkable event, which used to happen several times each year in some part of the world, and swore that the deck had been shuffled, cut and dealt in the normal way.
The cut, of course, did not change the nature of the deal, only the identity of the player with, for example, the spade suit.
The odds against this happening in a normal way are represented by a 28-digit number to one.


Changes Seen In Auto Tests For Pollution
Tough new Federal vehicle-inspection rules aimed at improving air quality in the nation's urban areas are expected to drastically change the way cars are checked for pollution emissions in New York, New Jersey and Connecticut in the next four years.
They may raise inspection and repair costs for millions of drivers in the area, public officials and motorists' groups say.
The rules, promulgated Thursday by the Environmental Protection Agency, are a framework for gradual changes through 1996, and many decisions affecting costs, procedures and other aspects of emission inspections are yet to be made by Albany, Trenton and Hartford.


City Hall and Sex: 'My Character Is Up for Grabs'
When Barbara Wood heard on the radio that her former boss was about to be named a Deputy Mayor of New York City, she thought of the night five years ago when, she said, Randy Daniels walked her to the subway station and propositioned her with crude, explicitly sexual remarks.
And then she put that thought aside.
Ms.
Wood said she never had any desire to block Mr.
Daniels's career path, not when she quit her job working for him in City Council President Andrew J. Stein's press office in 1987 and not after the radio report in October.
But her experience was leaked to news organizations without her consent, she said, thrusting her into a public scandal.
And, in the ensuing uproar, Mr.
Daniels withdrew as Mayor David N. Dinkins's new deputy, even though no formal investigation had been conducted, and he filed a libel and slander suit against her.


Sound Bytes; Nurturing Democracy Through Used Computers
ALEX RANDALL saw his first microcomputer in 1979, in a village in Bali where his mentor, the anthropologist Margaret Mead, had worked.
It was a homemade rig, in a wooden box, powered by a bicycle pedaled by a scientist trying to calculate how to grow the most rice for hungry people.
Mr.
Randall decided then that no computer should go to waste.
He started the for-profit Boston Computer Exchange in the early 1980's to create a national market for used computers.
Then, in 1990, he co-founded the not-for-profit East-West Foundation, also in Boston (617-542-1234), with the aim of fostering democracy in Eastern Europe by giving people computers with which to communicate.
Question: In Russia, where even Xerox machines were controlled, I imagine computers are heady things.


Data Update
*4*MEDIAN RESALE HOUSE PRICES
Sept. 92
Aug. 92
Sept. 91
Nation
$ 103,200
104,600
$ 100,300
Northeast
137,000
142,000
137,700
Midwest
81,300
82,100
76,400
South
91,700
95,200
91,700
West
145,200
138,000
144,200
*4*Source: National Association of Realtors
*4*MORTGAGE INTEREST RATES (Averages)
Last Week
Previous Week
Year Ago
New York
Conventional (30-yr)
8.51
8.49
8.97
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.39
5.36
6.69
New Jersey
Conventional (30-yr)
8.33
8.31
8.84
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.19
5.19
6.56
Connecticut
Conventional (30-yr)
8.41
8.38
8.85
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.04
5.01
6.61
Co-ops (N.Y.)
Conventional (30-yr)
8.56
8.60
9.17
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.94
5.87
7.15
*4*Indexes for Adjustable-Rate Mortgages*
1-yr. Treasury security
3.50
3.48
5.15
National Mortgage Contract Rate
7.44
7.58
8.93
*Rates on most adjustable mortgages are set 1 to 3 percentage points above these indexes.  (Source: HSH Associates)


The Trauma of War Persists for Soldiers Despite Safety Nets for Veterans:


Thinking of Me
T'S EASY TO OVERLOOK THE one who needs to be pampered most during the holiday season: you.
What better time to indulge yourself than when you're up to your eyebrows buying gifts for everyone else?
Pillows are a comforting thought; Ad Hoc Software's lush little silk versions, filled with flax seeds, are meant to soothe the eyes during a quick lie-down, perhaps between bouts of shopping.
Annick Goutal's plump bedside candles, at Henri Bendel, scent the room with Eau d'Hadrien, and look like tufted minicushions.
The brocade pillow sachets and Italian beechwood-handled makeup brushes, at Barneys, are also hard to resist.


Retreats
To the Editor: We were delighted to see "Seeking Respite at a Spiritual Retreat" (Oct. 4).
For three years we have traveled the United States visiting and writing about such places.


Big Rock Candy Mountain of Outlet Stores
SOMEBODY has to pay retail -- but why does it have to be me?
That's the credo of shoppers who flock to Woodbury Common, a sprawling outdoor mall of 95 factory outlet stores in Central Valley, N.Y.
Ninety minutes north of Manhattan, the seven-year-old discount mecca -- strong on designer fashions and sportswear, with a smattering of housewares, shoes and luggage -- was coyly conceived as a colonial village, with Mark Cross leather goods under the church steeple.
Betsy Gardner, encountered last weekend in the dressing room at the Calvin Klein outlet, was convinced that the trip from Manhattan was worthwhile.
"My mother-in-law paid $800 for an Anne Klein suit and wore it yesterday for the first time," she said.
"It's at the Anne Klein outlet here for $290. I can't wait to tell her."


In the Region: Westchester; Recent Sales
Millwood, N.Y. 435,000
10 Marian Place  5-bedroom, 3-bath, 25-year-old colonial; family room, fireplace, maid's room, den, pantry, 3,111 square feet; taxes $10,138.
Somers, N.Y. 295,000
Barlow Court  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 22-year-old colonial; formal dining room, family room, deck, fireplace, 2-car garage; taxes $5,095.
Yorktown Heights, N.Y. 296,900
Wildwood  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, new colonial; 2-story foyer, family room, fireplace, study, eat-in kitchen, 2-car garage; taxes $8,610.
New Britain, Conn. 96,000
82 Barnes Street  2-bedroom, 62-year-old ranch; new siding, roof and windows, formal dining room, galley kitchen, 50-by-160-ft. lot; taxes $1,820.
New Haven, Conn. 395,000
140 Alston Avenue  6-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 61-year-old Tudor; oak paneling, leaded casement windows, au-pair suite, 1.7 acres; taxes $9,128.
Stamford, Conn. 638,150
164 Dolphin Cove Quay  4-bedroom, 3-bath, 19-year-old colonial; direct waterfront, new kitchen, access to private beach club, 0.25 acre; taxes $7,350.
OTHER AREAS Livingston, N.J. 150,000
20 Preston Street  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 42-year-old colonial; 2-car garage, deck, taxes $2,827.
Maplewood, N.J. 237,000
41 Headley Place  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 34-year-old colonial; eat-in-kitchen, 2-car garage, c/a, fireplace; $5,190.
Amityville, L.I. 149,000
87 Offaly Street  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 16-year-old colonial; dining room, finished basement, 1-car garage; taxes $3,200.


Soft Music: What a Grind
In the clotted woods that surround Imaginary Road, Will Ackerman prepared to cut down a dead tree.
He had to.
It was turning cold and he needed firewood.
There was a fall tang to the Vermont air, and the sky brimmed with luminous clouds.
"I'm not sure if this pine will fall downhill or uphill," Mr.
Ackerman said with little mortification.
"So I would stay close to the base."


To Be Sure, It's Simply Hearty Irish Fare
WHEN raw winds blow in Ireland the chilled populace turns to local pubs for shepherd's pie and a pint of Guinness.
Wintry winds will soon be the daily norm here, and Islanders can nip into Dublin Delights in Miller Place for hearty Irish fare.
The lucky folks in St.
James have already flooded the Dublin Delights there.
Others heard of the tiny storefront when it received a rave in the A la Carte column this year.
Dublin Delights has now established a second, much larger stake in Miller Place, where the Secret Road Inn once held forth.


The 20th Century: Dr. Schnitzler's Diagnosis
"THERE is no one in the world who knows the sound of his own voice," observes the old Viennese doctor to the young Viennese composer in Arthur Schnitzler's novel "The Road Into the Open." They have just been commenting on the fact that the composer, Georg von Wergenthin, possesses a voice uncannily similar to that of his late father, and yet cannot appreciate the resemblance himself.
Schnitzler's own father was an eminent laryngologist at the medical school in Vienna, and Schnitzler himself was a doctor.
He followed at first his father's specialty, then became increasingly interested in psychiatry and ended by becoming the doctor who left to literature his diagnoses of a society in crisis, the doctor in attendance at the birth of the 20th century.
"The Road Into the Open," first published in 1908, now republished by the University of California Press in a new English translation by Roger Byers, was his most devastating diagnosis.
Listening with the trained ear of the clinical laryngologist, Schnitzler hears the vocal resemblance that ties a young artist to his dead father, hears the singing voices of the young women who are drawn to the hero and perform the songs he composes, one of whom becomes his lover and bears his illegitimate child.
Schnitzler hears the voices of Vienna's cultured, liberal world of artists and writers, doctors and scientists, desperately seeking to enunciate the formulas that will enable them to escape into the open, to master or flee the menacing tensions of the turn of the century.
He hears them cry out from the top of the giant Ferris wheel in the Prater.
He listens with them to dramatic Wagnerian voices in a Viennese night at the opera.
A Jew himself, he hears the Jews of Vienna as they respond to the vicious attacks and insinuations of heightened anti-Semitism, and to the emotional, unsettling appeal of early Zionism.
"The Road Into the Open" is Schnitzler's masterpiece, the recording of a whole society that did not know the sounds of its own cacophonous voices.
Those voices speak to us from the very beginning of the century that we are now preparing to conclude.


Miss Lindholm, James Robertson
Elizabeth Anne Lindholm, the daughter of Margery N. Lindholm of Chester, N.J., and Clifford F. Lindholm of Upper Montclair, N.J., was married yesterday to James Joseph Robertson, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Alexander Robertson of Princeton, N.J.
The Rev.
Ralph C. Quellhorst officiated at the Union Congregational Church in Upper Montclair.
Mrs.
Robertson, 28 years old, is a creative assistant in the promotion and advertising department at the Simon &amp; Schuster publishing company in New York.
She graduated from Denison University.
Her father, a former mayor of Montclair, is the president of the Falstrom Company, a metal fabrications company in Passaic, N.J.
Her mother owns Distinctive Framing, a custom framing business in Chester.
The bride is a stepdaughter of Karen C. Lindholm of Upper Montclair.


Well-Adjusted Clevis Rod Can Help Drain Stopper
MOST bathroom sinks are equipped with pop-up drains, which are operated by raising a vertical rod in the center of the faucet.
Such drains may look more attractive and be more pleasant to use than old-fashioned rubber stoppers, but they sometimes develop irritating problems that can be difficult to repair.
If lifting or pushing the vertical rod, called the lift rod, is difficult and the drain empties slowly, the drain is probably clogged.
To clear it, remove the stopper by lifting it straight out of the drain opening or by rotating it about a quarter of a turn counterclockwise while lifting.
Some stoppers can be removed solely by disassembling the drain.


Interest Rates: This Year's Big Speculation
Rarely have so many bet so much, and with so much borrowed money, as is now being bet on one simple proposition: Short-term interest rates will not rise, or at least will not rise very much.
The public now believes it, but it is not individuals who are doing the bulk of the speculating.
The big bettors are institutional investors, banks and brokerage houses.
Those who made the bets a couple of years ago have cleaned up, a fact that has enticed many others to follow.


Dancing All Night
For Historic Hudson Valley, a benefit held on Nov. 2.


No Headline
Way back in 1945 Winston Churchill was defeated at the polls.
He said 'I have been given the order of the boot.' And that is the exact same position in which I find myself today.
I admit this is not the position I would have preferred, but it is a judgment I honor. -- PRESIDENT BUSH.  [ 26:1. ]


A Guidebook To Outlet Stores
How do your not-rich brother and best friend manage to dress in Ralph Lauren and Donna Karan?
That's the question asked in the introduction to the new third edition of "The Outlet Shopper's Guide: A Field Guide to Factory Outlet Shopping" by Elysa Lazar and Eve Miceli (Lazar Media Group, $9.95), on sale Nov. 20.


O'Neal Hits Jackpot
You are a Spalding executive who has just signed SHAQUILLE O'NEAL to an endorsement contract and you need a catchy name for a basketball you plan to put out under the $40 million Orlando Magic rookie's signature.
Quille Deal?
Real O'Neal?
Nah.
Shaq Attaq?
Yeah. (AP)


Debra A. Starr, Harold J. Neher
Debra Alaine Starr, a daughter of Norman and Gloria Starr of Watchung, N.J., was married in Short Hills, N.J., last evening to Harold Joseph Neher, the son of Edward and Susannah Neher of Bayside, Queens.
Rabbi Perry R. Rank officiated at Short Hills Caterers.
Mrs.
Neher, 29 years old, is a staff lawyer at the New York law firm of Reboul, MacMurray, Hewitt, Maynard &amp; Kristol.
She graduated from the University of Pennsylvania.
She and her husband received law degrees from Yeshiva University.


The Nina, the Pinta and the Fate of the 'White City'
Columbia, enthroned on her "Barge of State," sails into the grand lagoon, with Father Time at the helm and Victory at the prow.
Eight plaster maidens, representing Arts and Industries, work the oars.
From the rim of the lagoon a white city arises, its gleaming arcades and pavilions designed by America's leading architects.
Fountains gush.
Fireworks explode nightly.
Now, that's the way to celebrate Columbus.
Or so it seemed to the builders of the World's Columbian Exposition, held in Chicago nearly a century ago.
Unlike the makers of this year's dud Hollywood epics, the architects of the Chicago world's fair knew how to throw a party.
Allegory.
Spectacle.
Classical architecture, an entire city of it, went up in Jackson Park in 1893 to commemorate the discovery of the New World.
And for a generation thereafter, Chicago's fabled "White City" was an ideal to which every American city aspired.
From the fair emerged the nationwide City Beautiful movement, a progenitor of modern city planning and the force behind such New York landmarks as Grand Central Terminal and the Public Library.


For One Lawmaker, Allure of Capital Had Double-Edge
He was one of the brash, bold reformers who swept into Congress 18 years ago on a wave of popular revulsion over Watergate and the Vietnam War.
Elected at age 25, he was so boyish that he was carded in bars and mistaken for a Congressional page.
And no one really begrudged him when, with an immature charm, he researched whether he could be called the youngest person ever to enter the Congress.
Representative Thomas J. Downey of Amityville literally grew up in the marble corridors of the Capitol.
He married during his tenure in Washington and made a home with his wife and children in a Capitol Hill townhouse.


Can He Get This Thing to Run?
On President-elect Bill Clinton's desk in the governor's mansion in Little Rock, Ark., are four thick briefing books.
They run to hundreds of pages and lay out the pros and cons of the numerous decisions he must make.
Probably nothing is more pressing in these pages than an issue not really dealt with in the campaign: Whether to attempt emergency measures to revive the economy and how to do so.
By all accounts, the new President has not decided whether to act precipitously.
But if he does, the main tool widely favored within the Clinton camp is an investment tax credit for business -- reminiscent of what John F. Kennedy proposed when he took office in 1961, during a recession.
The credit would return to businesses 10 percent of their investment in machinery beyond a certain level.
The only other big measure under consideration to lift the economy quickly, the advisers say, is swift enactment of $20 billion in new spending next year on public-works projects.


An Eye for the Photogenic Underdog
AT the Rye Arts Center here, the photographer Tony Vaccaro offers a view of life that begins with a sack race and ends with homelessness.
The sack race is a 1942 event that took place at the Isaac E. Young High School in New Rochelle, then Mr.
Vaccaro's hometown; the homelessness is contemporary and is cheerfully epitomized by a young man holding aloft a well-cared-for baby on Greeley Square, at 33d Street and Broadway in Manhattan.
Between the two images are 67 more that cover World War II, prominent figures in the arts and miscellaneous spectacles at home and abroad.
These mostly black-and-white prints must represent the iceberg's proverbial tip, because Mr.
Vaccaro has been around.
After seeing action as both an infantryman in the 83d Division Thunderbolts and as a combat photographer, he went on to work in Europe for the State Department and for the newspaper Stars and Stripes.


Tell Me Your Cola and I'll Tell You Your Party? Well, Not Quite
To the Editor:
"Presidential Pop and Circumstance" (The Week in Review, Nov. 1) connects Coca-Cola with Democratic Presidents and Pepsi with Republicans.
The political history of cola drinks is far more mixed.
The first major skirmish of the cola wars came in 1907, when the father of the Pure Food and Drug Act, Dr.
Harvey Wiley, vowed to put the Coca-Cola Company out of business.
Wiley suspected Coca-Cola contained cocaine.
When he found the drug had been removed from the secret formula, he attacked the caffeine in Coke.


BUSH'S GAMBLE
William Safire's politics have never attracted me, but I eagerly read everything he writes because he does it so well.
I assume you chose the title, "Bush's Gamble," warily -- possibly thinking that readers less hooked on Safire than I might pass over that posturing punditry of probability if you had called it "Why I'm Still Going to Vote for George Bush." J. D. BRANDT
Mendenhall, Pa.


Editors' Note
A review on page 20 of The Times Book Review today, about "My Life," by Earvin (Magic) Johnson with William Novak, discusses Johnson's retirement from professional basketball on Nov. 7, 1991, and his return to the sport, announced on Sept. 29.
On Monday, after The Book Review had gone to press, Johnson again retired from basketball.


Leslie Montana and David Joseph
LESLIE MONTANA, 31 years old, and David Joseph, 33, invited 90 guests to a Halloween party at their Victorian house in Montclair, N.J., without revealing one important thing: They planned to get married sometime between cocktails and dinner, by a cantor disguised as a hippie clergyman from the 60's.
"We didn't want people to feel the usual obligations of going to a wedding," Ms.
Montana said.
"We didn't want to stress anyone out."


Foreign Affairs; Is Clinton Tough Enough?
Republicans are already undermining Bill Clinton with foreign diplomats and businessmen -- just as they did to Jimmy Carter, with crippling effect, after the Nixon and Ford Administrations.
The hits come from former officials who have worked intimately with foreigners in 20 of the last 24 years and have gained their trust.
The underminers include the likes of Henry Kissinger, former top Reagan-Bush national security aides and conservative legislators.


A Century After Queen's Overthrow, Talk of Sovereignty Shakes Hawaii
A century after United States marines overthrew the Kingdom of Hawaii, an emotional movement is sweeping the Hawaiian islands to restore a measure of sovereignty to the native Hawaiian people, the Kanaka Maoli, the only indigenous people in America still not recognized by the Federal Government.
The movement is building momentum with the approach of Jan. 17, the 100th anniversary of the date that 162 marines illegally deposed Queen Liliuokalani, starting the complex events that led to the Hawaii's annexation by the United States.


A Team From the City By a Bay. Green Bay.
No, that will not be the San Francisco 49ers playing the Giants today at Giants Stadium in New Jersey.
Instead, it will be the Green Bay Packers, a younger and less-talented version of the 49ers but with many of the same looks and plays and threats.
The Packers have a new head coach (Mike Holmgren), a new offensive coordinator (Sherman Lewis) and a new defensive coordinator (Ray Rhodes), all from the 49ers' staff.
Like the 49ers, they have a passing game that emphasizes quick dropbacks and slant passes.
They have a Pro Bowl wide receiver in Sterling Sharpe, a Midwest version of San Francisco's Jerry Rice.


Robbers Kill 1 And Wound 4 At Social Club
Ten minutes after taking a table in a Brooklyn social club early yesterday, four men pulled out their guns, robbed the dozen patrons and then opened fire wildly, killing one man and wounding four others, the police said.
The robbers escaped with a dozen wallets and the club's cash register after spraying the crowd with 9-millimeter weapons, said Sgt.
David Groht of the 71st Precinct.
The attack took place at the Lunar Club at 1126 Nostrand Avenue in the Crown Heights section about 2:30 A.M.


Alexander Dubcek, 70, Dies in Prague
Alexander Dubcek, the Czechoslovak leader whose bold attempt in 1968 to give his country "socialism with a human face" was crushed by an invasion of Soviet-led Warsaw Pact troops, died yesterday.
He was 70 years old.
He died at Homolse Hospital from "failure of vital organs" yesterday morning, the official news agency reported.
Mr.
Dubcek had been listed in critical condition for the last two weeks and had been hospitalized since an automobile accident on Sept. 1.
Health Minister Robert Lom, who made the announcement, did not link the death directly to the accident.


NOV. 1-7: Ships, Yes. Planes, No.; Panel Rejects Major Role For Women in Combat
With recommendations that seemed to turn more on social philosophy than military considerations, a Presidential commission delivered a resounding setback to supporters of an expanded role for women in the military.
By an 8-to-7 vote, the panel said last week that women should continue to be barred from flying combat missions.
It urged that women also be prohibited from engaging in ground combat.
The panel did, however, recommend that women be allowed to serve on combat ships, though not on submarines or amphibious vessels.


Norman Stack, 64, Dealer and Expert In Rare U.S. Coins
Norman C. Stack, a leading international numismatic expert and a managing partner of the oldest and largest rare-coin dealer in the United States, died on Friday at North Shore University Hospital in Manhasset, L.I.
He was 64 years old and lived in Shelter Island, L.I.
He died of cancer, his family said.
Mr.
Stack was a fourth-generation member of Stack's Rare Coins in Manhattan.
The family firm began as a foreign currency exchange in 1858, and by 1934, it was appraising and auctioning rare coins, medals and paper money.


Prophets' Honors
Awards for two curators, Nov. 1.


Don't Spread Conjecture
To the Sports Editor:
I found "Messages of Reality and Mortality" (The Times, Nov. 1), focusing on Magic Johnson's AIDS status, especially troubling.


High School Football Report
Long Island  PLANTING A NEW SEED: Dom Pellegrino had 13 tackles, 3 sacks and a fumble recovery as a linebacker and a 58-yard touchdown as a tight end as WEST ISLIP (6-0-1) upset the No. 1-rated team in the state and 23d in the nation, BELLPORT (6-1), 24-15.
The last time West Islip defeated the state's No. 1 team was in 1984, when it beat Sachem.
Yesterday's victory set the stage for West Islip to claim the No. 1 seeding in Division II.
Quarterback Chip Jankow (10 of 13 for 151 yards) led the charge offensively for West Islip.
PITTMAN BREAKS OUT: All-county runner Andrew Pittman, who was held to 10 yards on 10 carries in ROOSEVELT's 26-22 victory over MINEOLA last week, broke out of his slump and rushed for 166 yards on 20 carries and one touchdown as the Rough Riders (6-1) routed WANTAGH (9-7), 28-0.
Jude Innocent (9 carries for 105 yards) scored two times for Roosevelt.
Mike Green (10 tackles) was the standout on defense.


Paintings and Prints That Speak in a 'Language of Forms'
THE finches at the Bergen Museum of Art and Science here have multiplied and replenished their cage.
Elegant little creatures straight out of Indian miniatures, they were brought in a year ago to tweet along with a show of bird paintings.
Now they are accompanying a major event in the form of a retrospective by Karl Schrag.
Appropriately for an artist who has summered there since 1959, this traveling show comes from Maine -- specifically, the Farnsworth Art Museum, in Rockland, where it was organized by the director, Carl Little.


Agassi Withdraws
ANDRE AGASSI, the Wimbledon champion, withdrew Friday from this week's European Community Championships in Antwerp, Belgium, citing a pulled thigh muscle.
Agassi, who was injured in Sydney, Australia, last month had withdrawn from tournaments in Tokyo, Hong Kong and Stockholm since then. (AP)


Sarah T. Vaden, S. S. Reynolds 2d
Sarah Taylor Vaden, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Donald B. Vaden of Williamsburg, Va., was married there yesterday to Sheldon Sickles Reynolds 2d, a son of S. Cary Reynolds of Cleveland and Sherrill H. Lemieux of Rocky River, Ohio.
The Rev.
David Tetrault performed the ceremony at Bruton Parish Episcopal Church.
Mrs.
Reynolds, 27 years old, is an advertising sales representative at New York magazine in Manhattan.
She graduated from the University of Vermont.
Her father is the president of the Mortgage Credit Corporation in Newport News, Va.


Lights Festival In Niagara Falls
Niagara Falls, N.Y., is planning to hold its Festival of Lights from Nov. 21 to Jan. 3, when tens of thousands of colored lights, scores of animated displays and continuous entertainment will be presented.
Opening night will feature a parade, choral singing and fireworks, leading up to the traditional flipping of the switch that turns on the lights and displays.
The festival, first organized in 1981, now occupies a five-block area of downtown as well as the adjacent state park that includes the brink of Niagara Falls.
Outdoor displays include the nine-story-tall Oxylights and a display of moving lights and music on the 180-foot-tall silos of the Nabisco Biscuit Company.


The Precise Pastels of an Accidental Swiss
Nothing short of blissful was the recorded life of Jean-Etienne Liotard (1702-89), almost 150 of whose near-miraculous portrait drawings, paintings, pastels and miniatures have just gone on view at the Louvre.
Liotard was a member of that rare but not endangered species, the accidental Swiss.
The son of a French couple from Montelimar who had come to Switzerland as refugees in 1685, he was born a citizen of Geneva and ended his days back there as a member of the City Council.
Almost from the start, he had great opportunities and made the most of them.
His work had an ease, a purity and a precision of statement that held connoisseurs captive all over Europe.
He could get an almost hallucinatory likeness without calling attention to how it was done.
Pastel is a difficult, crumbly, unstable medium, but he made it look effortless.


First, We Need to Have a Peacetime Economy; For a New R.F.C.
To the Editor:
Re "Old Idea Gains New Respect: Spending Way Out of Slump" (front page, Oct. 8):
There is another old way out.
It worked brilliantly before, but the men you interviewed are much younger than I am and do not remember the Reconstruction Finance Corporation.
It was run by Jesse Jones and credited by most economists with having done more to bring us out of the 1929 Depression than all the costly alphabetical agencies created.
When liquidated, R.F.C. returned a profit to the Treasury.


Nutty House in the Country
A DUBIOUS LEGACY
By Mary Wesley. 272 pp. New York: Viking. $21.


The Unthinkable and the Undrinkable
In the elegantly muted confines of New York's finest restaurants and the increasingly crowded aisles of the city's wine stores, there is a growing sense of dread.
Last Thursday, the Bush Administration fired what could be the first shot in a trade war between the United States and the European Community, announcing punitive tariffs that, beginning next month, would triple the cost of nonsparkling white wines imported from France, Germany and Italy.
The vast majority of Americans who spend more on lager than Liebfraumilch may not care, but the wine cognoscenti and those who serve them fear a disaster of epic proportions.


Rage in a Tenured Position
Twice a week for the past 32 years, her classes done, Carolyn Gold Heilbrun would leave Columbia University's department of English and comparative literature and walk past the classical facades of the main campus, past the bronze statue of Alma Mater, past the security guards at the wrought-iron west gate, out onto crowded Broadway.
Often she would tow along a group of English majors for an open-air conference, arguing imagery and interpretation as they walked the streets of Morningside Heights, finally presenting them with a bus or subway token each, to get them safely home.
In May, Heilbrun walked Columbia's campus for the last time, alone.
The 66-year-old professor of English, holder of an endowed chair, past president of the Modern Language Association, a leading feminist literary scholar and, not incidentally, the elusive mystery writer known as Amanda Cross had recently informed the administration of her sudden decision to retire early.


Mark Rosenberg, Movie Producer, Dies at Age 44
Mark H. Rosenberg, a producer of "The Killing Fields," "Presumed Innocent" and other hit films, died Friday on a movie set in Stanton, Tex., near Odessa.
He was 44 years old and lived in Los Angeles.
The cause of death was heart failure, said Warner Brothers, the studio with which he worked.


Susan Breidner, Michael Grey
Susan Tracy Breidner, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Samuel Breidner of Douglaston, Queens, was married last evening to Michael Irwin Grey, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Stanley Grey of New York.
Rabbi Harvey Tattelbaum performed the ceremony at the Muttontown Club in Muttontown, L.I.
Mrs.
Grey, 28 years old, is a special-education teacher at Public School 177 in Fresh Meadows, Queens.
She graduated from the State University at Binghamton, N.Y., and received a master's degree in special education from Hofstra University.
Her father is a curriculum adviser at Junior High School 226 in South Ozone Park, Queens.
Her mother, Felice Breidner, is an administrator for a urologic medical group in Manhasset, L.I.


Ellen A. Kremer, R. G. Christian Jr.
Joan L. Kremer of Rosemont, Pa., and John Kremer 3d of Lovell, Me., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Ellen Addams Kremer, to Robert George Christian Jr., a son of Mr.
Christian of Medford, Ore., and Doris A. Christian of St.
Thomas, V.I.
A January wedding is planned.
Miss Kremer, 31 years old, is the advertising director for Pre-K Today, a magazine for early childhood teachers, in New York.
She graduated from Oberlin College.


Sondra B. Sturim And Brian Glueck
Dr.
Sondra Beth Sturim, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Allan Sturim of Lake Success, L.I., was married last evening to Brian Jeffrey Glueck, a son of Barbara Glueck of Abington, Pa., and the late Franklin P. Glueck.
Rabbi Robert S. Widom performed the ceremony at Temple Emanuel in Kings Point, L.I.
Dr.
Sturim, who is 26 years old, is keeping her name.
She is a second-year resident in obstetrics and gynecology at Long Island Jewish Medical Center in New Hyde Park, L.I.
She and her husband graduated from Lehigh University, and she received a medical degree from the Medical College of Pennsylvania.
Her father is a partner in the law firm of Sturim &amp; Nizin in Kew Gardens, Queens.
Her mother, Marilyn Sturim, is a real-estate agent with Simon-Jerry Real Estate in Great Neck, L.I.


THE TRANSITION: The President-Elect; AFTER 13 MONTHS, CLINTON RELAXES
Nursing his chronically sore vocal chords, President-elect Bill Clinton indulged in the first full day of relaxation since the end of his 13-month campaign, emerging from the Governor's Mansion here only to golf.
With his campaign headquarters all but shut down, and with most of his senior advisers out of town for the weekend, Mr.
Clinton met with no officials of either his campaign or his transition team, said a spokeswoman, Max Parker.


NOV. 1-7: Rebuffing the Khmer Rouge; Peace Plan Faltering, Cambodia Appeals to U.N.
The Khmer Rouge, the Maoist-inspired guerrillas in Cambodia, retain a remarkable influence over the country they tried to force back to "Year Zero"at the cost of more than a million lives in the 1970's.


Police Anti-Corruption: More, Not All, Get the Message
The television screen fills with a piteous closeup: a man's face, haunted and tearful.
"I have nightmares," says the videotaped image.
He confesses -- a list of shakedowns, robberies, drug thefts, gun sales and, finally, arrest and conviction.
"When you feel those handcuffs come on your wrists," he says, "it felt like a hundred pounds. It felt like they would never come off."


Seize the Data
CITY OF LIGHT
By Michael Doane. 324 pp. New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $22.


JAPAN CONFRONTS SUDDEN RISE IN AIDS
With the number of AIDS cases here suddenly rising at a startling rate, the Japanese Government has begun to admit that this country is as vulnerable as any other to the disease and has started new programs to educate its largely uninformed citizens about it.
Some of those fighting the spread of AIDS say that the measures are too late to stop the numbers of those infected from soaring, and that the programs are still inadequate.
But they generally agreed that the Government appeared to have at least taken a step toward acknowledging that AIDS is not a disease of foreigners only, but of Japanese, too.


ABOUT-FACE
Wouldn't it be better if those who had little control over the war -- both those who fought and those who escaped the draft -- avoided blaming each other?
We've come a long way in recent years in burying the antagonisms of America's most hated war, and articles like this sabotage our fragile progress.
CHARLES BURRESS
El Cerrito, Calif.


H.I.V. and Mr. Johnson's Workplace
Last week's announcement by Magic Johnson that he would retire from basketball for good distressed many people infected with H.I.V. and those who advocate for them.
Johnson quit after players expressed worries that he could expose them to the virus through the routine cuts during play.
Experts say these risks are minimal, and many felt that Johnson should have stood up to such fears.


2 Reports Find Wide Abuses by India in Kashmir
A new Indian Government drive on separatists in the Kashmir Valley has resulted in dozens of killings of suspected militants by military forces and the widespread terrorizing of civilians, according to two American human-rights organizations that sent representatives to the area in October.
A military campaign called Operation Tiger, which began in August, has also resulted in the sexual abuse and murder of noncombatants, a preliminary report from Asia Watch and Physicians for Human Rights concludes.
It says that patients are dragged from hospital beds and medical staff detained and assaulted in raids.


Sally Florentino, Peter J. Schott
Mr. and Mrs.
Robert J. Florentino of Newport, R.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter Sally Frances Florentino to Dr.
Peter John Schott, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward E. Schott of Memphis.
A January wedding is planned.
Ms.
Florentino, 30 years old, is an account supervisor at Bronner Slosberg Humphrey, a direct marketing agency in Boston.
She graduated from Dickinson College.
Her father, who is retired, was a stockbroker for Shearson Lehman Brothers in Manhasset, L.I.


Forward Looking
Stephen Sprouse opens a boutique, Nov. 4.


Q and A
New York's Loft Law Question: Up until about 10 years ago New York City had an artists-in-residency program wherein up to two lofts per building could be used by live-in artists and their families.
This program was replaced with the Loft Law.
Now I understand that the Loft Law has expired.
Does this mean that the old rules for lofts apply again? . . .
Ruth Hodgin, North Plainfield, N.J.
Answer: No.
The program you ask about was discontinued when the Loft Law was established in 1982.
Last June the Legislature extended it for four years.
Lee Fawkes, executive director of the Loft Board, said the extension added new rent provisions.


JAPANESE PARTY WARNS JUDICIARY
After refusing for months to answer questions about their links with rightist groups and mobsters, leaders of the governing party issued angry threats today against prosecutors and judges who released documents implicating senior politicians in a secret multimillion-dollar deal to influence the selection of Japan's prime minister.
The Liberal Democratic Party said on Friday and today that it would file a libel suit against Tokyo prosecutors because they read in open court on Friday depositions detailing how top party officials offered $25 million to a leading rightist group to clear the way for Noboru Takeshita to become Prime Minister in 1987.


Right Back Where Lurie Started From
Ask not why the Tampa Bay area of Florida should get the Giants of San Francisco; ask why Bob Lurie should not be permitted to sell the Giants to the Tampa Bay group.
Major league club owners are expected to answer the questions surrounding the status of the Giants at their meeting in Scottsdale, Ariz., on Tuesday.
Their decision on the future address of the Giants will very likely set off additional developments, such as lawsuits.
Still, if the owners block the Giants' move to Florida, the Tampa Bay group should look twice before suing.


BUSH'S GAMBLE
Safire is right on target when he cites the Houston Republican convention as one very big nail in Bush's re-election coffin.
The venom spewed forth in Houston by Buchanan and Robertson stunned me, as did the wildly cheering crowd who loved it.
The Republican leadership fails to realize that most Americans don't consider people of different cultures and religions "enemies" and that a Republican call to join a "religious war" is offensive and downright dangerous.
BRETT ANGNEY
Shaker Heights, Ohio


Scientists Toast Dregs of Society
In science's diligent search for origins of the universe, archeologists have made a discovery that puts a frothy head on the origins of human tippling.
Examining pale yellow deposits inside a 5,000-year-old jar, they have identified the earliest known chemical evidence for beer.


Taking the Mystery Out of an Operation
"I LOOK like a Smurf, don't I?" asked Laura Lavelle, an operating-room nurse at Northern Westchester Hospital here.
Ms.
Lavelle, who was introducing herself to a group of children visiting the hospital, did, in fact, resemble the popular blue cartoon character, although perhaps one that had taken a side trip to outer space.
She wore blue surgical scrubs, a blue mask, blue booties, a plastic surgical cap and clear plastic goggles.


A Republican Message That Roiled the Waters; Just Who Makes Jobs?
President-elect Clinton has said that an economic stimulus program, including money for new roads and other public works projects, s at the top of his agenda.
As an indication of how dominant an issue the economy was in the Nov. 2 elections, readers are continuing to respond very strongly to "The Beauty of Indexing Capital Gains" (Viewpoints, Oct. 25) by Theodore J. Forstmann, national co-chairman of the Bush-Quayle re-election campaign.
Some of their letters follow.
To the Editor:


Donna Rodgers, Kevin R. Gruneich
Donna Melissa Rodgers, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Don C. Rodgers of Matthews, N.C., was married yesterday to Kevin Ross Gruneich, a son of the Rev. and Mrs.
Martin F. Gruneich of Bella Vista, Ark.
The Rev.
Dr.
J.
Thomas Kort officiated at Sardis Presbyterian Church in Charlotte, N.C.
The bridegroom's father, a Presbyterian minister, took part in the ceremony.


A World of Weaving at Two Shows
THE silent threads of hand-woven textiles can tell tales of weavers around the world.
Two intriguing new shows were selected by anthropologists who sought cultural significance and technical skill in the craft, whether the weavings were intended for religious purposes, clothing or that most mundane use, a baby's diaper.
An exhibition at Drew University in Madison focuses on the weaving of Laos and Thailand.
The New Jersey State Museum in Trenton is showing textiles and basketry from Africa, Asia, North and South America.


Changes Seen In Auto Tests For Pollution
Tough new Federal vehicle-inspection rules aimed at improving air quality in the nation's urban areas are expected to drastically change the way cars are checked for pollution emissions in New York, New Jersey and Connecticut in the next four years.
They may raise inspection and repair costs for millions of drivers in the area, public officials and motorists' groups say.
The rules, promulgated Thursday by the Environmental Protection Agency, are a framework for gradual changes through 1996, and many decisions affecting costs, procedures and other aspects of emission inspections are yet to be made by Albany, Trenton and Hartford.


The New Fischer: A Challenge to Chess as Usual
With Bobby Fischer's victory over Boris Spassky finally a reality, some two months and 30 games after their exhibition match in Yugoslavia began, chess players, chess fans and chess bureaucrats may want to settle back into their routines.
But a wild, mysterious, romantic intruder has appeared on the scene.
The official championship cycle has been grinding away as if Fischer didn't exist.
The two top contenders, Nigel Short of Britain and Jan Timman of the Netherlands, are preparing for a match in January to decide who faces the world champion, Gary Kasparov of Russia, the next fall.
The World Chess Federation, meanwhile, has given no hint whether it will even recognize that the Fischer-Spassky match took place.


U.S. WOULD ROUTE AID VIA BELGRADE
Even as the United States is assailing the Serbs for killing Bosnian Muslims and driving them from their homes, Bush Administration officials said today that they were seeking Serbian cooperation in making Belgrade a hub for relief convoys to Bosnia.
Under an American plan to aid thousands of Bosnians suffering from hunger and exposure, the Pentagon would base military personnel in the Serbian capital to speed truck deliveries of aid to beleaguered Muslims in Sarajevo.


Mega-seller, Great Gift
WHAT: "The Road Less Traveled" (Touchstone, $11), M. Scott Peck's inspirational tour of psychotherapy, religion and personal growth.
Subtitled "A New Psychology of Love, Traditional Values and Spiritual Growth," it has become the bible of the 12-step and other programs that make up the recovery movement.
WHAT YOUR $11 BUYS: A soft-focus 315-page look at love, religion and the human psyche.
Dr.
Peck, a psychotherapist, drew on case studies from his practice.
Chapters include "Love Is Not a Feeling," "The Healthiness of Depression" and "Entropy and Original Sin."


At Work; Toward the Factory on a Hill
SOME guys just get lucky.
On Tuesday, the candidate who inhales policy thrillers between campaign speeches prevailed over the candidate who might rather have been reading "A River Runs Through It." Otherwise, "Negotiating the Future: A Labor Perspective on American Business" (Basic Books) could have been consigned to the testy oblivion of academic conferences, and Irving and Barry Bluestone, the pere et fils team that wrote the book, could have been just a kinship curiosity.
But now all the might-have-beens are history.
"Negotiating the Future" was published last week with an ecumenical list of blurbs, including one from "Bill Clinton, Governor of Arkansas." "We wouldn't mind if the publisher changed his title," Irving Bluestone said.


Dog Days


Julia Joyce Clegg, R. V. Sansevere
Julia Joyce Clegg and Richard Vincent Sansevere were married yesterday in Huntsville, Tex.
The Rev.
M.
Douglas Harper Jr. performed the Presbyterian ceremony at the Whistler Bed and Breakfast, a historic home owned by the bride's mother, Mary T. Clegg of Houston.
Mrs.
Sansevere is an artist in New York who produces computer-generated graphics for television.
She graduated from the University of Texas at Austin.
She is also a daughter of the late Jake B. Clegg Jr.
Her father was a founding partner of the Houston law firm of Saccomanno, Clegg, Martin &amp; Kipple.
Her mother is a real estate broker with John Daugherty Realty in Houston.


At the Supreme Court, A Pendulum Stops
PRECISELY at 10 o'clock on the morning after Election Day, the Justices of the Supreme Court emerged from behind a velvet curtain into a courtroom crowded with lawyers and tourists who had come to hear the day's arguments.
As the Justices took their usual seats on the bench, there was not the slightest indication that anything had changed.
With the sense of imminent change so palpable everywhere else in Washington, this was an odd moment, underscoring the Court's frequent remoteness from the rhythms of the world around it.
And after all, the election brought no disruption to the Court, no sweeping personnel changes or lines of job seekers, no new methods of doing business, not even any new cases.
There was no reason not to carry on as usual.


Well-Adjusted Clevis Rod Can Help Drain Stopper
MOST bathroom sinks are equipped with pop-up drains, which are operated by raising a vertical rod in the center of the faucet.
Such drains may look more attractive and be more pleasant to use than old-fashioned rubber stoppers, but they sometimes develop irritating problems that can be difficult to repair.
If lifting or pushing the vertical rod, called the lift rod, is difficult and the drain empties slowly, the drain is probably clogged.
To clear it, remove the stopper by lifting it straight out of the drain opening or by rotating it about a quarter of a turn counterclockwise while lifting.
Some stoppers can be removed solely by disassembling the drain.


GAY POLITICS GOES MAINSTREAM
Isn't it pathetic that homosexuals were forced to vote for Bill Clinton just to dump George Bush ("Gay Politics Goes Mainstream," by Jeffrey Schmalz, Oct. 11).
Clinton's remarks in your article sickened me.
It is clear that he was only after our votes now that politicians are suddenly aware of the clout of the very large gay population in the United States.
His remarks reflected his usual hemming and hawing, mixed with half truths and people pleasing.


Knicks Rally To Sink The Sixers
As badly as the Knicks performed offensively last night, they still managed to win.
In a home-opening performance that was less than memorable, the Knicks squeaked out an ugly 89-85 victory over the Philadelphia 76ers before a sellout crowd (19,763) at Madison Square Garden.
The Knicks got a late-game lift from Greg Anthony, who made the game-winning shot, and rookie guard Hubert Davis, who made his debut by playing the entire fourth quarter and scoring seven key points.


Making Birth Control Easier Raises Touchy Political Issues
DEPO-PROVERA had the longest gestation period of any contraceptive in American history.
When the synthetic version of progesterone was first developed in the 1950's, Elvis was on stage shocking America with gyrations hinting there was life below the waist.
Pregnancy was the punishment for girls who "went all the way." Families were nuclear.
Science was a benevolent messiah.
By the time the Food and Drug Administration approved Depo-Provera for use as an injectable contraceptive last week, 35 years after it was developed in the Upjohn Company laboratories, virtually everything about reproduction in America had changed, except the biochemistry.
Pregnancy was a way of life for tens of thousands of teen-agers, many of them black and poor.
Families came in all forms.
Science was a tarnished idol, associated with arrogance, fraud and Chernobyl.


Gathering Dust, Hartford's Past Faces an Uncertain Future
THE city of Hartford has experienced some staggering blows lately, including the loss of its legendary department store, G. Fox, and major layoffs in the insurance industry, the city's mainstay.
But even as the community tries to cope with an uncertain future, its past is in equal jeopardy.
The Hartford Collection, a compendium of thousands of items related to the history of the city -- books, deeds, letters, official documents, maps, pictures -- is slowly but surely deteriorating at the Hartford Public Library.


The Fun of a Charmingly Nasty Guy
"Classical roles, they don't pay the rent," says Stacy Keach.
Ah, so that explains the trail of mystery-thrillers.
Tonight, in "Solitary Confinement" (by Rupert Holmes of "The Mystery of Edwin Drood"), Mr.
Keach opens on Broadway for the first time since 1981, when he starred in "Deathtrap." In 1983 he had the lead in the HBO production of "Wait Until Dark"; in 1988 he toured nationally in "Sleuth," and, of course, for four seasons he starred in "Mickey Spillane's Mike Hammer," the CBS series that ended in 1989.
"There is a very deep, complex motivation compelling me to do them," said Mr.
Keach, deadpan.
"The roles are fun. Really fun. It's also interesting that all of these characters are charmingly nasty guys."
Certainly that would describe Richard Jannings, Mr.
Keach's character in "Solitary Confinement" at the Nederlander Theater.
He is, the actor said, "a cross betweeen Howard Hughes, Donald Trump and Ross Perot." An eccentric and solitary multimillionaire who lives atop a 51-story office complex in Albuquerque, N.M., Jannings is so insulting to his staff that "they decide to revolt and take him down," Mr.
Keach said.
The resulting war of wills relies on high-tech tricks.


An Incomplete President
Angry Republicans point fingers in every direction to account for President Bush's defeat.
Some blame an unfortunate turn in the business cycle from which no President could have escaped.
Others blame bad advice from passive economic strategists, the nasty convention in Houston, his unaccountably late and lame campaign.
All true, but the main reason for George Bush's precipitous fall from political grace was George Bush himself.


Betrayal Is Central Issue of Sexual-Assault Trial
Trials are often about betrayal.
The Glen Ridge sex-assault trial here is about it more than most.
The legal issue now is whether a retarded 17-year-old girl had the mental capacity to consent to the occurrences in a semi-finished basement in the suburbs where she went with 13 boys one March afternoon in 1989.
There, she was penetrated with a broomstick and a narrow baseball bat and she performed oral sex on at least one teen-ager in front of a group.


The Little Kernel
A CHEF
Written and illustrated by Douglas Florian. Unpaged. New York: Greenwillow Books.
MAKE ME A PEANUT BUTTER SANDWICH
And a Glass of Milk.
Written and illustrated by Ken Robbins.
Unpaged.
New York: Scholastic Inc.


Doomed Without a Man?
To the Editor:
On reading Judith Miller's article "The Secret Wendy Wasserstein"  [ Oct. 18 ] , it struck me that if Wendy had been Wendell, the playwright's appearance -- "slightly disheveled, a little overweight, hair in all directions" -- would have been described as eccentric.
Further, she would have been described as single by choice, not circumstance, or just a brilliant writer whose social life was not relevant to the story.


Not the Real Abba, but Close
Erasure, the English pop group that recently revived four Abba hits from the 1970's, is also bringing back the Swedish group's look.
Singing "Lay All Your Love on Me" and "Take a Chance on Me" in recent shows at the Beacon Theater, Andy Bell wore black-leather hot pants and thigh-high silver platform boots, while Vince Clarke wore flared jeans.
Two backup singers appeared in denim skirts, white cork platforms and crocheted silver lame hats with pompoms on each side.
All four wore blue satin jackets with Abba appliqued on the back in sequins.


In France, Baroque Is Suddenly a la Mode
Little in Alain Corneau's background would suggest a phenomenon like his latest film, "Tous les Matins du Monde."
After years of watching Hollywood spectaculars dominate the French box office, the film industry here can finally cheer one of its own.
And French intellectuals can indulge in self-congratulation that a movie with as rarefied a subject as 17th-century French viol players could top the charts.
Since its opening in December 1991, more than 2 million tickets to "Tous les Matins du Monde" have been sold in France alone, nearly 700,000 of them in Paris -- remarkable numbers for a non-American film.


Johnny Jiggles the Planet
JOHN VON NEUMANN
By Norman Macrae. 405 pp.
New York:  A Cornelia and Michael Bessie Book/ Pantheon Books. $25.


Body of Edison Woman Found; Police Report No Suspects in Abudction
The body of an Edison woman was found here this morning in a lumberyard ditch, three days after she and her daughter were apparently abducted in their van during an evening shopping trip.
The body of the woman, Gail F. Shollar, 35 years old, was nude and she probably was stabbed to death with a knife, the Middlesex County Prosecutor, Robert Gluck, said during a news conference at police headquarters.
He said the exact cause of death would not be known until an autopsy was completed tonight.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
SEX, ART, AND AMERICAN CULTURE  Essays. By Camille Paglia. Vintage, paper, $13.


No Headline
Sol Wachtler, the Chief Judge of the New York State Court of Appeals, the state's highest court, was arrested by Federal agents yesterday and charged with threatening and trying to extort money from a woman who had broken off a long relationship with him.
Judge Wachtler, who leads one of the top appellate courts in the country, was charged in a complaint with sending a lewd greeting card to the woman's 14-year-old daughter, threatening to kidnap the girl, and demanding $20,000 in exchange for photographs and tapes of the woman.


Elizabeth Elmore, S. E. Ettinghausen
Elizabeth Elmore, a daughter of Lois Hopkins of Manchester Center, Vt., and Edwin Elmore of Fort Lauderdale, Fla., was married yesterday to Dr.
Stephen Edmund Ettinghausen, a son of Elizabeth Ettinghausen of Princeton, N.J., and the late Dr.
Richard Ettinghausen.
The Rev.
Richard Ringenwald performed the ceremony at the First Congregational Church in Manchester, Vt.
Mrs.
Ettinghausen, 32 years old, is a nurse practitioner at the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in New York.
She graduated from Smith College and received a master's degree in nursing from Pace University.
Her father is a manager of the Lauderdale Yacht Club in Fort Lauderdale.
Her mother is a visiting nurse with Manchester Health Services.
The bride is a stepdaughter of Ted Hopkins of Manchester Center.


Sarah Thomas And Bill Smith
Sarah Ann Thomas, a daughter of Virginia D. Thomas of Irvington, N.Y., and Allen L. Thomas of New York, was married yesterday to Henry William Smith 3d, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Smith Jr. of Scotia, N.Y.
The Rev.
David Harkness performed the ceremony at the Irvington Presbyterian Church in Irvington.
Ms.
Thomas, who is 28 years old, is keeping her name.
She is an associate product manager at the H. J. Heinz Company in Pittsburgh.
She graduated cum laude from Wellesley College and received an M.B.A. from the University of Pennsylvania.
Her mother teaches math and computer science at Irvington (N.Y.) High School.
Her father is a partner at the New York law firm of Paul, Weiss, Rifkind, Wharton &amp; Garrison.
The bride is a stepdaughter of Barbara S. Thomas of New York.


Irish Bowl Over Boston College
This was going to be their stage.
For the Boston College Eagles, there could be no better place to establish credibility in an unbeaten season than Notre Dame Stadium.
Eagles of all ages invaded the Midwest, singing "For Boston" at 31,000 feet and hauling stuffed plastic bags from the campus bookstore.
But from the beginning of a shocking afternoon, the Eagles were left to wonder how they could suddenly have been reduced to such a mess.


On Sunday; A Starlit Path To Survival In High School
"I am going to get you, Gerald," Ruby Blue warned.
"Do you know where you are or what you're doing?" Mrs.
Blue's job is keeping high-risk children in high school.
She's good.
Gerald Campbell gave her a smile full of ninth-grade condescension.
By the time she got him doing his homework, the bell rang.
"You think you're saved by the bell, Gerald, but you are not saved. I'm going to your English teacher. You're going to find out what you need. You think I don't know what's going on? I know." Gerald's smile said, yeah, right.
So Mrs.
Blue whispered in his ear.


POSTINGS: L.I. Workshop; Pointers on Downtowns
Many of Long Island's downtown areas have become depressing places for retailers.
Regional malls have taken away lots of business, and stores planned by such discounters as Bradlees and the Kmart Corporation may siphon away even more.
Still, the New York Main Street Alliance, a nonprofit business education group, says there's hope.
So on Monday, Nov. 16, the Alliance and the New York State Department of Economic Development will cosponsor an all-day workshop on ways to revitalize Long Island's main streets.


Christine Wolfe, William Nichols
Christine Randall Wolfe, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Frederic D. Wolfe of Perrysburg, Ohio, was married yesterday to William Allen Nichols, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Foster Nichols of Brookville, L.I.
The Rev.
C.
Eugene Pearson, an Episcopal minister, officiated at the Chapel of Our Savior in Colorado Springs.
Mrs.
Nichols, 30 years old, is a goldsmith and architect and owns a design company in Greenwich, Conn.
She graduated from Yale University, from which she also received a master's degree in architecture.
Her father is the president of Health Care REIT, a real-estate investment company in Toledo, Ohio.
Her mother, Mary Wolfe, is an art consultant in Toledo.


Ticket Agent Picked in U.S. For '94 Games
Cartan Tours, in Manhattan Beach, Calif., has been chosen by the United States Olympic Committee to be the exclusive American ticket agent for the 1994 Olympic Winter Games in Norway.
A brochure describing event schedules, ticket prices and venues will be available from Cartan starting Nov. 16.
Sports fans will be able to mail in their ticket orders as soon as they receive the events brochure.
The company says it expects to be able to start mailing out tickets next May, in the order in which ticket requests were received.
It will then continue to accept orders until the games.
Tickets will be sold for single sporting events.
For example, men's figure skating has two components, the original program and the freestyle.
Spectators can buy tickets to the original program ($48 to $135) and to
the freestyle event ($60 to $155), but there is no single ticket to both.
Similarly, hockey tickets are for single games, not for the entire competition, and the rounds have different prices.
The early rounds are $22 to $58; the medal rounds $48 to $110, and the gold-medal game $60 to $155.


Individual Rights, Infinitesimal Risks
To the Sports Editor:
H.I.V., the virus that causes AIDS, has been present in our society for over 10 years and 10 million people have been infected worldwide.
Several studies have shown that H.I.V. is transmitted between sexual partners, people sharing needles, and from mothers to infants.
It is theoretically possible that H.I.V. may be transmitted by unusual modes, such as when infected blood contaminates a cut of an uninfected person.
But if this occurs, it is significantly less common than being killed by a bolt of lightning.


Public &amp; Private; The (New) Hillary Problem
There's job talk in Little Rock, about who will be Secretary of the Treasury, chief of staff, Attorney General.
And there's job talk across the country, too, among many women.
Here's the question: Now that we have a First Woman as educated, intelligent, superachieving and policy-savvy as her husband, what do we do with her?
"Promise me she won't talk about cookies anymore," moaned a woman in Philadelphia.


Cruise Line Juggles Ships
First there was Fantasy (1990), then there was Ecstasy (1991), next year there will be Sensation (November) and a year or so later will come Fascination and Imagination.
They may sound like perfumes, but they are megaships, each carrying up to 2,600 cruise passengers.
What will the owners, Carnival Cruise Lines, do with these huge vessels?
The Miami-based line states that its occupancy rates and earnings warrant the investment the company is making in new ships.


The Education of a Young Pro Quarterback
Before Jets quarterback Browning Nagle steps up to the line of scrimmage, his mind is already whirling, clicking through an assortment of information like an AM radio set on search.
From the conclusion of one play to the beginning of the next, Nagle has 45 seconds to get the play from the sideline, call it in the huddle -- which includes identifying the formation, blocking protections and motion -- get the team to the line of scrimmage, check the defensive formations and change the play if necessary.


A Taste of Heaven
WHY THE SKY IS FAR AWAY
A Nigerian Folktale.
Retold by Mary-Joan Gerson.
Illustrated by Carla Golembe.
Unpaged.
Boston: Joy Street/ Little, Brown &amp; Company.


BUSH'S GAMBLE
Safire's account of Bush's effort to identify his campaign with Harry Truman's underdog victory of 1948 omits an ironic element.
Truman, unlike Bush, stuck to his own principles.
He lost the Democratic right -- the Dixiecrats who walked out because they opposed his civil rights policies -- and the Democratic left, who seceded to Henry Wallace's Progressive Party.
Truman won the election by rallying the common-sense center -- just what Safire, apparently, wishes Bush had the guts to have done.
NAOMI BLIVEN
New York, N.Y.


Corrections
Two picture captions on page 58 of The Times Book Review today are reversed.
The illustration on the left is by Tom Shefelman, from "A Peddler's Dream"; the one on the right is by Dennis Nolan, from "An Ellis Island Christmas."


Prosecutor Picked for Inquiry in Crown Hts. Case
The Federal investigation into the 1991 slaying of a Hasidic scholar in Crown Heights will be handled by a veteran civil rights prosecutor from Washington, law-enforcement officials said yesterday.
The Justice Department prosecutor, Jonathan Wroblewski, began meeting last week with lawyers from the offices of United States Attorney Andrew J. Maloney and Brooklyn District Attorney Charles J. Hynes, beginning the joint investigation into the death of Yankel Rosenbaum, the officials said.


Youth Must Be Served
AFTER a weeklong marathon of shows parading New York fashion designers' ideas for next spring, it was clear that all the news didn't come from Bill, Donna, Calvin, Ralph and the others on their exalted level.
A whole raft of more recent arrivals on the fashion scene proved they were worth looking at.
They, too, are experimenting with different fabrics and cuts.
And that's good for women who can't afford the top designers, but would like to try something new.


Johnson Should Reconsider
To the Sports Editor:
My appeal to Magic Johnson is: Please don't quit now.
Please don't allow the misguided and unfounded opinions and fears of a few people to stop you from making what will probably be the most important statement of your life.
Your comeback, even if it was for one season, was more important to millions of people around the world than it was to the millionaires in the N.B.A.
It showed that we cannot give up on life and that we can face adversity and our fears head on.
RHINOLD LAMAR PONDER  New Brunswick, N.J.


Answered Prayers
THE SNOW CAT
By Dayal Kaur Khalsa. Unpaged. New York: Clarkson Potter.


A Taste of Indian Fare With a Spicy Touch
IT has been the good fortune of the appropriately named Indian restaurant Kismet and its patrons to move from premises in Georgetown to a more visible and accessible site on Route 7 in Ridgefield.
The restaurant, which is attached to the Ridgefield Motor Inn, has made its main dining space (a long rectangular room with a smoking section in the rear) reminiscent of India, with decorative carpets on the floors, carved wooden panels mounted on the stone walls and glass-top tables covered with dark patterned cloths.
A smaller dining room behind the bar area has a fireplace as well as Indian carpets on the walls, which makes it especially cozy during the winter.


BUSH'S GAMBLE
Let's face it, it is not easy to be a member of the political right these days, particularly in the aftermath of the Republican convention.
So how does William Safire distance himself from the "boys of August?"


Nets Fall Prey to the Heat And a Late Surge by Coles
An elaborate pre-game laser and fireworks show, a Miami Heat staple for home opening night, left Miami Arena looking a little like a hazy barroom tonight.
"First time I've seen something like this," New Jersey Nets Coach Chuck Daly blurted to no one in particular.
"There's such a smokescreen, you can't see the basket."


Johnson Not Fond Of Role As a Fan
Not only did Magic Johnson, who goes by Earvin now, come out of hiding Friday night, but he also parked his angular self in the epicenter of the Los Angeles Sports Arena, seven rows up from courtside.
As he lounged in an aisle seat, his long legs spilled into a stairway and could have easily tripped someone.
His wife, Cookie, cheered when the Lakers scored against the Clippers; he did not.
He was clearly not comfortable as a spectator.


Corrections
A map on Oct. 18 with an article about night life in Tokyo mislabeled a number of streets.
A corrected map follows.


Edge of the Chasm -- AIDS Comes to Asia/A special report.; After Years of Denial, Asia Faces Scourge of AIDS
AIDS came relatively late to most of Asia, but it is now spreading so rapidly -- and so randomly -- that scientists are convinced that AIDS will kill more people on this continent than on any other.
Conservative estimates suggest that by the end of the decade, the AIDS virus will infect more than one million Asians each year, more than in the rest of the world combined.


Political Operas Happen to Cross Paths
The fortuitous near-simultaneous release of recordings of Anthony Davis's "X: The Life and Times of Malcolm X" and John Adams's "Death of Klinghoffer" poses suggestive parallels.
Both operas are about contemporary political events that still arouse anger and pain in broad segments of the American population.
Both involve Islam and resentment against white or Jewish power.
Both are written in post-modernist musical idioms.
And the recordings even include two of the same singers: one of Mr.
Adams's Arab terrorists aboard the cruise ship Achille Lauro, the baritone Eugene Perry, also sings Malcolm; another, the tenor Thomas Young, takes the other two leading male roles in the Davis opera, Street and Elijah.


Purdue Gets Dutch Star
The decision is a big disappointment for Louisiana State, Pittsburgh, Boston College and Villanova, but MATT TEN DAM, a 7-foot-2-inch, 302-pound center from the Netherlands, has decided to play for Purdue.


Can Clinton Close The Vision Gap?
Democrats are under standably elated.
They hear hoofbeats the cavalry's arrival, in the nick of time, to rescue the Supreme Court.
A high turnout, a landslide Electoral College win, the customary graciousness of the losers.
These things help dispel, for the moment, the sourness that pervaded much of the campaign.
But we should not forget, in the fizz of celebration, that the overall winner this year was not F.O.B. (Friends of Bill) but N.O.B. (None of the Above).
Sometimes N.O.B. ran under his own name, sometimes under that of Jerry Brown or Paul Tsongas or Patrick Buchanan or Ross Perot.
But mainly he ran -- and won big -- as Term Limits.
The clearest margins of the year were given to energetic dismissal.
The message was simple: be gone.


Looting Brazil
It is one thing to talk about austerity," Fernando Collor de Mello lectured Brazilians two years ago, soon after sweeping Brazil's first free presidential elections in three decades. "It is another thing to practice it."
To punctuate his point, the telegenic 40-year-old apostle of clean government announced that he would live in his family's modest ranch house in Brasilia as a "demonstration of austerity."


Libraries Set Scene In a Variety Of Ways
"LOCAL libraries play a valuable role in giving patrons the opportunity to experience live musicians in a wide variety of concert contexts," said Dom Cerulli, the former New York editor for Downbeat magazine who now arranges concerts at the Warner Library in Tarrytown and acts as host.
"Ossining has similar seasons of live music and theatrical presentations, and libraries in Greenburgh, New Rochelle, White Plains, Chappaqua and Croton-on-Hudson also make the presentation of live music a part of their service to the public."
The attraction at the Warner Library today at 2:30 P.M. is the Arioso Trio, made up of the pianist Harold Lewin, the violinist Fiona Vanderspar-Simon and the cellist Judith Davidoff.
They will play works by Mozart and Brahms along with Joaquin Turina's "Circulo Fantasia" for Cello and Piano.
Later in the season the far-ranging Warner series will present free programs of jazz, Irish folk songs and chamber music.
The number to call for more information on Warner Library programs is 631-2189.


First, We Need to Have a Peacetime Economy
To the Editor:
"The Cold War: Get Over It" (editorial, Oct. 22) raises the central issue facing Americans -- the imperative to put an end to our semimilitary economy and construct a system geared to peacetime needs.
Many of us can recall when the country faced the dangers from the Rome-Berlin-Tokyo Axis.
The Roosevelt Administration, after grappling with a number of problems, was able to mobilize our economic strength to cope with the prospects of war.


Shoes, Soup, A Wigged Wag
MONDAY night, at the nearly empty Upper East Side town house that Bill and Camille Cosby are vacating for a roomier one nearby, an enlarged childhood snapshot of the journalist Charlayne Hunter-Gault was hanging at the head of the stairs.
Typical of family snapshots, it captured a wide-eyed innocent standing at attention in a clean jumper with her arms hovering at her sides.
She looked as if she were about to sprout wings and fly.
It was almost half a century later, and Ms.
Hunter-Gault stood nearby greeting guests celebrating the publication of her memoir, "In My Place," which chronicles her experience as one of the first two black students admitted to the University of Georgia in 1961.
"You know," she said, "a lot of people have a midlife crisis at 50. Instead of having one, I decided to renew my life by writing this book." As she spoke, she dispensed kisses and hugs in a dashiki-style silk blouse.


Diverted, Danube Fades, and the Rage Rises
Erno Kosa, a 70-year-old farmer in this Danube River village, stands next to the well in his yard, only a few steps from his front door.
A metal bucket above the well hangs idly from its chain, no longer of any use.
"There have been many dry periods, but the well has never gone dry before," Mr.
Kosa says.


Soft Music: What a Grind
In the clotted woods that surround Imaginary Road, Will Ackerman prepared to cut down a dead tree.
He had to.
It was turning cold and he needed firewood.
There was a fall tang to the Vermont air, and the sky brimmed with luminous clouds.
"I'm not sure if this pine will fall downhill or uphill," Mr.
Ackerman said with little mortification.
"So I would stay close to the base."


A Searing Examination Of Private Adoptions
RECENT plays like "After Shocks" by Doug Haverty, at the defunct Long Island Stage in Rockville Centre, and the poignant "Phantasie" by Sybil Pearson, at the Studio Theater in Lindenhurst, have explored the subject of adoption.
Now the Studio Theater is taking another look, in "The Baby Dance" by Jane Anderson.
The play had its premiere in Pasadena, Calif., in 1990.
Last year it was at the Lucille Lortel Theater on Christopher Street in Manhattan.


Some Builders Are Bucking the Trend
"PEOPLE thought I was absolutely mad to be building a luxury house on spec during the depths of the recession," said Dorothy Zeifer, a developer in Chappaqua, "but bucking the trend made sense to me. For one thing, in 1990, it was the recession that made it possible for me to buy some spectacular property, the Hope Farm spread near Bedford Village. Because I was able to finance the purchase of the land myself, I didn't have to go to the banks."
Ms.
Zeifer's 40 acres, which she has divided into seven building lots measuring from 2.8 to 5.3 acres, will eventually be developed into a community of seven houses, each selling for more than $1 million.


Jennifer Iselin, Miles Chapin
Jennifer Sara Iselin, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Herbert M. Iselin of Pound Ridge, N.Y., was married yesterday to Miles Chapin, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Schuyler G. Chapin of New York.
The Rev.
Francis Geer, an Episcopal minister, performed the ceremony at Steinway Hall, the New York showroom for Steinway &amp; Sons, the piano company founded by the bridegroom's family.
Mrs.
Chapin is the special-events coordinator for the Hudson Riverkeeper Fund, an environmental-advocacy group in Garrison, N.Y.
She graduated from Clark University.
Her father, now retired, was a founding partner of the former New York securities brokerage of Iselin, Legge, Stonehill &amp; Company.
Her mother, Lily Iselin, is a painter in Pound Ridge.


Using Wild Rice for an Autumn Flavor
WILD rice is very much an autumn dish.
Its distinctive nutty flavor goes extremely well with game and roasts.
It makes an excellent pilaf mixed with pine nuts, pecans or wild mushrooms, and it can be used as a stuffing for such birds as pheasant or grouse.
It is also delicious folded into pancakes and served with smoked salmon as a first course.
Chef Bradley Ogden of the Lark Creek Inn in California serves it in a superb fall salad made with smoked chicken in cranberry vinaigrette dressing.
The name wild rice is misleading.
Wild rice, which has a black sheen and a faint earthy smell, is not really rice but the seed of a marsh grass native to the Great Lakes region.
For centuries it was harvested by Indians in Minnesota, Wisconsin and Canada who traveled in birch-bark canoes.
They used a stick to knock the seeds off the grass into the bottom of their canoes.
It was not until the mid-70's that commercial wild-rice farming began in Minnesota and in the Sacramento Valley in California.


Bypassing the Press Helps Candidates; Does It Also Serve the Public Interest?
MARISSA HALL, the young woman from Richmond, Va., who stood up at the second Presidential debate and asked "How has the national debt personally affected each of your lives?" probably wasn't expecting to become a major campaign figure.
But as William Figueroa, the student Dan Quayle coached to spell "potatoe," can attest, celebrity sometimes comes in unexpected ways.
After the second debate was over, many Americans hailed Ms.
Hall's question as one of the campaign's most illuminating, calling it proof that the political process functions best when the role of the news media is minimized.
Others argued that the question itself was wrong-headed -- Ms.
Hall seemed not to understand the difference between the recession and the national debt -- and called it one of the best arguments that could be made for the importance of the press.


Streetscapes: Grace Episcopal Church; Restoration to Revive Gothic Revival Glory
IN the 1960's, a building was considered "saved" if it was protected by landmark designation and got a decent budget for renovation.
Details of the physical changes were not too important, in large part because an understanding of how building materials actually worked was fairly primitive.


NOV. 1-7: Washington's Warning Shot; Europe Holds Its Fire But a Trade War May Have Begun
In the global economy, where nations risk trade wars when diplomacy fails, weapons can be as mundane as soybeans or as stylish as fine wine.
So it went last week in the apparent failure of talks between the Bush Administration and the European Community.
Soybeans -- innocuous cream-colored legumes about the size and shape of green peas -- figure centrally.
The United States wanted Europe to end or reduce the farm subsidies that allow its growers of soybeans and other oilseeds to unfairly undersell American growers.
After European officials refused, the United States moved to impose 200 percent taxes on some imports, chiefly white wine.


Tampa Bay Castoffs Cast Aside Islanders
The Islanders lost their fourth consecutive game tonight, but this one was quite a show, better than some of their victories.
They fell in overtime by 6-5 to the Tampa Bay Lightning, an expansion team with six former Islanders.
Among the many highlights, before an unusually large crowd of 12,136 at the Coliseum, was a goal on a penalty shot by the Islanders' Pierre Turgeon, to send the game into overtime with seven seconds left in regulation.


Q and A
Hiking in the Pyrenees
Q.
I have heard of a hiking trail called G.R. 7 that traverses the Pyrenees.
Where can I find information, preferably in English, to help plan a walk next summer? -- Christopher Newton, Clinton, N.J.


About Those Stats on Women's Pay
To the Editor:
As the mother of two talented teen-age daughters (one in high school and one at Harvard), I encourage pursuing a good education, planning careers carefully and setting high goals for their professional and personal lives.
But we all have to be realistic, and your article knocked the proverbial stuffing out of me.


Randye Resnick, Michael Bernot
Dr.
Randye Sue Resnick, the daughter of Dr.
Martin Resnick of Bedford, N.Y., and the late Thelma Resnick, was married last evening to Michael Dana Bernot, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Robert Bernot of New York.
Cantor Richard Botton performed the ceremony at the Marriott Financial Center Hotel in New York.
Dr.
Bernot, 26 years old, is an intern at Lenox Hill Hospital in New York.
She graduated from Duke University and received her medical degree from New York Medical College, where her husband is a fourth-year student.
Her father is a podiatrist in the Bronx.


Blood Count


Europe's Small Airlines Shelter Under Bigger Wings
HANNES GOETZ, the chairman of Swissair, is in a quandary.
He heads one of the premier well-run carriers in Europe, with a following of customers much larger than the small size of Switzerland might warrant.
Through its reputation for good service, Swissair has attracted many travelers who are willing to fly to other destinations by way of its hubs in Zurich and Geneva.
But Swissair, and other medium-sized European airlines, are about to find themselves face to face with change and soon they must adapt or die.


Q and A
Hiking in the Pyrenees


Talking: Flip Taxes; In a Weak Market, a Big Burden
WORRIED that a flip tax equal to 6 percent of the gross sales price was posing too great a financial hardship on shareholders struggling to sell in tough times, Donald Chase, a board member at the 42-unit co-op at 160 West 77th Street, has been lobbying for change.
His goal is to reduce his co-op's flip tax -- the fee imposed by a co-op on shareholders who sell their apartments -- to 2 percent.
Moreover, he maintains there is strong sentiment to have the tax abolished altogether.


City Hall and Sex: 'My Character Is Up for Grabs'
When Barbara Wood heard on the radio that her former boss was about to be named a Deputy Mayor of New York City, she thought of the night five years ago when, she said, Randy Daniels walked her to the subway station and propositioned her with crude, explicitly sexual remarks.
And then she put that thought aside.
Ms.
Wood said she never had any desire to block Mr.
Daniels's career path, not when she quit her job working for him in City Council President Andrew J. Stein's press office in 1987 and not after the radio report in October.
But her experience was leaked to news organizations without her consent, she said, thrusting her into a public scandal.
And, in the ensuing uproar, Mr.
Daniels withdrew as Mayor David N. Dinkins's new deputy, even though no formal investigation had been conducted, and he filed a libel and slander suit against her.


Tech Notes; Want to Be Alone? Forget It
DICK TRACY, you're getting closer.
For better or worse, more people are about to be tethered electronically to spouse, boss or tennis partner by what its maker says is the world's smallest pager.
Called a Piepser -- German for "beeper" -- it is basically a normal-sized wristwatch with a built-in pager, and can receive distinct signals from as many as four callers.


POSTINGS: 26 Bronx Houses; Color Them Brightly
Pink.
Peach.
Yellow.
Blue.
The vibrant colors of the 26 new two-family houses at Melrose Avenue and East 155th Street in the Bronx strike some viewers as being a bit out of context.
But that may be part of their appeal.
"They represent the
new
context," said Kathryn Wylde, president of the New York City Housing Partnership, which sponsored the project, with city and state assistance.


Hampton Stepping Up In Class in the N.F.L.
The first time Rodney Hampton high-stepped with a football in his hands in a Pop Warner game, he darted and skipped for a 50-yard touchdown run.
In his first high-school varsity game in Houston, he cradled the opening kickoff and sped 80 yards to glory.
In his first game at the University of Georgia, on a third-and-9 play, he ran 20 yards for a first down.
On the next play, he finished what he had started, running 20 more yards into the end zone.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
Romance for Younger Set
PETER GOLDBERG had fallen in love with a princess.
Her name was Katie Luciano, and she was a vision in pink.
As the music played, every dance was his.
But being 5 years old, Peter decided that he had to go to the bathroom -- now.
He rushed off, and another kindergartener rushed over.


Listen Up, Sears!
To the Editor:
Regarding "Signs of Life at Sears, Roebuck" (Oct. 25), here is what is wrong with Sears.
I am 26, single with an annual income of $35,000 -- a yuppie, if you will.
I have Visa, Mastercard and American Express.
Sears doesn't take any of them.
If they don't want my cards, they don't deserve my money.
RAJU NARISETTI Dayton, Ohio, Oct. 28


THE TRANSITION: The Republicans; Bush Looks to History as a Salve for Losing Office
President Bush began a new campaign today -- one to win the hearts and minds of historians.
"I hope history will record that the Bush Administration has served America well," he said in a short, eloquent radio address.
"America has led the world through an age of global transition. We've made the world safer for our kids, and I believe the real fruits of our global victory are yet to be tasted."


A Near-Perfect Game But Rangers Fall Short
For the longest time, Roger Neilson thought he saw perfection unfolding before him on the Boston Garden ice.
The Rangers' forwards were backchecking.
The defense was standing the Bruins up at the blue line.
The power play produced a goal.
The penalty-killing unit staved off a two-man Boston advantage.
Mike Richter busily kept the pucks out of the net.


Scott McPherson; Actor, 33, Author of a Hit Stage Play
Scott W. McPherson, an actor and playwright who wrote "Marvin's Room," an award-winning Off Broadway hit, died yesterday at his home in Chicago.
He was 33 years old.
He died of complications from AIDS, said a friend of his, Andrew Patner.


IN SHORT: FICTION
THE TRESPASSERS By Robert Roper. Ticknor &amp; Fields, $19.95.


No Headline
Sol Wachtler, the Chief Judge of the New York State Court of Appeals, the state's highest court, was arrested by Federal agents yesterday and charged with threatening and trying to extort money from a woman who had broken off a long relationship with him.
Judge Wachtler, who leads one of the top appellate courts in the country, was charged in a complaint with sending a lewd greeting card to the woman's 14-year-old daughter, threatening to kidnap the girl, and demanding $20,000 in exchange for photographs and tapes of the woman.


Susan M. Girard, Mr. Damico
Susan Mary Girard, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Philippe A. Girard of Newtown Square, Pa., was married in Villanova, Pa., yesterday to Christopher Damico, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
P.
C.
Damico of West Hazleton, Pa.
The Rev.
Michael A. Colagreco performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Thomas of Villanova Chapel at Villanova University.
Mrs.
Damico, 30 years old, is an associate at the law firm of Prickett, Jones, Elliott, Kristol &amp; Schnee in Wilmington, Del.
She and her husband graduated from Villanova, where Mrs.
Damico also received a law degree.


Eponymy
The election of a new President often raises instant, nonpartisan questions of terminology.
If a President's name is too long (Roosevelt, Eisenhower) to fit comfortably in a headline, copy editors embrace initials (F.D.R.) or nicknames (Ike).
Whatever the winner's approach to the nation's business, commentators love to call it Nixonomics, Reaganomics.
As William Safire observed in his New York Times Magazine column last week, the time for Clintonomics is at hand.
There is nothing neutral however, about the eponyms that are created to describe a President's supporters.
Tuesday's election has brought forward at least six such neologisms:


Technology; Look, No Wires! But the Pages Fly
Since the first rough radio broadcast nearly a century ago, wireless communication has made giant strides.
A person walking along a Manhattan street can now pull a cellular phone out of a coat pocket and talk to someone across the ocean.
And in a similar leap of technology, portable computers allow people to carry a library full of facts and documents wherever they wander.
Now comes the next goal: to merge those two technologies into one, to let someone sitting under a tree summon a 10-page document from a laptop computer and with a few keystrokes send those thousands of words through the air to a distant office.


Well-Adjusted Clevis Rod Can Help Drain Stopper
MOST bathroom sinks are equipped with pop-up drains, which are operated by raising a vertical rod in the center of the faucet.
Such drains may look more attractive and be more pleasant to use than old-fashioned rubber stoppers, but they sometimes develop irritating problems that can be difficult to repair.
If lifting or pushing the vertical rod, called the lift rod, is difficult and the drain empties slowly, the drain is probably clogged.
To clear it, remove the stopper by lifting it straight out of the drain opening or by rotating it about a quarter of a turn counterclockwise while lifting.
Some stoppers can be removed solely by disassembling the drain.


Sara Goldsmith, R. G. Schwartz Jr.
Sara Helene Goldsmith and Robert George Schwartz Jr., lawyers in Boston, were married yesterday at the Elizabeth B. Hall Chapel at Concord Academy in Concord, Mass.
The Rev.
Rhys Williams, a Unitarian minister, performed the ceremony.
Mrs.
Schwartz, 26 years, was until recently a law clerk to Judge William Young of Federal District Court in Boston and is to become an associate at the law firm of Ropes &amp; Gray this month.
A cum laude graduate of Yale University, she received her law degree from Harvard Law School.


Mary Alice Ward, James B. Rickert
Mary Alice Ward, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Harry P. Ward of Little Rock, Ark., was married yesterday to Dr.
James Burleson Rickert, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert G. Rickert of Louisville, Ky.
Msgr.
George Bardes performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Thomas More Church in New York.
Mrs.
Rickert, 28 years old, is a fund-raising officer with the Neurological Institute, a division of Columbia University, in New York.
She graduated from Princeton University.
Her father is the chancellor of the University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences in Little Rock.


The Executive Computer; As Piracy Grows, the Software Industry Counterattacks
UNITED STATES marshals recently raided several businesses in New Jersey and California and seized an estimated $9 million of counterfeit versions of the Microsoft Corporation's MS-DOS 5.0 software.
The packages, Microsoft executives said, were perfect imitations, right down to the special holographic stamps intended to thwart counterfeiters.


The Year's Best Illustrated Books
The illustrations on these pages have been taken from The Book Review's choices of the 10 best illustrated children's books of 1992.
The Book Review has annually asked a panel of three judges to make a selection from among the several thousand children's books published each year.
The judges this year were: Roger Sutton, executive editor of The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books; Barbara Kiefer of Columbia Teacher's College, and Alice Provensen, an artist whose most recent book is "Punch in New York." As a matter of note, Trina Schart Hyman was a winner once before, Oscar de Mejo twice before.
De Mejo died this year; William H. Johnson died in 1970.


Asian Themes Featured In Pair of Performances
ASIAN motifs highlight a pair of 3 o'clock concerts this afternoon, a concerto for the traditional Chinese pipa in Danbury, and dancers from Shanghai performing in New London.
The pipa is a short-necked lute favored by blind troubadours in ancient times but now used frequently as a concert instrument.
Wu Man, the first woman to receive a master's degree in pipa performance from the Beijing Conservatory, and winner of a national pipa competition in 1989, is now a resident of Danbury, and will demonstrate the instrument in a pre-concert talk at the Rogers Park Middle School, starting at 2:30.


Dartmouth Pounds Columbia
Dartmouth 38, Columbia 19
On a record-setting day at Memorial Field, heavily favored Dartmouth beat Columbia, 38-19, today to give the Big Green its 22d consecutive victory in meetings between the two schools.


SURFACING
ELECTRONICS --
Underwater camcorders:
for home videos from a new perspective. From Sony. REAL ESTATE --
Prewar-style lobbies for postwar buildings:
moldings and cornices in standard-issue high-rise apartment houses. ACCESSORY --
Leather wallets for Post-It notes:
from Paris, by Didier Lamarthe.  BOARD GAMES --
Harassment:
contains 156 "cases" of all kinds -- involving sex, religion, ethnicity, age, appearance -- and lets you judge.
FASHION --
Everlast swimsuits:
for women who like to box and swim.


Profile/Larry Estes; Hollywood's Quiet 'Godfather' of the Offbeat Film
LARRY ESTES arrives for lunch at the trendy Melrose Avenue restaurant driving a distinctly untrendy 1988 Acura.
No one's head turns when he enters.
His table is hardly the best in the house.
But Mr.
Estes, a low-key Georgian with a self-deprecating style and a faint smile that never quite vanishes, is one of the most influential, if unknown, players in town.
The 38-year-old producer, a senior vice president of Columbia Tristar Home Video, has since 1987 financed nearly 60 films, most of them low budget ($1 million to $4 million).
Some, particularly "Sex, Lies, and Videotape," have become box-office hits.
But Mr.
Estes's true distinction has been in proving that thanks to the home-video market, a worthy film made at the right price can make a profit even if it never shows in a theater.


Well-Adjusted Clevis Rod Can Help Drain Stopper
MOST bathroom sinks are equipped with pop-up drains, which are operated by raising a vertical rod in the center of the faucet.
Such drains may look more attractive and be more pleasant to use than old-fashioned rubber stoppers, but they sometimes develop irritating problems that can be difficult to repair.
If lifting or pushing the vertical rod, called the lift rod, is difficult and the drain empties slowly, the drain is probably clogged.
To clear it, remove the stopper by lifting it straight out of the drain opening or by rotating it about a quarter of a turn counterclockwise while lifting.
Some stoppers can be removed solely by disassembling the drain.


GAY POLITICS GOES MAINSTREAM
It was encouraging to find that the gay vote was important enough in 1992 to warrant a cover story in your magazine.


Knicks Rally To Sink The Sixers
As badly as the Knicks performed offensively last night, they still managed to win.
In a home-opening performance that was less than memorable, the Knicks squeaked out an ugly 89-85 victory over the Philadelphia 76ers before a sellout crowd (19,763) at Madison Square Garden.
The Knicks got a late-game lift from Greg Anthony, who made the game-winning shot, and rookie guard Hubert Davis, who made his debut by playing the entire fourth quarter and scoring seven key points.


Emigre Couple Caught 'Between East and West'
IN "Between East and West" at the McCarter Theater, Gregor, a Czechoslovak dissident, and Erna, his brooding wife, are subsisting in a dingy loft sublet on Manhattan's Lower East Side in 1983.
While Erna, an actress, retreats into remoteness, yearning to go back to Prague, Gregor, a film maker, is in an if-you-can-make-it-here, you'll-make-it-anywhere state of mind.
Richard Nelson's cheerless play had its first staging during an experimental work-in-progress series at Yale Repertory in 1985 when glasnost held sway.
A small production in an off-beat London playhouse, the Hampstead Theater, followed two years later, as the Soviet Communist Party was waning.
The McCarter's program carries a chronology of changes in Czechoslovakia, from 1968 to 1989, when Vaclav Havel was elected President by acclamation.


May This Planet Be Safe From Heretics
GREEN DELUSIONS
An Environmentalist Critique of Radical Environmentalism.
By Martin W. Lewis. 288 pp.
Durham, N.C.: Duke University Press. $24.95.


The New Fischer: A Challenge to Chess as Usual
With Bobby Fischer's victory over Boris Spassky finally a reality, some two months and 30 games after their exhibition match in Yugoslavia began, chess players, chess fans and chess bureaucrats may want to settle back into their routines.
But a wild, mysterious, romantic intruder has appeared on the scene.
The official championship cycle has been grinding away as if Fischer didn't exist.
The two top contenders, Nigel Short of Britain and Jan Timman of the Netherlands, are preparing for a match in January to decide who faces the world champion, Gary Kasparov of Russia, the next fall.
The World Chess Federation, meanwhile, has given no hint whether it will even recognize that the Fischer-Spassky match took place.


A Bit Wryly, Moscow Summons the Masses
Once more, a banner headline in red across the top of Pravda greeted "comrades" on the "October celebration," and throngs of workers with red flags bellowed lustily to the ringing slogans.
But beyond that, there was little in common between the celebration that an intact Soviet state would have mounted on the 75th anniversary of the revolution and the small and aging mob of divided, embittered and humiliated Communists who gathered outside Red Square to vent their anti-Government, anti-reform, anti-Yeltsin, anti-American, anti-Semitic and anti-privatization sentiments.


Rare Evidence Of Nevada's Mint
THE Carson City (Nev.) Mint had a short and tumultuous run, and today its coins are some of the rarer ones on the market.
The production figures were never very high, and few people collected the coins at the time.
Consequently, specimens showing little wear are seen infrequently and often bring much higher prices than similar coins from more famous mints.
Carson City was an odd spot for a city, much less a mint.
The town was established in 1858 by Abraham Curry, a New Yorker who had traveled to the barren wastes of Nevada and bought some land.
A year later, gold and silver were found just 15 miles away, and Mr.
Curry was quick to start a mine, the Gould &amp; Curry.
By 1860, Gould &amp; Curry was one of the largest mines working the immense Comstock Lode.


Legal Aid for Breast-Cancer Queries
A SECRETARY in Westbury was in the shower when she found a lump in her right breast.
After breast cancer was diagonsed she had radiation and chemotherapy treatments.
When they failed to stop the spread of the cancer, her doctor told her that her best chance of survival would be a bone-marrow transplant.
But her insurance company refused to pay for the treatment because it said the procedure was experimental.
Adrienne Jonay was 42 years old when her breast cancer was diagnosed.
A speech therapist in Queens, she was absent from work 72 days to receive chemotherapy.
She almost lost her job and her health insurance.
Amid the crisis, she began divorce proceedings, and her husband left the country, leaving her to care for her two adolescent sons.
On the husband's return, he told her that he could no longer keep her on his policy.


Alien Love Call


Victoria DiStasio, James B. Fuqua
Victoria Anne DiStasio, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Anthony F. DiStasio of Yonkers, was married there yesterday to James Bertrum Fuqua, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
James M. Fuqua of Panama City, Fla.
Msgr.
James R. Moore officiated at Annunciation Church.
Mrs.
Fuqua, 25 years old, graduated from Williams College.
She is an assistant editor at Hyperion, a publishing company in New York.
Her father is the American sales representative, based in Tuckahoe, N.Y., for the Freyssinet Company, a Paris-based civil engineering concern.
Her mother, Maria DiStasio, is a fifth-grade teacher at St.
Eugene's School in Yonkers.


New Momentum Builds on 125th Street
EFFORTS to revitalize 125th Street have gained momentum in recent months as new ventures have appeared on Harlem's main shopping, entertainment and business thoroughfare.
Last month the Victoria 5 Theater, Central Harlem's only moviehouse, reopened after being dark for more than a year.
In July a local businessman, Joseph Holland, opened a Ben &amp; Jerry's ice-cream parlor on the southeast corner of Fifth Avenue and 125th Street.
And before the end of the year a branch of The Body Shop, a London-based cosmetics company, is to take space in the ground floor of the National Black Theater on the northeast corner of 125th Street and Fifth Avenue.


Yeltsin Asks U.N. to Help Russians in the Baltics
President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia asked the United Nations on Friday to "take all measures" within its power to help end what he said were human rights violations against ethnic Russians in the Baltic countries.
Last month, Russia suspended the withdrawal of its troops from Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania and indicated that the timing of the withdrawal was linked to the treatment of the troops, their families and the ethnic Russian populations in the three countries.


Michelle Leber, Michael Roberts
Mr. and Mrs.
Steven Leber of Lawrence, L.I., have announced March wedding plans for their daughter Michelle Ann Leber and Michael Paul Roberts, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Eugene Roberts of Roslyn, L.I.
Miss Leber, 26 years old, graduated from Boston University and received a law degree from New York Law School.
Her father is the producer in New York of the North American touring company of the Moscow Circus.
Her mother, Marion Leber, is the associate producer of the company.


NOBLESSE LARGESSE
The pressures of the 1992 campaign season were such that the use of language by George Bush, Bill Clinton and Ross Perot became more tarnished by the day (On Language: "Noblesse Largesse," by William Safire, Oct. 11).
In a speech following the debate on Oct. 15, Bush compared himself to the pennant-winning Atlanta Braves, saying that politics is like baseball: "It ain't over till the last batter swings." The relevant baseball saying is "It ain't over until the fat lady sings." Perhaps he was being careful not to offend any overweight voters.
Clinton was guilty of awkward language.
I heard him speak of "growing the economy" and "growing jobs," as if he were running for national groundskeeper.
Perhaps, because of the "character" or "trust" issue, he wanted to reassure skeptical voters by planting an image of Clinton the caretaker.


In This Three-Sided Civil War, Only Death Is Claiming Victory
NOT long ago, the violent struggle over the fate of Liberia seemed nearly over.
Charles Taylor, the American-educated guerrilla leader, had agreed to disarm and encamp his forces.
Meanwhile, troops from a multinational West African peacekeeping force had begun fanning out through territory under the rebel leader's control, which includes nearly 95 percent of the Liberian countryside-- and appeared poised to enforce a truce.
There was even talk of elections this year, the first in nearly a decade.
But in a blink, the conflict was rekindled last month, and now Liberia's warring factions appear to be thrusting the country once again into chaos, and this time possibly engulfing its neighbors in the region.


Update; On Times Square, It's Back to Square One
Fantasy is alive and well on 42d Street, though most of the movie marquees are blank and even the neon red pupil in the Peepland sign went dark last month.
As developers plan to remake the strip in its old image as a glittering entertainment center, movies are being shot in theaters where they once were shown.
Last week, recreational vehicles lined the curbs between Seventh and Eighth Avenues as tight-lipped production crew members rushed in and out of the decrepit Victory Theater, where Woody Allen was at work on his new movie, "Manhattan Murder Mystery."


A Republican Message That Roiled the Waters; Core Failure Rate?
President-elect Clinton has said that an economic stimulus program, including money for new roads and other public works projects, s at the top of his agenda.
As an indication of how dominant an issue the economy was in the Nov. 2 elections, readers are continuing to respond very strongly to "The Beauty of Indexing Capital Gains" (Viewpoints, Oct. 25) by Theodore J. Forstmann, national co-chairman of the Bush-Quayle re-election campaign.
Some of their letters follow.
To the Editor:


Kerry McCullough, Douglas Brown
Kathleen Helen McCullough, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William H. McCullough Jr. of Memphis, was married yesterday to Douglas S. Brown, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Stanley E. Brown of Newtown, Conn.
Msgr.
Donald S. Pryor, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated at the Church of the Resurrection in Rye, N.Y.
Mrs.
Brown is 27 years old and known as Kerry.
She graduated from William Smith College.
She is a senior marketing representative for Titan Sports Inc., which runs the World Wrestling Federation, in Stamford, Conn.
Her father is the manager of sales and marketing for the business forms department of the International Paper Company in Memphis.


Wall Street; Lately, It Sure Beats Selling Bagels
Being a stockbroker has gotten to be a lot more fun lately, what with individual investors back in the market and commission business at record levels.
But that isn't the half of it for the heaviest hitters among brokers -- "big producers," in the parlance of Wall Street.
Bidding wars are putting generous signing bonuses of up to 50 percent of the previous year's income in these brokers' already stuffed pockets.
The broker who pulled in $1 million in commissions last year is strolling over to the firm across the street with an extra $500,000 in his wallet.
Not bad for a day's work.


Cuban Says Next Chief Shouldn't Be an Exile
A young leader of Cuba's human rights movement on his first visit to the United States says a new generation of Cubans looking toward a more democratic future wants to choose a national leader from within their society, not from among the exiles in Miami.
In what amounted to a message to those exiles who might be positioning themselves for political power after Fidel Castro leaves the scene, the rights leader, Sebastian Arcos Cazabon, said at a news conference on Friday that his contemporaries "want mostly economic support from Miami."


Series Fraud Called Wider
The Philippine team that was stripped of its Little League World Series title because 8 of its 14 players proved to be imported from as far as 700 miles from the city it supposedly represented did not have a single eligible player on the squad, a Manila newspaper said yesterday.
According to The Philippine Daily Inquirer, the six players who were really from Zamboanga, the team's host city, were in fact over-aged imposters, two of them 15-year-old high school sophomores.
The Little League age limit is 12.


ABOUT-FACE
What parent would allow his child to submit to a future draft ordered by a President who did not deem it necessary to submit to the draft in 1969 and allowed someone else to serve in his place?
As a result of the decision Bill Clinton made 23 years ago, I could not support his bid for the Presidency.
I believe that the Bill Clinton of 1992 is the same Bill Clinton of 1969.
E.
DAVIS
Elmhurst, Queens


Shelly Etherton, Michael Atkinson
Dovie Etherton of Lancaster, Calif., has announced January wedding plans for her daughter Shelly Marie Etherton and Michael David Atkinson, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
David Atkinson of Lawrenceville, N.J.


The First Jobs Program Is for the Democratic Elite
Now that they have dispensed with the technicalities (winning an election), the nation's long-suffering, power-starved Democrats have turned their minds to far more important matters: themselves.
The groveling, simpering and leaking have begun.
So have the feigned indifference and the ringing denials.
Bill Clinton needs a cabinet.
And a court.
He'll be looking for ambassadors and domestic-policy experts.


Portrait of the Statesman as an Aging Gadfly
DEAN ACHESON
The Cold War Years, 1953-1971.
By Douglas Brinkley.
Illustrated. 429 pp.
New Haven: Yale University Press. $35.


Lock Up the Food. Here Comes Richard Osterweil.
Richard Osterweil has this thing about celebrities, having made an avocation of crashing their parties and funerals to sample hors d'oeuvres, eavesdrop on conversations and be photographed in the vicinity of Jacqueline Onassis.
"A compulsion is a compulsion," this sneaky, driven yet charming interloper says with a shrug in "Painting the Town," a film about his life that began a limited run on Friday at the Village East Cinema.


Friends' View of Judge: G.O.P. Answer to Cuomo
In state Republican circles, Sol Wachtler has long enjoyed an aura as the party's best intellectual match for Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo, and perhaps the best political one as well.
Affable, extremely intelligent and gifted with a razor-sharp wit and rich baritone voice, he has long been cast by many Republican leaders as the member of their party with the best chance to unseat Mr.
Cuomo.
Governor Cuomo may well agree.
Years ago he speculated in his diaries that Mr.
Wachtler was "really eager" to run for Governor and would make "a good candidate." In 1985, he made Mr.
Wachtler the state's chief judge, in a move that Mr.
Cuomo cast as evidence of his scrupulous nonpartisanship but that was also seen as an ingenious way of neutralizing a formidable potential foe.


PARDON IS SOUGHT FOR WEINBERGER
Friends of Caspar W. Weinberger are beginning an effort to persuade President Bush to pardon the former Defense Secretary, a step that would be immensely popular among many Republicans but would probably revive questions about Mr.
Bush's own role in the Iran-arms scandal, senior Republicans said today.
White House officials, in interviews today, said that a pardon for Mr.
Weinberger may be considered at some point in the final days of Mr.
Bush's Presidency.
But they cautioned that so far only informal discussions have taken place among lower-level staff members.
Senior advisers have not formally reviewed the idea and no proposal has been sent to the President's desk, the aides said.


Hillary I. Hirsch, Todd J. Emmerman
Hillary Iris Hirsch, the daughter of Patricia Hirsch of White Plains, was married in New York last evening to Todd Joseph Emmerman, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Ronald Emmerman of Highland Park, Ill.
Rabbi Norton D. Shargel performed the ceremony at the Harmonie Club.
Mrs.
Emmerman, 24 years old, is the Northeast account executive at Michael Kors for Compagnia Internazionale Abbigliamento U.S.A.
Corporation in New York, a designer and manufacturer of women's clothing.
She and her husband graduated from Boston University, where Mr.
Emmerman also received a law degree.
The bride's mother is a real estate broker in Rye, N.Y., for Coldwell Banker Real Estate.


What Can Clinton Change, and When?
GOV.
BILL CLINTON and his supporters had just begun to savor the sweet taste of election victory when the heartburn of governing set in.
By the end of last week, they clearly recognized that the policy changes Mr.
Clinton promised daily during the campaign can only take effect slowly, incrementally and painfully even if they are enacted early in the year.
"The word now," said an adviser in Little Rock trying to dampen expectations, "is no quick fix."


First, the Symphony; Later, More Glassiana
The Metropolitan Opera's premiere of Philip Glass's "Voyage" last month, though perhaps the most glittery affair of the composer's career, was merely the beginning of a hectic season for Mr.
Glass in New York.
On Friday and Saturday evenings, the Brooklyn Academy of Music will prepare the way for "Einstein on the Beach" with "Glass Reflections," a program of the composer's music performed by Dennis Russell Davies and the Brooklyn Philharmonic.
The concert includes the premiere of the composer's first full-fledged symphony, which is based on instrumental cuts from the 1977 album "Low" by David Bowie and Bryan Eno.
The "Low" Symphony has been recorded by Mr.
Davies and the Brooklyn Philharmonic for release by Mr.
Glass's Point label early next year.


'Nashville': Political Prescience
Robert Altman's "Nashville" may be the perfect follow-up to the strangest Presidential campaign in recent memory.
When the film appeared in 1975, it seemed anchored in its own political moment, a time far different from the 90's.
Watergate, the Nixon resignation and the war in Vietnam were last year's news instead of history.
But the film's mix of cynicism and hope is so eerily pertinent today that watching it again is a revelation -- about politics and about art.
"Nashville" has just opened at the Film Forum in its original wide-screen format.
It is also available on video, in a version that cuts off some of the action on the sides of the screen and so loses something of the film's epic scope.
That loss matters, because the film is, above all, a rich, savvy, entertaining epic of Americana.
It was never a political tract.


Eldorado: Cadillac's High-Tech Platform
WITH the recent flood of bad news from General Motors, including last week's purge of the chairman, Robert C. Stempel, and the announcement of a $753 million loss for the third quarter, it is sometimes hard to remember that the world's largest automobile company does indeed make some pretty good cars.
Chevrolet's Corvette, for instance, is a state-of-the-art vehicle.
Buick's Park Avenue Ultra is well worth a look.
Saturn is earning high marks in all categories.
And, while much of today's attention has focused on the imports, G.M. has a long history of innovation after innovation.
Oldsmobile has been the test-bed for many of those good ideas.
But it is Cadillac that has garnered most of the kudos over the years.


Help the Cities First
Dear Mr. President-elect:
Since our last meeting, you have been besieged by many voices.
Mine will continue to be for those who have grown silent because they have lost their jobs, because they are poor or because they have no hope.
For them, stand and deliver.


There's Nothing Super About Rypien This Season
Go down to the bottom of the National Football Conference quarterback rankings and there, surprisingly, sprawls Mark Rypien.
With only six touchdowns and nine interceptions, with a mere 54.5 percent completion average, Rypien is hardly being confused these days with the commanding Super Bowl most valuable player of barely nine months ago.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
35 HOPPER DRAWINGS
A collection of 35 working drawings by Edward Hopper will be on view at the Hopper House Art Center at 82 North Broadway in Nyack through Dec. 13.
An opening reception is scheduled today from 1 to 5 P.M.


Education Is Putting On a Younger Face
THE face of education is getting younger.
All over New Jersey, parents who started school at the age of 4 or 5 are enrolling their children in nursery schools well before their third birthdays.
And in many cases, children are also taking "enrichment courses" -- gym classes for 1-year-olds in Nutley, violin instruction for 3-year-olds in Newark, Japanese lessons for 2 1/2-year-olds in Teaneck.


Children's Books
THE STINKY CHEESE MAN By Jon Scieszka.
Illustrated by Lane Smith.
Reviewed by Signe Wilkinson. -- 29 JUNE 29, 1999  Written and illustrated by David Wiesner.
Reviewed by Linda Perkins.-- 31 THE MOON LADY  By Amy Tan.
Illustrated by Gretchen Schields.
Reviewed by Ellen Schecter. -- 31 THE NIGHT OF WISHES By Michael Ende.
Illustrated by Regina Kehn.
Reviewed by Elizabeth Crow. -- 32 MARTHA SPEAKS  Written and illustrated by Susan Meddaugh. -- 32 BOODIL MY DOG  Written and illustrated by Pija Lindenbaum.
Reviewed by Benjamin Cheever. -- 32 LITTLE PIG By Akumal Ramachander.
Illustrated by Stasys Eidrigevicius.
Reviewed by Art Spiegelman. -- 33 MORNING GIRL  By Michael Dorris.
Reviewed by Alice McDermott. - 33 THE YEAR'S BEST ILLUSTRATED BOOKS -- 34 WHY THE SKY IS FAR AWAY Retold by Mary-Joan Gerson.
Illustrated by Carla Golembe.
Reviewed by Sam Swope. - 36 MIRETTE ON THE HIGH WIRE Written and illustrated by Emily Arnold McCully.
Reviewed by Jean Van Leeuwen. -- 38 WHAT HEARTS  By Bruce Brooks.
Reviewed by Eric Kraft. -- 40 THE SNOW CAT  Written and illustrated by Dayal Kaur Khalsa.
Reviewed by Leonard Marcus. -- 42 BILLY THE GREAT  By Rosa Guy.
Illustrated by Caroline Binch. -- 44 RACHEL PARKER, KINDERGARTEN SHOW-OFF By Ann Martin.
Illustrated by Nancy Poydar.
Reviewed by Stephen L. Carter. -- 44 WOODY'S 20 GROW BIG SONGS By Woody Guthrie with Marjorie Mazia Guthrie.
Illustrated by Woody Guthrie. -- 44 GONNA SING MY HEAD OFF!
Collected and arranged by Kathleen Krull.
Illustrated by Allen Garns.
Reviewed by Oscar Brand. - 44 DON'T YOU KNOW THERE'S A WAR ON?
Written and illustrated by James Stevenson.
Reviewed by Peter Benchley.-- 46 ORFE  By Cynthia Voigt. -- 48 ORPHEUS  Retold and illustrated by Charles Mikolaycak.
Reviewed by David Sacks. -- 48 A CHEF  Written and illustrated by Douglas Florian. -- 50 MAKE ME A PEANUT BUTTER SANDWICH Written and illustrated by Ken Robbins.
Reviewed by Molly O'Neill. -- 50 SWEET ARE THE USES OF PREDICTABILITY.
By Ilene Cooper. -- 52 LETTING SWIFT RIVER GO By Jane Yolen.
Illustrated by Barbara Cooney.
Reviewed by Noel Perrin.-- 54 SUNDIATA Written and illustrated by David Wisniewski.
Reviewed by Joe Lasker. -- 55 ALICE -- By Whoopi Goldberg.
Illustrated by John Rocco.
Reviewed by Rosemary L. Bray. -- 56 WHEN CATS DREAM  Written and illustrated by Dav Pilkey.
Reviewed by James Howe. -- 57 WHO SAVES A DRAGON?
A LITERARY QUIZ. -- 58 A PEDDLER'S DREAM  By Janice Shefelman.
Illustrated by Tom Shefelman. -- 58 KLARA'S NEW WORLD  Written and illustrated by Jeanette Winter. -- 58 AN ELLIS ISLAND CHRISTMAS By Maxinne Rhea Leighton.
Illustrated by Dennis Nolan.
Reviewed by Ruth J. Abram. -- 58


BUSH'S GAMBLE
Safire comments correctly that the patrician Bush "clanks falsely when he puts on Joe Sixpack nonairs." Clinton, too, makes ungrammatical, faux-Bubba soundbites, lest he be condemned for sounding like a scholar.


Using Wild Rice for an Autumn Flavor
WILD rice is very much an autumn dish.
Its distinctive nutty flavor goes extremely well with game and roasts.
It makes an excellent pilaf mixed with pine nuts, pecans or wild mushrooms, and it can be used as a stuffing for such birds as pheasant or grouse.
It is also delicious folded into pancakes and served with smoked salmon as a first course.
Chef Bradley Ogden of the Lark Creek Inn in California serves it in a superb fall salad made with smoked chicken in cranberry vinaigrette dressing.
The name wild rice is misleading.
Wild rice, which has a black sheen and a faint earthy smell, is not really rice but the seed of a marsh grass native to the Great Lakes region.
For centuries it was harvested by Indians in Minnesota, Wisconsin and Canada who traveled in birch-bark canoes.
They used a stick to knock the seeds off the grass into the bottom of their canoes.
It was not until the mid-70's that commercial wild-rice farming began in Minnesota and in the Sacramento Valley in California.


Laura Mackenzie, Edward Steins
Laura Harrison Mackenzie, the daughter of Kay MacDermott of Douglaston, Queens, and the late Donald H. Mackenzie, was married yesterday to G. Edward Steins, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
George E. Steins of Naperville, Ill.
The Rev.
John Meyer performed the Dutch Reformed ceremony at the Community Church of Douglaston.
Mrs.
Steins, 31 years old, is a sales manager for Anne Klein II, the women's clothing manufacturer, in New York.
She graduated from Skidmore College.
Her father was the chairman and president of the former Long Island City Financial Corporation, a savings and loan company in Long Island City, Queens.
Her mother is an assistant district attorney in Kew Gardens, Queens.
The bride is the stepdaughter of Malcolm MacDermott of Douglaston.


Emily Fisher, A. W. F. Fletcher
Mrs.
Alton E. Peters of New York and Edmund B. Fisher of London have announced the engagement of their daughter, Emily Anstice Fisher, to Alexander William Frederick Fletcher, the son of David S. L. Fletcher of Thurlestone, South Devon, England, and the late Ada Mary Y. Fletcher.
A February wedding is planned.
Miss Fisher, 25 years old, graduated cum laude from Smith College.
She is an actress in London, where her father is a book publisher.
Her stepfather is a senior partner in the New York law firm of Kelley Drye &amp; Warren and is the president of the Metropolitan Opera Guild and the chairman of Goodwill Industries of Greater New York.


Junior Rider Saddles for Last Run at an Elusive Title
She is the most accomplished junior rider in the nation, and she is her own best advertisement.
Cool and collected in the saddle, Nicole Shahinian has the perfect combination of drive and delicacy that assures her of success once she turns professional next month.
Horse owners who realize she represents ribbons and trophies and prize money for their expensive equine investments will want her in the saddle for them.
But there is one last rite of passage left for this 18-year-old junior rider, the coveted Rolex/Maclay Championship at the National Horse Show here on Sunday, and figuring out how to win it on her seventh and final attempt has left the Pascack High School graduate uncharacteristically frazzled.


Literary Lionizing
Talking books and toasting authors, for the library's good, Nov. 5.


Air Force Lands a Date For New Year's Eve
The Commander in Chief's Trophy was the biggest thing on the line besides pride in today's clash between Air Force and Army at a sold-out Michie Stadium.
Neither team was able to summon up a passing game, but Air Force's ground attack was effective enough to produce a 7-3 triumph over the Cadets in a game that was scoreless for three quarters.


The Old Order Changes In Congress -- a Little
IRRITATION at the image of the Senate Judiciary Committee's well-heeled white male inquisitors sitting in judgment on Justice Clarence Thomas and Anita Hill permeated many Congressional campaigns this year, and voters smashed old barriers, electing a record number of women, black and Hispanic lawmakers.
An American Indian and a black woman will join the Senate, and Congress's first Korean-American was elected from a southern California district with a minuscule Asian population.
This new diversity in an institution that was conceived 200 years ago as a redoubt of philosopher-landowners but perceived by many citizens as another men's club represents a big step in the unfolding of a more democratic and perhaps more tolerant era in elective representation.
Women and minorities will more often express their concerns on the floor of Congress without going through the filter of white men.


In the Region: Long Island; Recent Sales
Amityville 149,000
87 Offaly Street  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 16-year-old colonial; dining room, finished basement, 1-car garage; taxes $3,200.
Bayville 162,000
6 Pine Park Avenue  5-bedrooms, 1 1/2-bath, 69-year-old colonial, basement, fireplace; taxes $2,100.
Copiague 125,000
900 Dante Avenue  4-bedroom, 3-bath, 33-year-old Cape Cod; finished basement, 1-car garage; taxes $3,500.
Glen Head 260,000
24 Terry Court  5-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 29-year-old colonial; dining room, basement, 2-car attached garage; taxes $5,600.
Sayville 252,000
44 Amy Drive  5-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 20-year-old colonial; dining room, eat-in kitchen, den, 2-car garage; taxes $6,700.
Williston Park 215,000
142 William Street  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 44-year-old brick and aluminum Cape Cod; dining room, basement, 70-by-100-ft. lot; taxes $4,400.
OTHER AREAS Yorktown Heights, N.Y. 296,900
Wildwood  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, new colonial; 2-story foyer, family room, fireplace, study, eat-in kitchen, 2-car garage; taxes $8,610.
New Britain, Conn. 96,000
82 Barnes Street  2-bedroom, 62-year-old ranch; new siding, roof and windows, formal dining room, galley kitchen, 50-by-160-ft. lot; taxes $1,820.
Livingston, N.J. 150,000
20 Preston Street  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 42-year-old colonial; 2-car garage, deck, screened porch; taxes $2,827.


Julie C. Bick, Rogers Weed 4th
Mr. and Mrs.
Maurice Bick of South Orange, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Julie Catherine Bick to Alonzo Rogers Weed 4th, a son of Mr.
Weed 3d of Spartanburg, S.C., and Lynne R. Weed of Charleston, S.C.
A February wedding is planned.


Corrections
An air fare listing in the Travel Watch column on Oct. 25 included erroneous entries under the headings "Discount Fare" and "Unrestricted Fare." Kiwi Airlines offers a $198 round trip fare in both categories between New York and Orlando.


Roads to the Real New Mexico
THE smart people don't go to Santa Fe just for Santa Fe itself.
Local residents, some of whom refer ironically to their outrageously successful tourist town as "The Adobe Boutique," will tell you there's very little of the real New Mexico in the countless shops and galleries, or in the trendy restaurants.


The Once and Future Versace
THE red carpet was laid at the corner of Seventh Avenue and 27th Street on Thursday night.
Hundreds of design students at the Fashion Institute of Technology stood behind police lines and hollered as people they recognized passed by.
They didn't even have to recognize them; if they liked the way they looked, that alone was enough to set off a cheer.
The event was a preview of "Signatures," a retrospective of the work of Gianni Versace, the prolific Italian designer whose clothes have inspired tides of imitators in the last few seasons.
Mr.
Versace, who is 43 years old, started his businesss 15 years ago, not a terribly long time for a designer in terms of retrospective shows.
Still, the quality and quantity of the work, as well as the installation, brought gasps of astonishment from the 800 invited guests.


THE GUIDE
FOLK DANCE BALL
Easy dances for beginners to join in and a very advanced performance by the Hameed African Drum and Dance Ensemble will be featured at the sixth annual Folk Dance Ball on Saturday in Tenafly.


Endangered 'Dinosaur' Fish Is Breeding in Louisiana
For months, Bobby Reed had been patiently waiting for a particular species of fish to turn up on the Mississippi River north of Baton Rouge, and three weeks ago one finally landed in his net.
It was rather strange looking: a flattened head and snout, lips but no teeth, and covered in a light-gray suit of armor.


Who Saves a Dragon? A Literary Quiz
The characters in the best-loved children's books work their way off the page and into our daily lives.
From the first bedtime companions to the most outrageous adolescents, they grow on us until their habits and foibles stand in for our own.
The dozen questions that follow are about some of the children, grown-ups, animals and imaginary creatures that American children today think of as members of the family.
--------------------
1.
When winter came knocking, which creature opened the door of his cozy home?  a.
The runaway bunny  b.
The cat in the hat  c.
The owl at home  d.
The velveteen rabbit  2.
Which pals were part-time pirates?  a.
Omri and Patrick  b.
Huck and Tom  c.
Johnny and Rab  3.
What do young Laura Ingalls, Anne Shirley and Dorothy Gale have in common?  a.
Braids  b.
Dogs  c.
Brothers  4.
These children all go on rescue missions.
Which of them saves a baby dragon?  a.
Obadiah Starbuck  b.
Elmer Elevator  c.
Fern Arable  5.
Storybook dogs tend to wander.
Which of these stays closest to home?  a.
Max Stravinsky  b.
Carl  c.
Ribsy
d.
Eddie  6.
None of these children live in the city, but which siblings find life in the suburbs insufferable?  a.
Claudia and Jamie  b.
Anastasia and Sam
c.
Beezus and Ramona  7.
Which best friends are of the same species?  a.
Ernest and Celestine  b.
Amos and Boris  c.
George and Martha  8.
Who is not a schoolteacher?  a.
Miss Nelson  b.
Mz.
Frizzle  c.
Miss Rumphius  d.
Miss Honey
9.
These girls have hardworking parents, but which mom works at the Blue Tile Diner?  a.
Ramona's  b.
Rosa's  c.
Ronia's  10.
Which little boy leaves footprints on the snowy sidewalk?
a.
Max  b.
Peter  c.
Alfie  11.
Madame Lupino sells ice cream to a pig.
But which pig?  a.
Freddy the Pig  b.
Garth Pig  c.
Pig Pig  d.
Sylvester  12.
All of these children get angry when things don't go their way.
But whose frustration leads to a "universe quake"?  a.
Gilly Hopkins  b.
Arthur  c.
M.
C.
Higgins  ANSWERS TO QUIZ:
1. c. The owl at home, in the book of the same title.
2. b. Huckleberry Finn and Tom Sawyer.
3. a. Braids.
4. b. Elmer Elevator, in "My Father's Dragon."
5. c. Henry Huggins's dog, Ribsy.
6. a. Claudia and Jamie, in "From the Mixed-Up Files of Mrs. Basil E. Frankweiler."
7. c. George and Martha are hippopotamuses.
8. c. Miss Rumphius is a magical old lady who plants lupines.
9. b. Rosa's, in "A Chair for My Mother."
10. b. Peter, in "The Snowy Day."
11. b. Garth Pig, in "Garth Pig and the Ice-Cream Lady."
12. b. Arthur, in "Angry Arthur."


How Shorter Days Bring Brighter Blooms
PLANT lovers sometimes wonder why the Christmas cactus sets buds in late summer and bursts into bloom in November or early December.
They might also ponder why chrysanthemums always bloom in fall, or why a poinsettia is on schedule with bright red bracts for the holiday season.
The easiest answers are that these events are supposed to happen, but there is a better answer: Nature sends out specific signals, and one of the most obvious at this time of year is that the days are growing shorter.
Though to many observers the phenomenon is probably not worth a second thought, to the natural world it is very important.
The biological response to the phenomenon is called photoperiodism.


Roads to the Real New Mexico
THE smart people don't go to Santa Fe just for Santa Fe itself.
Local residents, some of whom refer ironically to their outrageously successful tourist town as "The Adobe Boutique," will tell you there's very little of the real New Mexico in the countless shops and galleries, or in the trendy restaurants.
To get a taste of the authentic Southwest you've got to hit the road.
Three drives within 75 miles of Santa Fe, all of them leisurely day trips, offer an array of New Mexico's expansive vistas and encapsulate practically the entire history of the state.


NOV. 1-7: Cipollone v. Liggett; Legal Costs Doom Suit Against Tobacco Industry
The court record will show that nobody won and nobody lost -- the plaintiffs simply walked off the field.
And officially, that is the way the country's best-known smoker-liability lawsuit, Cipollone v.
Liggett Group Inc., ended last week in Federal court in Newark.


Crime
The next time that friends come to town expecting a personal tour of the
real
New York City, here's what to hand them: a subway map, a fistful of tokens and Lawrence Block's big bruiser of a crime novel, A WALK AMONG THE TOMBSTONES (Morrow, $17).
Mr.
Block has eyes for the city, which presents as vivid a character presence in his 10th Matthew Scudder mystery as any of the colorful denizens encountered by the hard-boiled private eye at his favorite haunts.
Typically, these range from workingmen's bars on 10th Avenue and seedy hotels in the theater district to A.A. meeting places up and down Manhattan's West Side and selected body-dumping grounds in the outer boroughs.
There are plenty of other crime novelists roaming this turf, but Mr.
Block seems to have put down deeper roots.


Kauai Sets Up Recovery Line
The Hawaiian island of Kauai, devastated by Hurricane Iniki on Sept. 10, has set up toll-free phone and fax lines to help travelers and others get information on the recovery of the island and its tourism industry.
The 24-hour Kauai Hot Line, (800) 262-1400, fax (800) 637-5762, is answered by volunteers who provide information coordinated by Lin Brazil, director of the island's Kalapaki Bay Resort Association.
Information about accommodations and other facilities is updated every Tuesday.
The line will be in operation at least until next October.
Responses will be by fax or telephone.
One of Kauai's largest hotels, the 600-room Hyatt Regency, on Poipu Beach, is expected to reopen on Dec. 15.
More than 200 employees have been cleaning up the grounds, pools, restaurants and first-floor rooms.
A hotel spokeswoman said that about 200 rooms were occupied by contractors and other people working on the island's recovery effort.


High Temples To the Age Of Steam
THE great railroad stations of the 19th century were, like the cathedrals of preceding centuries, monuments to faith.
The arched roofs of the train sheds, built mainly with steel or iron instead of stone, soared like immense churches and spoke eloquently of the optimistic belief in progress that was symbolized by the railroads themselves.
Americans shared this belief too, and built some of the grandest stations of all -- Grand Central and Pennsylvania stations in New York City, Union Station in Washington, D.C., among them -- and then let them crumble or be torn down before rediscovering their vitality and restoring some that remained.


A Vote for '96 Mascot
Whatever you think of Whatizit, the computer-generated blue blob that has been designated the official mascot of the 1996 Olympic Games, it has at least one fan.


If Links Are Missing, Surprises Follow
OFTEN, in trying to track the progress of various strategies through many tournaments and games, you find leaps -- missing links.
You can be sure that several or even many players know what is missing, but each withholds the information to spring it on the next gullible opponent.
How can you be sure that something is omitted?
One indication is the avoidance in a game of what is supposed to be an annihilating attack.


Gold Medalist Retires
The last time she tried to retire, GAO MIN of China was persuaded to resume her career and attempt to win a second Olympic gold medal for her country.
After doing just that in Barcelona last summer, the 22-year-old Gao, who was the world's best springboard diver for six years, retired once again.
This time she has apparently found a way to make it stick.


Mutual Funds; Junk Bonds: Has the Time Passed?
ARE there any bargains left in junk bond funds?
They returned 36.4 percent last year, triple the historical return of stocks, and so far this year they have commanded an edge of nearly 12 percentage points over virtually riskless United States Treasury funds, returning 16 percent.
On top of that, many yield-starved investors are enticed by the funds' juicy yields, which are now averaging 10.3 percent.
But the party is probably over, many experts say.
For one thing, junk bonds have recovered so strongly from their 1990 trough that further price appreciation is seen as unlikely.


Fighting the Meese Commission
To the Editor:
In your review of Susan B. Trento's book, "The Power House" (Aug. 23), the statement that Robert Keith Gray of Hill &amp; Knowlton "worked for Playboy" in the fight against the Reagan Administration's antipornography crusade misrepresents and mischaracterizes the relationship between the public relations firm and Playboy.


With Truce, Angola Rulers Face Uncertainty
Nearly a week after fierce fighting erupted in Angola, a fragile cease-fire has begun to take hold.
But experts on the turbulent political scene there say President Jose Eduardo dos Santos and his governing party still face a daunting array of problems, any one of which could jeopardize their survival.
First, both Angolans and Westerners say, is whether the cease-fire reached last weekend will endure.
Second is whether another round of elections will be held.
Third is the demobilization and merger of the warring factions into a new integrated national army.


In the Region: New Jersey; Recent Sales
Livingston 150,000
20 Preston Street  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 42-year-old colonial; 2-car garage, deck; taxes $2,827.
Maplewood 237,000
41 Headley Place  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 34-year-old colonial; eat-in-kitchen, 2-car garage, c/a, fireplace; $5,190.
Millburn 203,000
26 Southern Slope Drive  2-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 37-year-old colonial; 2-car garage, living room with fireplace, family room; taxes $3,343.
Short Hills 455,000
89 Tennyson Drive  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 37-year-old ranch; family room, 2-car garage, fireplace, eat-in-kitchen; taxes $9,679.
South Orange 484,000
365 Forest Road  6-bedroom, 4 1/2-bath, 43-year-old Tudor; fireplace, 3-car garage, deck, porch, eat-in-kitchen; taxes $9,994.
West Orange 241,000  15 Wessman Drive  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 35-year-old bi-level; c/ a, patio, recreation room, 2-car garage; taxes $5,908.
OTHER AREAS Amityville, L.I. 149,000
87 Offaly Street  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 16-year-old colonial; dining room, finished basement, 1-car garage; taxes $3,200.
Yorktown Heights, N.Y. 296,900
Wildwood  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, new colonial; 2-story foyer, family room, fireplace, study, eat-in kitchen, 2-car garage; taxes $8,610.
New Britain, Conn. 96,000
82 Barnes Street  2-bedroom, 62-year-old ranch; new siding, roof and windows, formal dining room, galley kitchen, 50-by-160-ft. lot; taxes $1,820.


Abducted Woman Found Dead


Correction
An article on Oct. 25 about new buildings in Toronto referred incompletely the role of Bregman &amp; Hamann Architects.
In addition to being associate architects on the Canadian Broadcast Center, they were the co-architects (with Scott Associates) of the new airport terminal and the master planners and architects (along with Skidmore, Owings &amp; Merrill and Santiago Calatrava) for the BCE Place project and its galleria.


An Option Cage Didn't Foresee
John Cage Generally kept from interfering in performances of his works.
Having mapped out the possibilities, he liked to leave the choices of detail in the hands of the performers.
But he did enjoy being on hand when his music was played, and shortly before his death last Augusthe spoke of the international festivities scheduled to honor his 80th birthday this year as a kind of puzzle.
In particular, he wondered how he would manage to attend the premieres of two new orchestral works, one in Frankfurt, the other in New York, two days apart.
"I'll have to take one of those fast planes," he said.
The second of those works, "Seventy-Four," will be given its premiere by Dennis Russell Davies and the American Composers Orchestra this afternoon at Carnegie Hall.
And in some ways, it is a perfect piece to offer in Cage's memory, because its scoring lets the players decide -- among other potential interpretations -- whether the work is to sound like a funereal reading of the composer's last will or a celebration of the freedom and inventiveness his music demanded.


Syracuse Passes Test With Glowing Marks
Syracuse was tested today by a difficult Big East opponent, Virginia Tech, but the Orangemen displayed their considerable skills in winning a game that seemed closer than the final score, 28-9.
The result brought up an instant question about Syracuse and Miami, the team the Orangemen will play Nov. 21.
Two weeks ago, Virginia Tech lost to the Hurricanes by 20 points.


Gearing Up for Expected Flood of Passport Renewals
AMERICANS are expected to travel overseas in record numbers next year.
The Travel and Tourism Administration, part of the Commerce Department, predicts that 16.7 million will travel outside the country to places other than Canada and Mexico, an increase of 6 percent over this year.
In addition, the first 10-year passports, issued in 1983, start expiring in January.
Passport demand in the early 80's was high; the dollar was strong, air fares were low and the word was go-go.
So the State Department is bracing for an onslaught of applicants for new and renewed passports.


Table With a View
To the Editor: Having recently completed a tour of the Canadian Rockies conducted by Tauck Tours, I'd like to share one persistent source of discomfort with your readers.
Perhaps they will prove I am not paranoid!


About Those Stats on Women's Pay
To the Editor:
"Women's Progress Stalled? Just Not So" (Oct. 18) confirms that while the glass ceiling is still a popular notion and a reality for some, it is less of a barrier than once believed.


It's a Wonderful 2d Term (Apologies to Mr. Capra)
OF all the reasons why George Bush unravelled, the one most often cited is the 1990 bipartisan budget deal that broke his "read my lips" pledge.
Lyn Nofziger, the former Reagan aide, called it "the wound from which all blood flows."
With a little humorous license, it is possible to imagine what would have happened in the Bush Administration if the President had, at the last moment, just stood up to John Sununu and Richard Darman, his aides who worked out the deal, and said: "Can't do it. Can't break my promise to the American people. Wouldn't be prudent. Might lose in '92."


The War at Sea in Nelson's Day
The tactics and shipboard life of Britain's Adm.
Horatio Nelson are the focus of a new gallery at the Mariners' Museum in Newport News, Va.
The gallery was opened on Oct. 21, the anniversary of Nelson's death at the Battle of Trafalgar in 1805, when his ships defeated Napoleon's fleet, thwarting a French-Spanish invasion of England.
A re-creation of a gun deck aboard a late 18th-century battleship demonstrates the cramped quarters in which sailors lived and worked -- sleeping in hammocks swung over the cannons and eating on tables hung from overhead.
Some of Nelson's innovations are reflected in a naval surgeon's quarters, represented by a cot, surgical tools and medicine chest.


Commercial Property: Going Global; Brokerages Take On Partners to Do Deals Abroad
REAL ESTATE has always been the most local of businesses, with success linked to a deep understanding of the quirks and opportunities of a geographically limited area.
But nowadays, with business in general going more global, the real estate profession is scurrying to do so, too.
Indeed, there is a growing line of brokerages trying to cash in on American companies looking for space abroad, and on deep-pocketed foreign investors looking to take advantage of depressed prices here.
Increasingly, they are hooking up with overseas realty firms in hopes of melding those firms' local expertise with their own global visions.


RUSSIANS PLANNING TO CONTINUE USING FAULTED REACTORS
Senior Russian nuclear officials have told a watchdog group of Western experts that Russia's notorious graphite-core nuclear reactors -- the kind that blew up at Chernobyl in 1986 -- will go on operating indefinitely.
If the West wants to make them safer, it can help to pay for improvements, but in any case, the reactors will not be shut down.
The official United States position on these reactors has strongly opposed their continued operation, and has sought to discourage or bar financing of measures that would prolong the reactors' lives.


Such A Lovely Neck For the Role
NAME: Michaela Bercu.
IDENTITY: 22-year-old Israeli-born model.


No. 1 Washington Stopped by Arizona
It has been a tough week for the Washington Huskies.
On Thursday, they lost Billy Joe Hobert, their starting quarterback, for the first five games of the season after an investigation into a possibly improper loan.
And today, they not only lost a game for the first time in more than two years but most likely will lose their No. 1 ranking and a shot at an unofficial national championship as well.


Outrageous Sexism In Dining Review
The description of the Court Jester Restaurant in a dining review (Oct. 11) as "A Masculine Setting in White Plains" is outrageously sexist.
As evidence, the review offers up "the clubby dining pit," which is "fitted with brass rails and discrete corners for making or breaking deals." And "the softening, charming garden beyond a dramatic glass wall" does not offset this "decidedly masculine" setting.
Whoa!
From this, one concludes that gents do deals and ladies do gardens, a la Mary, Mary, Quite Contrary.
But lots of women do deals and can't tell a flower from a weed.
I even know men who tend gardens (Gasp!).
Culturally, we may be stuck with blue for baby boys and pink for baby girls.
As adults in the 1990's, we deserve more enlightened commentary.


NOV. 1-7: Job Offer Rescinded; Presbyterians Forbid Hiring Of Homosexual Ministers
The effort among homosexuals to gain a public place in the nation's religious leadership suffered a setback last week when the top judicial body of the Presbyterian Church (U.S.A.) refused to let a church hire a lesbian minister.


First, We Need to Have a Peacetime Economy; Jobs Plan That Worked
To the Editor:
Peter Passell's Oct. 15 Economic Scene column states that Gov.
Bill Clinton's advisers have been looking positively on a suggestion for employment tax credits -- say, $2,000 for the first year for employers who add workers.
Mr.
Passell then quotes a critic who mentioned that the 1977 credit was only used by about one-third of the eligible businesses.


Meow! Meow!
To the Editor:
In Mark A. Fischetti's article "When Caution Blunts the Pens of Political Cartoonists"  [ Oct. 25 ] , a main theme is that most political cartoonists today are pussycats when it comes to slash and cut.
How about copycats?
Drawing styles, to a great extent, are indistinguishable from one another.
Some cartoonists draw so badly -- most noticeably when it comes to their caricaturing -- as to make deciphering their ideas a chore.


F.B.I. Account of Events Leading to Wachtler's Arrest
April, 1992: J.S. begins receiving anonymous greeting cards and notes, some addressed to her, and some to her 14-year-old daughter.
One card, postmarked May 11, contained offensive sexual references and a condom in its wrapper.
June and July 1992: In a series of typed letters, J.S. is told that the writer had some embarrassing pictures and tapes of J.S. together with a man, and says that they are "for sale."


Salvadoran Rivals Agree on Purge of the Military
The Government and its rebel adversaries agreed today to final terms for a sweeping purge of the armed forces, apparently removing the last major obstacle to peace.
The senior United Nations official who brokered the agreement said it had cleared the way for the full disarmament of the rebels on Dec. 15 and a series of other steps by the two sides on and around that date.


Ms. Mittelstadt, Othon A. Prounis
Monica Geli Mittelstadt and Othon Alexander Prounis, both lawyers in New York, are planning a January wedding, the parents of the future bride, Mr. and Mrs.
Charles A. Mittelstadt of Rye, N.Y., have announced.
Mr.
Prounis is the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Theodore O. Prounis of New York.
Ms.
Mittelstadt, 30 years old, is an associate at the law firm of Rogers &amp; Wells.
She graduated from Amherst College and received a law degree from Fordham University.
Her father, a marketing consultant, retired as a senior vice president of the Interpublic Group of Companies, the advertising conglomerate, in New York.
Her mother, Angelica Mittelstadt, is a portrait artist in Rye.


The Jackhammer Voice of Mamet's 'Oleanna'
"Oleanna," David Mamet's contribution to the national debate on sexual harassment, is not going to calm anyone down.
It will rankle those who think Anita Hill went too far, just as it will rankle those who think she didn't go far enough.
Even those who object to the work on purely theatrical grounds are likely to object strenuously.
Everything about Mr.
Mamet's play (Off Broadway at the Orpheum Theater) seems guaranteed to induce a state of high anxiety in the viewer.


A Republican Message That Roiled the Waters; Old Money, New Money
President-elect Clinton has said that an economic stimulus program, including money for new roads and other public works projects, s at the top of his agenda.
As an indication of how dominant an issue the economy was in the Nov. 2 elections, readers are continuing to respond very strongly to "The Beauty of Indexing Capital Gains" (Viewpoints, Oct. 25) by Theodore J. Forstmann, national co-chairman of the Bush-Quayle re-election campaign.
Some of their letters follow.
To the Editor:


A New Winter Coat for the Underground


Deeper Problems?
To the Sports Editor:
In The Times's coverage of the Magic Johnson story since he announced his H.I.V. infection, I have not seen a discussion of how many players, referees or trainers may be infected.
Nor have I seen discussed how many have not been tested or how many may not have had the courage to announce that they are H.I.V. positive.


Sinatra: The Idol, The Institution, The Mini-Series
Tina Sinatra removed her sunglasses and sat down to lunch at the Regency Hotel on Park Avenue: fried eggs, burned bacon and a lot of filter-tipped cigarettes.
She laughed, but just a little.
"I don't know why, but when I'm in New York I want breakfast." She made it sound like the Last Supper.
Tired eyes, comfort food and nicotine, but with an explanation.
Ms.
Sinatra had just completed the work of a lifetime: "Sinatra," the authorized five-hour, $18.5 million video biography of her famous father.
And after eight years, it was a little like emerging from psychoanalysis.
But analysis is intensely private, and Ms.
Sinatra's project is anything but.
Tonight at 8 and Tuesday night at 9, anyone in America with a television set tuned to CBS can watch.
She hopes millions will.


Robin Rafford, Anthony O'Reilly Jr.
Mr. and Mrs.
Robert I. Rafford Jr. of New York have announced the engagement of their daughter Robin Elise Rafford to Anthony John O'Reilly Jr., a son of Dr.
O'Reilly of Pittsburgh and Susan O'Reilly of London.
A May wedding is planned.
Ms.
Rafford, 27 years old, graduated from Cornell University and received an M.B.A. from Columbia University.
She is a strategic planner at Peter Owens Ltd., an advertising company in Dublin.
Her mother, Sylvia E. Rafford, and her father are investment advisers at Donaldson, Lufkin &amp; Jenrette Securities Corporation in New York.


Deborah Krueser, Mark Whitney
Deborah Marie Krueser, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles Krueser of West Caldwell, N.J., was married yesterday to Mark McEldowney Whitney, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
John H. Whitney of Upper Saddle River, N.J.
The Rev.
Frank McNulty, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated at Our Lady of the Blessed Sacrament Church in Roseland, N.J.
Mrs.
Whitney, 27 years old, is an analyst on the emerging markets desk at Salomon Brothers in New York.
She graduated from Lehigh University.
Her mother, Carmela M. Krueser, is a reading specialist in the Woodcliff Lake (N.J.) School District.
Her father is a special investigator in Warren, N.J., with Chubb &amp; Son Inc., the insurance company.


American Indian Art: In the Spotlight at Galleries
Thousands of American Indian art enthusiasts are expected to converge on New York this week to attend the previews and opening next Sunday of the Smithsonian's National Museum of the American Indian, at the Alexander Hamilton Custom House in lower Manhattan.
And while they are about it, many people will probably visit the gallery exhibitions timed to coincide with the museum festivities.
The Custom House exhibition of 100 artifacts represents the first stage in the transfer of the oil magnate George Gustav Heye's vast collection of American Indian art.
Eventually, more than a million items will be removed from their home at Broadway and 155th Street, where they have been on view since 1922.
Some will go to the Smithsonian's permanent satellite downtown, which will bear the name Heye (pronounced Hi); the rest will go to the main facility that the institution plans to build by the end of the decade on the Washington Mall.


The Executive Life; A Silicon Valley Spin On Financing the Arts
A tycoon tired of being pestered and industry executives with an eye to the arts have combined to produce in Silicon Valley what may be a model for fast-growing communities too new to have a tradition in cultural fund raising.
The new Silicon Valley Arts Fund, based in San Jose and composed of 11 big cultural organizations, each of which hopes to raise more money than it would alone, aims to bring in $20 million by the end of 1993.


Debra Bontempo, Scott Arenare
Debra Ann Bontempo, an associate at the New York law firm of Fish &amp; Neave, was married yesterday to Scott Andrew Arenare, an associate at the New York law firm of Willkie Farr &amp; Gallagher.
The Rev.
Thomas DeVita performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Church of St.
Aidan in Williston Park, L.I.
Mrs.
Arenare, 27 years old, graduated from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and received a law degree from Columbia University.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Ralph A. Bontempo of Albertson, L.I.
Her father is an associate in the law offices of Steven Cohn in Carle Place, L.I.


Beth Seidenberg, David Ertel
Beth Leslie Seidenberg, the daughter of Dr.
Boyd H. Seidenberg of Ridgewood, N.J., and Ruth S. Seidenberg of Tenafly, N.J., was married last night to David Ertel, a son of Salomon and Bertha Ertel of Surfside, Fla.
Rabbi Stephen Listfield officiated at Tappan Hill in Tarrytown, N.Y.
Mrs.
Ertel, 26 years old, is a financial analyst at Ryder System Inc., the trucking company, in Miami.
She and her husband graduated magna cum laude from the University of Pennsylvania, from which they also received M.B.A. degrees.
Her father is an ophthalmologist in Ridgewood.


For Pittsburgh, a Model Airport at an Immodest Price
From high above, the maze of geometric designs is reminiscent of the Nazca lines, those mysteries of the Peruvian desert.
But this is western Pennsylvania, and the designs are those of a modern civilization.
They are the terminals, concourses and runways of the new Pittsburgh International Airport.
Opened last month, the $1.06 billion airport is the nation's most expensive since Dallas/Fort Worth International opened in 1974.
And it is the first in the United States designed to accommodate the changed needs of carriers and passengers since the airline industry was deregulated 14 years ago.
From its gate configuration to its baggage handling to its security system, this airport represents a new age of efficiency and convenience.


Class in Yiddish Gets New Members
I want to take this opportunity to thank you for the beautiful article about our Yiddish Vinkle  [ "In the Classroom, Yiddish Gets a Second Wind," Oct. 18 ] .
It had such flavor and warmth, and I believe it truly captured the spirit of this unique class.
I know that the participants in the class were thrilled by your attention to detail in their stories and in terms of their feelings.
The most exciting part for us was that since the article's publication we have received over 60 serious inquiries about the class and 8 new members attended today.
What a thrill for the "Y." MARTIN GREENBERG Executive Director Richard G. Rosenthal Y.M.-Y.W.H.A. of Northern Westchester Pleasantville


Two Autumn Escapes in Arizona
SOMEWHERE on Interstate 17, the neat ribbon of highway that links Phoenix with Flagstaff, I understood what draws visitors to Arizona.
The pale desert landscape, with whimsical cactus and black, ominous birds, was like nothing I had ever seen.
It became increasingly exotic as I sped toward the red rocks of Sedona, 125 miles north of Phoenix, radio blaring and windows down (a sign advises turning off air-conditioners to keep engines cool).
The lone touch of reality was a cluster of fast food haunts off the main highway at exit 287.
Arizona is an obvious place for an autumn escape, with warm, dry days, crisp cold nights and startling changes of scenery.
Head north from Sedona for a couple of hours or so, and you'll reach the Grand Canyon.
And starting with the Arizona Biltmore in Phoenix, which opened in 1929, the 48th state has specialized in resort hotels with all the on-campus amenities.


The Growing Battle of the Big Bookstores
Last Aug. 3 was a banner day for Barnes &amp; Noble Inc., the nation's second-largest bookseller.
That was the day the company opened five "superstores" -- each stocked with 100,000 books -- in Houston, Chicago, Grosse Pointe, Mich., Orange, Conn., and Auburn, Mass.
Yet Aug. 3 was just a drop in the bucket of the grand plan hatched by Leonard Riggio, the man who controls Barnes &amp; Noble.
On Oct. 18, he opened three more giant outlets -- in the Cleveland suburbs of Shaker Heights and Mayfield Heights, and in Jenkintown, Pa.
With 105 superstores opened in the last three years, including 30 in the New York area, Mr.
Riggio plans to add 28 more by Jan. 1.
By the end of next year, he hopes to have about 250.


An Answer to the Welfare Trap
While the Presidential candidates gave lip service to welfare reform during the campaign, New York State was doing something about it.
A unique experiment in seven counties could become the model for a nationwide system -- especially if New York City signs on.
The Aid to Families with Dependent Children program, administered jointly by the Federal Government and localities, was set up in the 1930's to provide long-term support for families in which the breadwinner had died and the mother was expected to stay home with the children.


Mindy Neuthaler and Steven Shulman
Mindy Neuthaler and Steven Shulman, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Martin J. Shulman of New York, plan to wed in May.
The announcement was made by the prospective bride's father and stepmother, Dr. and Mrs.
Paul Neuthaler of New York, and by her mother and stepfather, Mr. and Mrs.
Ronald Wurtzburger of Scarsdale, N.Y.
Miss Neuthaler, 24 years old, is the vice president of sales at Peerless Clothing International, a men's clothing manufacturer in New York.
She graduated from Tufts University, as did her fiance.
Her father is the president of professional and technical publishing for the Bertelsmann Publishing Group International in New York.
Her stepmother, Abbi Neuthaler, is a former tennis coach in New York and Long Island.
Her mother, Paula Wurtzburger, is a partner in Woolco Foods, a food-distribution company in New York.
Her stepfather is the president of Peerless Clothing.


A Republican Message That Roiled the Waters; The Zero Return
President-elect Clinton has said that an economic stimulus program, including money for new roads and other public works projects, s at the top of his agenda.
As an indication of how dominant an issue the economy was in the Nov. 2 elections, readers are continuing to respond very strongly to "The Beauty of Indexing Capital Gains" (Viewpoints, Oct. 25) by Theodore J. Forstmann, national co-chairman of the Bush-Quayle re-election campaign.
Some of their letters follow.
To the Editor:


Residential Resales
Closings in the week ended Oct. 24  MANHATTAN  Chelsea 220,000
249 West 29th Street  1-bedroom, 1-bath, 1,800-sq.-ft. co-op in a loft building; elevator, darkroom, 3 exposures; maintenance $1,070, 50% tax-deductible (Broker: Cathy Fields Realty)  Gramercy Park Area 350,000
200 East 24th Street  2-bedroom, 3-bath, 2,200-sq.-ft. postwar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, dining room, 500-sq.-ft. greenhouse; maintenance $1,942, 50% tax-deductible (Broker: J.I. Sopher Co.)  Greenwich Village 550,000
32 Washington Square West  3-bedroom, 3-bath, 2,000-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, manned elevator, maid's room, dining room, fireplace, 3 exposures, park view; maintenance $2,091, 35% tax-deductible (Brokers: William B. May-Kanelba &amp; Robilotti)  Upper East Side 620,000
26 East 63d Street  (Leonori Condos)  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,300-sq.-ft. condo in a prewar building; 24-hr. doorman, concierge, 11-ft. ceilings, 2 exposures, Central Park view; common charge $938, taxes $6,708 (Broker: Walter &amp; Samuels)  Upper West Side 775,000
320 West 85th Street  6-bedroom, 6-bath, 4,300-sq.-ft. one-family, 4-story town house; 14-ft. ceilings, 2 terraces off rear extension, parquet floors, 16- by 102-ft. lot; taxes $6,200 (Brokers: Ambrose Mar-Elia-Gail Zgodny)  BRONX  Riverdale 220,000
6139 Fieldston Road  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, one-family detached brick Tudor; dining room, finished attic and basement, 2-car garage, 25- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,950 (Broker: Charles G. Brophy &amp; Associates)  Wakefield 127,000
939 East 215th Street  2-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, one-family attached brick house; dining room, finished basement, 1-car garage, 20- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $900 (Broker: Cancro Realty)  BROOKLYN  East Flatbush 220,000
240 East 46th Street  5-family, 3-story, semi-attached brick house; 2 bedrooms in two units; 1 bedroom in others; 1 bath, eat-in kitchen in each; 900-sq.-ft. of commercial space on ground floor; 19 1/2- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $2,625 (Broker: Helmar Brokerage Ltd.)  Midwood 310,000
1556 East 28th Street  4-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, one-family detached brick house; dining room, den, hospitality suite in finished basement, 1-car garage, 30- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $2,000 (Broker: Maryl Realty)  Park Slope 168,000
214 St.
John's Place  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 1,150-sq.-ft. co-op in a 5-unit brownstone; dining alcove, fireplace, 10- by 12-ft. terrace, 2 exposures; maintenance $458, 50% tax-deductible (Broker: Frederick Palmer Real Estate)  QUEENS  Ozone Park 164,000
111-17 106th Street  2-family semi-attached frame house; 3 bedrooms in primary unit; 2 bedrooms in other; dining room, 1 bath in each; semi-finished basement, 25- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,400 (Broker: Kremer Realty)  Forest Hills Gardens 537,500
60 Summer Street  5-bedroom, 4 1/2-bath, one-family detached Tudor; dining room, solarium, fireplace, glass doors to rear patio, 1-car garage, 40- by 95-ft. lot; taxes $3,100 (Broker: Terrace Realty)  STATEN ISLAND  Eltingville 178,400
48 Moffett Street  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, one-family semi-attached frame house; dining room, in-ground pool, finished basement, 25- by 110-ft. lot; taxes $1,500 (Broker: RE-MAX Preferred)  Port Richmond 145,000
274 Sharpe Avenue  4-bedroom, 1-bath, one-family detached frame house; dining room, front porch, dinette, remodeled kitchen, 1-car garage, 37- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,160 (Broker: Foreman/ Rand Properties)


Business Diary/November 1-6
THE ECONOMY Some Well-Placed Loopholes in the Looming Trade War


BUSH'S GAMBLE
When you are as insightful as William Safire and use campaign trivia (like pandering to the far right, loss of control of the national convention, mistaken judgments by campaign handlers, etc.) as the reasons for your candidate's loss of popularity, one has to suspect the motivation.
To adopt the posture of a party stalwart doing some serious soul-searching about why your candidate and your party have failed to find the support of the American people and not to address the problems of breach of faith that are represented by Irangate, Iraqgate, the savings and loan fiasco is disingenuous at best.
ANDREW ALEF
Congers, N.Y.


Clinics in County React To Court's Ending Ban
LOCAL family planning clinics were in a celebratory mood last week after a Federal Appeals Court ruling on Wednesday invalidated the Bush Administration's ban on abortion counseling.
The court ruled that recent modifications to the so-called gag rule -- which had been in effect only a month -- had been improperly imposed.
The immediate impact on Westchester is widespread.
Local response had been bitterly divided over the regulations, which prohibited clinics receiving Federal funding from offering counseling on abortions or referring or steering clients to abortions.


Concern Over Lead In County's Water
OFFICIALS in New Castle saw the handwriting on the wall in 1986, when Congress first passed amendments to the Federal Safe Water Drinking Act.
They knew that it was just a matter of time before local water providers would have to comply.
"We thought we'd better get a jump on things" said Gerard C. Moerschell, Commissioner of Public Works in New Castle, which supplies water to 17,000 residents.
"We wanted to avoid a panic."


New York City Sues to Halt Sex-Based Bias on Prices
At Kenneth Beauty Salon on Park Avenue near 50th Street, there have always been two prices for haircuts.
But while the categories used to be men and women, now they are appointments and walk-ins.
The cost of haircuts, dry cleaning and even used cars may be coming down for women -- or going up for men -- as New York City begins to press its campaign against sex discrimination in pricing.


Daryl Teicher, Alan Eisenberg
Daryl Lynne Teicher, a daughter of Suellen J. Globus of New York and Laurence M. Teicher of London, was married in New York last evening to Alan Edward Eisenberg, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Jerome R. Eisenberg of Roslyn, L.I.
Rabbi Joseph P. Sternstein officiated at the Westbury Hotel.


Anxiety in 3/4 Time
In Vienna, many women suffer from migraine.
It must be something about the air.
I was given this information by a perfectly serious person, and though it sounded odd, it was the sort of thing you might expect to hear in Vienna, the city that gave mental anguish a peculiar distinction.
I began my exploration of Vienna in Leopoldstadt, the rundown district where poor Jews from the east used to live and where Sigmund Freud went to school.
Its streets are as hushed as Freud's old apartment not far away.
An old Jewish lady, who grew up there, returned recently and commented that the air used to be full of piano music, wafting from the windows.
Perhaps her memories were a little too rosy, but it is true that Leopoldstadt today is a melancholy place.
The odd plaque still indicates where synagogues used to be.
Some of these plaques are stuck on poles, because the new residents didn't want them attached to their buildings.


He's Seen the Future And It's Digital
ASK John Larish of Rochester, a photography writer, publisher of an electronic photography newsletter and consultant on high-tech photography.
Several months ago, Mr.
Larish thought he had finished writing his newest book, "Photo CD: Quality Photos at Your Fingertips" (Micro Publishing Press, $27.95), which will be published in December.
But so much new information on Photo CD has been pouring out from scientists and manufacturers, Mr.
Larish has found himself revising the book right down to press time.


75 Years Of Helping
Hebrew Home for the Aged celebrates, Nov. 1.


Talking to Vietnam
To the Editor:
I applaud your call for United States diplomatic recognition of Vietnam in "Coming Soon: The Vietnam Peace" (editorial, Oct. 28).
However, while Vietnam did at first demand reconstruction aid as a precondition for normalization (aid that President Nixon had promised), it dropped this precondition in the fall of 1978.
The United States had an opportunity to normalize relations then, but did not because it felt that might jeopardize reconciliation with China.
Thus, Vietnam initially put up obstacles, but when removed, it was the United States that failed to act.


Housing Problem Is Very Real
We were fascinated to discover that according to Robert Weininger, a candidate for the New York State Senate in the 36th District, the "so-called housing problem is a figment of the imagination of out-of-touch incumbents like Suzi Oppenheimer and of developers like Andrew Cuomo" ("New District Lines, New Challenges," Oct. 11).
The need for affordable housing throughout Westchester County is no figment of the imagination.
It is very real.
Those most affected include the elderly, the homeless, young families, white-collar and municipal workers and the poor, many of whom work and earn low wages.


THE TRANSITION: Foreign Policy; PROBLEMS ABROAD MAY FORCE CLINTON TO CHANGE AGENDA
While President-elect Bill Clinton puts together an Administration devoted to keeping his promises on domestic affairs, the outgoing Bush team is leaving him with a series of problems abroad that could force him to devote much more time than he had planned to foreign policy.
Now that they are on their way out, some Bush Administration officials concede that there has been very little top-level focus, direction or Presidential political capital expended on foreign policy since former Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d and President Bush went on the campaign trail last summer.
Stalled and Broken Talks
Partly because of the absence of such high-level American attention, several sets of negotiations have stalled or broken down and some trouble spots around the world have worsened.
Subordinates of Mr.
Bush and Mr.
Baker have continued to work on these problems, from arms control talks with Moscow to the Arab-Israeli peace process.


NOTES
Marky Mark is on the Madonna track.
The increasingly unclothed rapper, currently appearing in underwear ads for Calvin Klein, will appear this month in a book of photographs for HarperCollins and has done a photo spread scheduled for the February Penthouse magazine.
"He posed with a Penthouse girl in the hot tub, in the shower and in the bed," said Lynn Goldsmith, the photographer.
"He's not nude. We'd like people to believe in the shower he is."


Jordan's King Urges Iraqis to Put an End To the Hussein Era
King Hussein of Jordan said today that Iraq was suffering badly under sanctions imposed by the United Nations and suggested it was time for Iraqis to end the Government of President Saddam Hussein and push for a democratic, pluralistic society.
Although the King did not specifically call for Iraqis to overthrow their President, he provided a bleak description of conditions in Iraq and an unusually caustic assessment of the man he long viewed as his friend and ally and actively supported during the Persian Gulf war and in its aftermath.
The King did not directly refer to the Iraqi ruler by name.


Germany
To the Editor: After many years of soul-searching, this past September, my husband and I decided to include Germany (Munich and Berlin) on a monthlong European trip.
We collected all the relevant material, including a brochure published by the German National Tourist Office entitled "Germany for the Jewish Traveler."


Recipes Using Folk Dances For Flavoring
Choreographers for the stage are insatiably greedy.
They snap up influences from many kinds of nontheatrical dance, including folk dance.
By so doing, as several recent productions demonstrated, they often find ingenious ways to transform history and anthropology into art and entertainment.
Surely no one wears leotards in Argentine dance halls.
But that's what Milton Myers put his dancers into in "Nuevo Tango," which received its New York premiere during the Trisler Danscompany's recent engagement at the Joyce.
To recorded tangos by Astor Piazzolla, men and women fought battles of will.
That kind of confrontation can be expected in a tango.
But in one sequence a couple did a series of impetuous leaps.
Their dance was certainly no traditional tango; yet it captured the spirit of that passionate dance form.


The Girl Columbus Discovered
MORNING GIRL
By Michael Dorris. 74 pp. New York: Hyperion Books for Children. (Ages 8 and up)


Irreconcilable Passions
BLACK DOGS
By Ian McEwan. 149 pp. New York: Nan A. Talese/Doubleday. $19.50.


ABOUT-FACE
Daring?
Nerve?
Stamina?
Clinton had the audacity and temerity to run for President at a time when a Republican landslide seemed imminent and any Democratic challenge a hopeless endeavor.
Let's not forget that a little more than a year ago most of his peers, the best and brightest of the Democratic Party (many of them former servicemen), refused to risk in any way their precious political careers.
JUDY CAPEL EPSTEIN
Flushing, Queens


How Shorter Days Bring Brighter Blooms
PLANT lovers sometimes wonder why the Christmas cactus sets buds in late summer and bursts into bloom in November or early December.
They might also ponder why chrysanthemums always bloom in fall, or why a poinsettia is on schedule with bright red bracts for the holiday season.
The easiest answers are that these events are supposed to happen, but there is a better answer: Nature sends out specific signals, and one of the most obvious at this time of year is that the days are growing shorter.
Though to many observers the phenomenon is probably not worth a second thought, to the natural world it is very important.
The biological response to the phenomenon is called photoperiodism.


Colombia Rebels Attack Oilfield, Killing 26
Leftist rebels attacked a petroleum field in southern Colombia today, killing at least 26 policemen who were there to protect oil drills, the police said.
Some 300 insurgents began the surprise attack at the Orito oilfield in the southern jungle region of Putumayo, near the border with Ecuador.


On the Slag Heap of History
HOMESTEAD
The Glory and Tragedy of an American Steel Town.
By William Serrin.
Illustrated. 452 pp.
New York: Times Books/Random House. $25.


Princeton Remains Unbeaten in League
Princeton's vastly improved defense, overshadowed this season by the dazzling running of Keith Elias, made the difference in the crunch this afternoon as the Tigers beat Pennsylvania, 20-14, to remain unbeaten in the Ivy League.
Penn twice drove deep into the home side's territory late in the fourth quarter.
But the Quakers were stopped on both occasions, first after reaching the 5-yard line and then, as time ran out, at the Princeton 23.


Jackson Leads Group to Push Social Agenda
The Rev.
Jesse Jackson, relatively silent during the Presidential campaign, today led a group of about 150 prominent advocates for minorities, women and other political groups in celebrating Bill Clinton's victory and in urging that the new Administration make good on the candidate's promises on a variety of economic and social issues.
In a daylong gathering at the Hyatt Hotel in Washington, Mr.
Jackson sounded a note of compromise and political consolidation.
He said the loosely formed coalition of advocacy groups should keep pressure on the White House to follow through on promises of jobs programs, education, health-care improvements and a wide range of civil rights matters.


L.I. Congregation
To the Editor:
I was delighted that you focused on our town in your article on living in Sag Harbor on Oct. 25, but it omitted an important factor in the town heritage: Temple Adas Israel, Long Island's oldest Jewish congregation.


'In Search of Anti-Semitism'
To the Editor:
Joseph A. Cincotti, in the interview that accompanied the review of William F. Buckley Jr.'s "In Search of Anti-Semitism" (Sept. 27), quoted Mr.
Buckley as saying, "I'm pro-Buchananism, absent this particular anomaly," referring to what he considers to be Pat Buchanan's weakest point: a penchant for making anti-Semitic remarks.


BUSH'S GAMBLE
William Safire is correct: George Bush's persona has gone through many shifts ("Bush's Gamble," Oct. 18).
Unfortunately, the changes point more toward political expediency than conviction.


The Duck Stops Here
The rich land that rolls from the dark side of the Pyrenees and sprawls north toward the vineyards of Bordeaux in southwest France seems to exist for fall: the red, gold and umber gasp of the deciduous trees that line its byways and fields of corn; the lumps of wild cepes that push between the earth and the forest floor; the blistered aroma of Armagnac and of ripe plums distilling into eau de vie, and the final ounces of fat that plumps the livers of geese and ducks and reduces them to a waddle.
Gascony is central to the French sense of self.
It is the land of the Three Musketeers, foie gras and fall.
Americans flock to New England, Italians favor Tuscany and the French are pulled to the land of D'Artagnan, where the aroma of walnuts, rough wine, duck fat and garlic seems to swagger, an olfactory bluster dismissing summer and daring winter.


Shedding Light on New Catholic Catechism
The priest who is translating into English the Roman Catholic Church's first catechism for churchwide use in four centuries has provided a glimpse at the shape of the new document, which was approved last June by Pope John Paul II but has not yet been made public.
In an interview on Friday, the Rev.
Douglas K. Clark said the text "is going to be a surprise and people should read it instead of prejudging it." The document, he added, "is not straight-out conservative, although it is traditional." Some experts have seen the catechism as an opportunity for the Pope to establish more firmly his conservative view of the church.


Colorado Homosexuals Feel Betrayed
They sat around a cafe table two days after the election, but nobody felt much like eating.
It seemed like they had just been on trial.
And the verdict was not pleasant.
"I feel like I've been kicked in the stomach," said Lawrence Pacheco, a 23-year-old gay man.
"Do they really hate us that much?"


ABOUT-FACE
Norman says of the butchery of the battlefield, it "made them more humane, brought out the woman in them, if you will, their best part."


This Week's Numbers
Consensus
Last Period
Estimates
(I.D.E.A. Inc.)
Tuesday
Oct. producer prices, percent change
0.3
0.2
Friday
Oct. retail sales, percent change
0.3
0.3
Oct. consumer price index, percent change
0.2
0.2
Late Oct. auto sales, millions annual rate
7.9
7.5
Sunday: Deadline for the Food and Drug Administration to issue its final nutrition labeling rules for food  Monday: Continental Airlines board scheduled to choose buyer *
President Boris N .Yeltsin of Russia visits Britain *
Central bankers from 10 industrialized countries meet in Basel  Tuesday: Regional Federal Reserve president Jerry Jordan speaks in Cleveland


An Iraqi Send-Off for George Bush


Elizabeth Tobin, John Fantozzi
Elizabeth Ann Tobin, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert T. Tobin of Short Hills, N.J., was married there yesterday to John Vincent Fantozzi, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Chester Fantozzi of Fitchburg, Mass.
The Rev.
Gerald Greaves performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Rose of Lima Church.
Mrs.
Fantozzi, 26 years old, is a first-grade teacher at St.
Peter's School in Cambridge, Mass.
She and her husband graduated from the College of the Holy Cross and she received a master's degree in elementary education from Lesley College.
Her father is a partner in the New York law firm of Kenyon &amp; Kenyon.


Two More Semifinalists For Merit Scholarships
Your listing in the Nov. 1 Westchester Weekly ("National Merit Scholar Semifinalists") omitted the names of two National Merit Scholarship semifinalists from Hastings High School.
These students who scored extremely well in the competition are Kathryn Novello and Anuradha Vikram.
We are very proud of their accomplishments.
ANTHEA FRANKL Public Information Officer Hastings School District


The Pleasures of Giving
Appearances can be deceiving -- which is just as well, if your taste is richer than your bank account this holiday season.
With a little imagination, an eye for quality and a trompe l'oeil approach to gift-giving, you can find objects -- the well crafted, the artfully executed, even the occasional work of art -- that look expensive and feel luxurious, but don't cost an arm and a leg.


All About/Heating Systems; The Cost and Cleanliness Equation
SQUIRRELS gathering nuts and birds winging their way south may be strong indications that winter is approaching, but rising heating bills are an even surer sign in most parts of the country.
Overall, growth in the residential heating system-supply market has slowed along with the hard-hit construction market.
But while sales of oil and electric furnaces have fallen in the last three years, sales of gas furnaces are edging back up.


History Is Written in Smoke
Freud once said that occasionally a cigar is merely a cigar.
In the movies, at least, a cigarette has never been merely a cigarette, although the meanings and uses of cigarettes have changed over the decades.
Compare two movies 50 years apart.
In "The Maltese Falcon" in 1941, Humphrey Bogart rolls his own.
The tobacco pouch that proclaims his toughness and masculinity dangles from his jacket pocket.
In "Regarding Henry" in 1991, the wages of chain smoking are having your brains splattered on the floor of a convenience store.
Harrison Ford wouldn't have been shot in the head if he hadn't gone out to buy a pack of cigarettes -- almost literally his coffin nails.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-21  RUSSIA'S RISKY REACTORS


Luckinbill, Portrayer of Giants, Takes One to the Courthouse
Laurence Luckinbill strode into the Westchester County Courthouse here, an artist for sure among the briefcases and the suits.
His thinning mop of brown hair stuffed into a blue baseball cap, and wearing a beaten-up leather jacket and jeans, he grinned and apologized for being late.
Not the usual place for an interview, but fitting: the 57-year-old actor will play this house on Nov. 16 when he holds forth in the Ceremonial Courtroom as Clarence Darrow, the famed lawyer who is the only character in the play "Clarence Darrow" by David Rintels.
The play will be performed here once only at 7:30 P.M. as a benefit for the Northern Westchester Center for the Arts.


BENEFITS
Bowling With the Stars
MONDAY -- Marsha Mason, Kathleen Turner, Estelle Parsons and other assorted notables are to try their hand at bowling to benefit Second Stage, the Off-Broadway theater that has been producing contemporary American plays for 14 years.
Bowling, along with drinks and hors d'oeuvres, starts at 6:30 P.M. at the Leisure Time Bowling and Recreation Center in the Port Authority Bus Terminal (entrance on Ninth Avenue between 40th and 41st streets).
Tickets, $250 to bowl with the celebrities or $150 to watch, from (212) 787-8302.
Royal Support for the Arts
TUESDAY -- Prince Albert and Princess Caroline of Monaco are due at a fund-raiser for the Princess Grace Foundation, named after their mother, which supports aspiring artists in American theater, dance and film.
The supper party with dancing and entertainment will start at 8 P.M. at Club USA, a new club that is due to open to the public next month at 218 West 47th Street.
Tickets, $125, from (212) 861-8690.
Elie Wiesel for Yad Vashem
TUESDAY -- The Nobel laureate Elie Wiesel will address the International Society for Yad Vashem, the Israel Holocaust memorial center in Jerusalem, at its annual Remembrance Awards dinner at the Grand Hyatt Hotel.
Cocktails at 6 P.M.
Tickets, $300, from (212) 564-9606.
Benefit for Musical Archive
TUESDAY -- The Archive of Contemporary Music, a research center for popular music from 1950 to the present, is holding a benefit at S.O.B.'s nightclub, 204 Varick Street, at Houston Street, starting with cocktails at 7 P.M.
Dinner, entertainment by the singer Ann Peebles and dancing follow.
Tickets, $125, or $25 for performance and dance starting at 10 P.M., from (212) 226-6967.
Indonesian Performance
TUESDAY -- The theater company Mabou Mines will have a benefit centered around Indonesian artists that will include a traditional Wayang Kulit performance.
A 6:30 P.M. cocktail party will precede the 7:30 P.M. performance at the Indonesian Consulate, 5 East 68th Street.
Tickets, $50, from (212) 473-0559.
Ellis Island Cocktail Party
WEDNESDAY -- United Neighborhood Houses of New York, the umbrella group for 38 settlement houses that provide programs for 500,000 New Yorkers annually, will hold a cocktail party from 6 to 9 P.M. in the Great Hall of the Immigration Museum on Ellis Island.
Ferries leave at 6 and 7 P.M. from Battery Park between Battery Place and State Street.
Tickets, $150, from (212) 481-5570.
Paralysis Group Fund-Raiser
WEDNESDAY -- The American Paralysis Association, which finances research into paralysis caused by spinal cord injury and other central nervous system disorders, will hold its annual dinner and dance at the Plaza.
Barbara Walters will be the mistress of ceremonies.
Black tie.
Cocktails at 7 P.M.
Tickets, $350, from (212) 580-5511.
Party at F.A.O.
Schwarz
WEDNESDAY -- From 7 to 9 P.M. there will be a party at F.A.O.
Schwarz, Fifth Avenue at 58th Street, with cocktails and hors d'oeuvres for the grown-ups and soda, hot dogs and such for the children, along with a chance to shop.
The party will benefit the department of pediatrics at the New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center.
Tickets, $100 for adults, $50 for children 12 years old and under, from (212) 746-1401.
Smithsonian Indian Benefit
THURSDAY -- The National Museum of the American Indian of the Smithsonian Institution will hold a benefit that starts with a 5:30 to 6:30 P.M. cocktail reception and preview of the exhibition "Pathways of Tradition: Indian Insights Into Indian Worlds." A 6:30 P.M. performance of the American Indian Dance Theater will follow.
Both party and performance will take place at the museum in the United States Custom House at Bowling Green at the bottom of Broadway.
A dinner at 8 P.M. will be followed by an auction of works by native Americans at the nearby White Hall Club, 17 Battery Place near West Street.
Tickets, $500, from (212) 245-6570.
Red Cross Award
THURSDAY -- Elizabeth and Felix Rohatyn will receive the Humanitarian Award from the American Red Cross in Greater New York at its annual black-tie benefit at the Waldorf-Astoria.
Cocktails, at 7 P.M., will be followed by dinner and dancing.
Tickets, $350, from (212) 787-1000.
Lung Association Award
THURSDAY -- The New York Lung Association, founded in 1902 to fight tuberculosis, will present its Life and Breath Award to Dr.
H.
William Harris at the Plaza.
Cocktails, at 6 P.M., will be followed by dinner and entertainment.
Tickets, $250, from (212) 889-3370.
Children's Aid at Circus
FRIDAY -- "Big Blue," a mobile health unit of the Children's Aid Society that takes preventive health services to 10,000 of the city's poorest children each year, will receive the funds from a benefit performance of the Big Apple Circus, from 6:30 to 11 P.M. at Damrosch Park at Lincoln Center.
The evening includes a box supper, performance and then dancing and dessert.
Tickets, $50 for unreserved grandstand seats, $60 for reserved grandstand, $75 for ringside and $100 for first two rows of ringside, from (212) 949-4934.
Helen Hayes Ball
FRIDAY -- The annual Helen Hayes Ball to benefit the hospital in West Haverstraw, N.Y., named after the actress will be held at the Dellwood Country Club in New City, N.Y.
Arthur Ashe, Hugh Carey and Richard Traum, founder of the Achilles Track Club, will be honored.
Cocktails, at 7 P.M., will be followed by dinner and dancing.
Tickets, $225, from (914) 947-3000, ext. 3225.
Diabetes Fund-Raiser
SATURDAY -- The annual Promise Ball to benefit the New York chapter of the Juvenile Diabetes Foundation International will be held at the Waldorf-Astoria.
Cocktails, at 6:30 P.M., will be followed by dinner, dancing and entertainment including Sidney Poitier, Mary Tyler Moore, Marvin Hamlisch, Merv Griffin, Lesley Gore and Laurie Beechman.
Black tie.
Tickets, $750, from (212) 735-0745.
Theater Benefit Brunch
SATURDAY -- The year-old Theater Arts Productions will hold a brunch with entertainment from 1 to 4 P.M. at Dolce Restaurant, 60 East 49th Street.
Tickets, $50, from (212) 754-6238.
Family Show at Avery Fisher
SATURDAY -- The premiere of an hourlong production of "Babes in Toyland" will be held at Avery Fisher Hall to benefit the Little Orchestra Society, which is starting its 44th season of concerts for children.
A party at the Radisson Empire Hotel follows.
Tickets, $125, from (212) 704-2100.
Gay Rights Celebration
NOV. 15 -- The Human Rights Campaign Fund, the nationwide advocacy organization for gay and lesbian rights and health issues, will hold its 11th annual dinner at the Rainbow Room.
Cocktails, at 6:30 P.M., will be followed by a buffet dinner and entertainment that will include the Radio City Rockettes.
Tickets, $300, from (212) 769-2610.
Evening for Artists' Colony
NOV. 16 -- Since 1907, more than 3,000 artists, composers, writers and film makers, including E. L. Doctorow, Meredith Monk, Aaron Copland and Leonard Bernstein, have stayed at the MacDowell Colony to work on projects.
The colony in Peterborough, N.H., will hold a black-tie dinner with readings and music at the Essex House starting with cocktails at 7 P.M.
The playwright Wendy Wasserstein will be the mistress of ceremonies of a program that will include Sigourney Weaver, Irene Worth and Paula Robison.
Tickets, $500, from (212) 535-9690.
Doodles for Sale
NOV. 16 -- Doodles of varying quality by a score of assorted celebrities will be auctioned at a 6:30 P.M.
Champagne party at the Russian Tea Room for the benefit of New Dramatists, an organization that helps support new American playwrights.
Tickets, $100, from (212) 757-6960.
Reading Out Loud
NOV. 16 -- The New York City School Volunteer Program will hold a Celebrity Read Aloud Benefit to raise funds for tutorial programs in city schools.
Readers, at the Roundabout Theater, Broadway and 45th Street, will include David McCullough, Blair Brown, George Plimpton, Jane Curtin, Calvin Trillin, Spalding Gray and B. D. Wong.
The evening opens at 6:30 with a cocktail buffet followed by an hour of readings.
Tickets, $75, from (212) 213-3370, or $85 at the door.
Montefiore Dinner-Dance
NOV. 16 -- The Montefiore Medical Center in the Bronx will hold its annual benefit starting with cocktails at 7 P.M., then dinner and dancing at the Waldorf-Astoria.
The black-tie evening will feature elaborate and whimsically decorated tables by various magazines, stores and corporations.
Tickets, $550, from (212) 920-6134.
Institute's 35th Year
NOV. 16 -- The Young Adult Institute, founded to provide services for people with mental retardation and developmental disabilities in New York City, Long Island and Westchester County, will celebrate its 35th anniversary at the Pierre Hotel.
Black tie.
Cocktails, at 6:30 P.M., followed by dinner and entertainment.
Tickets, $300, from (212) 563-7474, ext. 121.
English Union Revival
NOV. 16 -- "Song at Twilight," the Noel Coward play last seen on Broadway in 1974, will receive a revival at a reading produced by the New English Stage Company and the English-Speaking Union at the union's New York branch, 16 East 69th Street.
The 7 P.M. reading by British actors will benefit a BBC Children in Need charity that will soon start in Britain.
Champagne and desserts will be served after the reading.
Tickets, $50, from (212) 289-5890.
Ballet Opening Night
NOV. 17 -- Czarist Russia will be the theme of four ballets, including the premiere of an untitled work by Peter Martins, to be performed at an opening night benefit by the New York City Ballet at Lincoln Center's New York State Theater.
Cocktails, at 6:30 P.M., will be followed by the performance, at 7:30 P.M., after which there will be a black-tie supper ball "a la Russe." Tickets, $600, or for the cocktail reception and performance alone, $10 to $150, from (212) 870-5585.


Wall Street; The Dow's Dip on Election Day May Bode Well
WALL Street did not exactly celebrate Bill Clinton's election.
The Dow Jones industrial average slipped on Election Day, and fell more the next day, after the scale of his victory was clear.
There was nothing new in that reaction.
Traders have never been fond of Democrats, and the five worst immediate market reactions since 1916 have come when Democrats won.
By contrast, Republican victories have sparked some of the best election gains.


A Republican Message That Roiled the Waters; The Zero Return
President-elect Clinton has said that an economic stimulus program, including money for new roads and other public works projects, s at the top of his agenda.
As an indication of how dominant an issue the economy was in the Nov. 2 elections, readers are continuing to respond very strongly to "The Beauty of Indexing Capital Gains" (Viewpoints, Oct. 25) by Theodore J. Forstmann, national co-chairman of the Bush-Quayle re-election campaign.
Some of their letters follow.
To the Editor:


Karen Field, Slava Hazin
Arthur and Doris Field of New York have announced the engagement of their daughter, Karen Ellen Field, to Slava Hazin, a son of Milia and Asia Hazin of Singer Island, Fla.
An October wedding is planned.
Ms.
Field, 26 years old, graduated from Vassar College, as did her husband.
She is a law student at Yeshiva University.
Her father is a partner at the New York law firm of Shearman &amp; Sterling.


Corrections
A list of semifinalists for the 1993 National Merit Scholarship last Sunday omitted the semifinalists from North Brunswick Township High School.
They are Andy S. Barnett, Anthony M. Caterina, Andrew K. Diemer, Daniel J. List, Swati R. Prakash, Sudeep Rangaswamy, David H. Seidman, Chetan Seshadri and Sanjay K. Vanguri.


Passaic Flood Tunnel: A Turning Point
THE moment of truth has arrived for the Passaic River Flood Tunnel. Again.
After more than 16 years, $30 million worth of studies by the Army Corps of Engineers, one false start and unceasing controversy, both supporters and opponents of the engineers' proposed tunnel say the time for decision may be at hand.


Eleanor Green, Nicholas Carlough
Eleanor Thurston Green, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Marshall M. Green of Fairfield, Conn., was married in New York yesterday to William Nicholas Carlough 3d, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Carlough Jr. of Charlotte, N.C.
The Rev.
Donald R. Goodness performed the Episcopal ceremony at the Church of the Ascension.
Mrs.
Carlough, 28 years old, is a development officer at St.
Vincent's Hospital and Medical Center in New York.
She graduated from Mount Holyoke College.
Her father is of counsel to the New York law firm of LeBoeuf, Lamb, Leiby &amp; MacRae.


What's It All About, Albie?
Perhaps the third time will be the charm.
"Einstein on the Beach," which played by special invitation at the Metropolitan Opera House in 1976 and at the Brooklyn Academy of Music in 1984, returns to the academy on Thursday, Nov. 19, and maybe this time everyone will begin to figure out what on earth it means.
Its creators say they have already done so, a mere 16 years after they produced the work that quickly changed their lives.
"I may be getting my first clear thoughts about it now," said the opera's composer, Philip Glass, recently at his home in the East Village section of Manhattan.
He had just been immersed in the work for two weeks in Princeton, N.J., helping to prepare the current touring production, directed by Mr.
Glass's original collaborator on the piece, Robert Wilson. (The dancer Lucinda Childs, who has been deeply involved in all three productions, became choreographer only in 1984, though she choreographed her solo numbers in 1976.) The tour has included runs in Frankfurt; Melbourne, Australia; Barcelona, Spain; Madrid, and Tokyo -- in that inscrutable order, appropriately.


How Shorter Days Bring Brighter Blooms
PLANT lovers sometimes wonder why the Christmas cactus sets buds in late summer and bursts into bloom in November or early December.
They might also ponder why chrysanthemums always bloom in fall, or why a poinsettia is on schedule with bright red bracts for the holiday season.
The easiest answers are that these events are supposed to happen, but there is a better answer: Nature sends out specific signals, and one of the most obvious at this time of year is that the days are growing shorter.
Though to many observers the phenomenon is probably not worth a second thought, to the natural world it is very important.
The biological response to the phenomenon is called photoperiodism.


Election Talk: Federal Funds, Florio's Future
GOV.
BILL CLINTON'S victory over President Bush last week, officials and political experts say, could change New Jersey's landscape in the coming months -- literally and politically.
State officials' hopes have been raised by Mr.
Clinton's campaign promise to create jobs by rebuilding the nation's aging bridges, roads and sewerage systems.
Some officials have speeded up the planning process for their pet projects, preparing to weigh in with financing requests when the bell sounds.


CORRECTION
The Talking column last Sunday, about closing costs, misstated the mortgage recording tax on loans for homes in Nassau County.
It is 0.75 percent, less $25.


What the Dog Said
MARTHA SPEAKS
Written and illustrated by Susan Meddaugh. Unpaged. Boston: Houghton Mifflin Company.
BOODIL MY DOG
Written and illustrated by Pija Lindenbaum.
Translated by Gabrielle Charbonnet.
Unpaged.
New York: Henry Holt &amp; Company.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
GOURMET ART
When displaying sculpture made of chocolate there are no options, temperature wise.
So Jacques Kaplan's main concern will be keeping cool during the current exhibition at his Paris-New York-Kent Gallery in Kent, on view through Nov. 22.


When a Series Loses One of Its Own
On Oct. 13, a 51-year-old character actor, John Hancock, died of a heart attack.
Normally his loss would have been felt by only family and friends, but Hancock had recently started a new job, playing Ike the bartender on the new CBS series "Love and War." In addition to the grief of the show's cast and crew, there was business to consider.
In the early days of television, the solution would have been simple: write his role out for a few episodes, recast the part and move on.
But times have changed, perhaps because audiences are considered too sophisticated to accept such a switch.
Production on "Love and War" was shut down for a week, then an episode was filmed in which the characters hold a memorial service for Ike (it will be broadcast next Monday night at 9:30).
Eventually another actor will be cast as a bartender, but not as Ike.
Until then, other characters will take turns tending bar.


First Families: A Fount of Heritage and Humor
THE Colonial Homes magazines stacked near the fireplace take on extra meaning in the home of Esther Hicks Emory of Westbury.
Mrs.
Emory's relatives not only lived in colonial houses, but they built them, as well.
The 90-year-old Mrs.
Emory is a descendent of the Hicks family, in whose honor Hicksville was named.
No Hicks ever lived in Hicksville, Mrs.
Emory says.
The community was named in the 1800's by the Long Island Rail Road for its president at the time, Valentine Hicks.
When service was extended into Nassau County, the last station was dubbed Hicksville.


Gilberto Gil, Bahia's Most Beloved Export
In Salvador da Bahia, the most musical city in Brazil, a country that largely defines itself through its music, no musician is more beloved than Gilberto Gil.
On the beaches and in the nightclubs, his songs pour from radios and jukeboxes.
To stroll down the twisting, cobblestoned streets of Salvador with him is to be met by tooting horns from passing cars, shouted greetings and strangers emerging from neighborhood bars to invite him to share a quick cup of coffee.
It has been like that for 25 years now and shows no signs of changing.


Death After Police Beating Inspires Fear in Detroit
All day, in the cold and the swirling snow, cars carrying people like Florence Frazier and her grandchildren pulled up to the curb in front of a ramshackle two-story building.
"Is this where they killed him?" Mrs.
Frazier's 9-year-old grandson, Lawrence Newell, asked today.


Using Wild Rice for an Autumn Flavor
WILD rice is very much an autumn dish.
Its distinctive nutty flavor goes extremely well with game and roasts.
It makes an excellent pilaf mixed with pine nuts, pecans or wild mushrooms, and it can be used as a stuffing for such birds as pheasant or grouse.
It is also delicious folded into pancakes and served with smoked salmon as a first course.
Chef Bradley Ogden of the Lark Creek Inn in California serves it in a superb fall salad made with smoked chicken in cranberry vinaigrette dressing.
The name wild rice is misleading.
Wild rice, which has a black sheen and a faint earthy smell, is not really rice but the seed of a marsh grass native to the Great Lakes region.
For centuries it was harvested by Indians in Minnesota, Wisconsin and Canada who traveled in birch-bark canoes.
They used a stick to knock the seeds off the grass into the bottom of their canoes.
It was not until the mid-70's that commercial wild-rice farming began in Minnesota and in the Sacramento Valley in California.


BEST SELLERS: November 8, 1992
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
3
THE TALE OF THE BODY THIEF, by Anne Rice. (Knopf, $24.) To prove he is still a hero among the living dead, Lestat embarks on a dangerous enterprise; "The Vampire Chronicles," continued.
2
2
4
THE STARS SHINE DOWN, by Sidney Sheldon. (Morrow, $23.) The fortunes of a successful businesswoman are suddenly imperiled by secrets from her past and present relationships. (LP)
3
6
2
DRIVING FORCE, by Dick Francis. (Putnam, $21.95.) An ex-jockey's horse-transport business is besieged by a series of mysterious deaths.
4
10
2
MOSTLY HARMLESS, by Douglas Adams. (Harmony, $20.) The fifth volume of the "Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy" series.
5
9
4
SABINE'S NOTEBOOK, by Nick Bantock. (Chronicle Books, $17.95.) Continuing the epistolary romance begun in "Griffin &amp; Sabine."
6
3
24
WAITING TO EXHALE, by Terry McMillan. (Viking, $22.) The friendships and romances of four black women in Phoenix.
7
8
4
THE SHADOW RISING, by Robert Jordan. (Tor/ Doherty, $24.95.) A fantasy tale.
8 *
5
35
THE PELICAN BRIEF, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $22.50.) A woman law student probes the murder of two Supreme Court justices.
9
13
10
GRIFFIN &amp; SABINE, by Nick Bantock. (Chronicle Books, $17.95.) The romance of an artist and a secret admirer, told through cards and letters.
10
4
8
THE SECRET HISTORY, by Donna Tartt. (Knopf, $23.) Close friends at a small college must deal with the consequences of a crime they committed.
11 *
7
11
WHERE IS JOE MERCHANT? by Jimmy Buffett. (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, $19.95.) A couple on the trail of a dead rock star who has been sighted.
12
11
13
THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $14.95.) A photographer and a lonely farmer's wife in Iowa.
13
12
17
GERALD'S GAME, by Stephen King. (Viking, $23.50.) Twenty-eight hours of horror suffered by a woman handcuffed to a bedpost.
14
1
MEXICO, by James A. Michener. (Random House, $25.) While researching the lives of his ancestors, an American journalist learns about the history of the land south of the border. (LP)
15
14
2
BEST DESTINY, by Diane Carey. (Pocket, $20.) A new "Star Trek" novel.
16 *
15
4
LEAVING COLD SASSY, by Olive Ann Burns. (Ticknor &amp; Fields, $21.) The story of a marriage that survives many strains.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
SEX, by Madonna. (Warner, $49.95.) Erotic photographs of the pop star by Steven Meisel, and her reflections on them.
2
1
8
THE WAY THINGS OUGHT TO BE, by Rush H. Limbaugh 3d. (Pocket, $22.) Anecdotes and opinions offered by the talk show host.
3
2
5
IT DOESN'T TAKE A HERO, by H. Norman Schwarzkopf with Peter Petre. (Linda Grey/ Bantam, $25.) The autobiography of the general who commanded the allied forces in the gulf war.
4
10
3
I CAN'T BELIEVE I SAID THAT! by Kathie Lee Gifford with Jim Jerome. (Pocket, $22.) The autobiography of the co-host of the television show "Live With Regis and Kathie Lee."
5
5
24
THE SILENT PASSAGE, by Gail Sheehy. (Random House, $16.) The psychological and social significance of menopause for today's women.
6
4
10
EVERY LIVING THING, by James Herriot. (St. Martin's, $22.95.) Continuing the memoirs of the Yorkshire veterinarian.
7
3
22
EARTH IN THE BALANCE, by Al Gore. (Houghton Mifflin, $22.95.) The author discusses factors affecting the environment and what must be done to save the earth.
8
6
7
THE TE OF PIGLET, by Benjamin Hoff. (Dutton, $16.) Aspects of Taoist philosophy explained through the actions of an A. A. Milne character.
9
12
2
BANKRUPTCY 1995, by Harry E. Figgie Jr. with Gerald J. Swanson. (Little, Brown, $19.95.) The authors predict the collapse of America under Government debt and suggest ways to cope with it.
10
7
13
WOMEN WHO RUN WITH THE WOLVES, by Clarissa Pinkola Estes. (Ballantine, $20.) A Jungian analyst reinterprets myths and folk tales to enable women to understand their psyches.
11
8
21
TRUMAN, by David McCullough. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $30.) A biography of the 33d President.
12
11
4
THE SENATOR, by Richard E. Burke with William and Marilyn Hoffer. (St. Martin's, $23.95.) The recollections of a man who served as an aide to Edward M. Kennedy for 10 years.
13
1
GENIUS, by James Gleick. (Pantheon, $27.50.) The life and achievements of Richard Feynman, the Nobel Prize-winning physicist.
14
9
10
YOUNG MEN &amp; FIRE, by Norman Maclean. (University of Chicago, $19.95.) An account of a disastrous fire in a Montana forest in 1949.
15 *
13
2
THE CHANGE, by Germaine Greer. (Knopf, $24.) An extensive survey of the physical, psychological and social effects of menopause.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
1
17
HARVEY PENICK'S LITTLE RED BOOK, by Harvey Penick with Bud Shrake. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $19.) Anecdotes and tips about playing golf, by a legendary teacher.
2
2
6
ARE YOU THE ONE FOR ME? by Barbara De Angelis. (Delacorte, $21.) How to choose and keep the right partner in love and marriage.
3
5
6
THE AMERICAN HERITAGE DICTIONARY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE. (Houghton Mifflin, $39.95.) The third edition.
4
4
36
A RETURN TO LOVE, by Marianne Williamson. (HarperCollins, $25.) Inspirational advice about ways to replace feelings of fear with feelings of love in daily life.
5 *
3
48
HOW TO SATISFY A WOMAN EVERY TIME, by Naura Hayden. (Bibli O'Phile/Dutton, $14.95.) Sexual counsel for married couples.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,050 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 28,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.
And Bear in Mind
(Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)
THE CALL OF THE TOAD, by Gunter Grass. (Helen and Kurt Wolff/Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, $19.95.) Mr.
Grass returns to Danzig (now Gdansk), his own childhood home and the site of "The Tin Drum," where an endearing exemplary couple -- he German, she Polish, both widowed -- keep on keeping on.
THE EMPEROR'S LAST ISLAND: A Journey to St.
Helena, by Julia Blackburn. (Pantheon, $22.) That nowhere place in the South Atlantic springs both to mind and to life in this geographical, psychological and historical account of Napoleon's final days.
THE DEATH OF NAPOLEON, by Simon Leys. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $15.) An elegant, absurd novel, in which Napoleon escapes from St.
Helena but is unable to re-establish his identity, while 20 inmates of a French asylum each maintains that
he
is Napoleon.
THE ENGLISH PATIENT, by Michael Ondaatje. (Knopf, $21.) Mr.
Ondaatje's theatrical novel of World War II in Europe reflects the alternate exhilarations and terrors of war, and the passions of the participants, subverting nostalgia without stamping it out.
MEMORIES OF THE FORD ADMINISTRATION, by John Updike. (Knopf, $23.) All that the guilty hero of Mr.
Updike's 15th novel can really remember from the period is his extramarital affairs and his unfinished book on President James Buchanan.
ORIGINS RECONSIDERED: In Search of What Makes Us Human, by Richard Leakey and Roger Lewin. (Doubleday, $25.) A paleoanthropological argument that such "human" qualities as consciousness evolved before modern humans themselves.
WHERE IS HERE?
Stories, by Joyce Carol Oates. (Ecco, $18.95.) Thirty-five tales, full of murder, madness and equally intense situations, sometimes taciturn, usually artfully brief.


Data Bank/November 8, 1992


Red Barber Played A Civil Rights Role
To the Editor:
In none of the coverage accompanying the death of Red Barber did readers learn of his involvement in the civil rights movement.


Soldiers' Stories


What Lovely Wedding . . . Pants?
THE wedding dress has been reinvented.
Again.
At Wearkstatt in SoHo, it might even be pants -- silk crepe with a silk satin bra top or white cotton pique shorts.
And pockets are made much of.
"We want clothes that are modern in a classic sense -- not modern as futuristic or up to the minute, but modern as uncluttered," said Jonas Hegewisch, who with his wife, Ursula, designs the clothes for their company, Wearkstatt, a wordplay on the Wiener Werkstatte, a turn-of-the-century group of Austrian artists and designers.
"Pants allow you more freedom," he said.
"We offer pockets to everybody."


Report Says Piniella o Manage Mariners
The former Cincinnati Reds manager LOU PINIELLA has accepted a three-year contract as manager of the Seattle Mariners, The Seattle Post-Intelligencer reported in yesterday's editions.
The paper said Piniella would be introduced as the Mariners' 10th manager at a news conference tomorrow.
Mariners spokesman DAVE AUST, speaking from Arizona yesterday, would not comment on the report.
Aust said WOODY WOODWARD, Mariners vice president for baseball operations, finished interviews for the manager's position on the East Coast yesterday.


Malone Is in the Eye of the Storm
It will not be until Feb. 4 that the Utah Jazz visits the Forum in Los Angeles, where Karl Malone can count on being booed for his role in what is sure to be perceived as the forced retirement of Magic Johnson.
The question is whether every professional basketball arena's fans will be as intemperate, whether Malone, on a national level, will become the symbolic embodiment of anti-H.I.V. hysteria.
"It's crossed his mind that there could be a backlash," Randall Call, Malone's lawyer, said in a telephone interview from Salt Lake City.
"There very well might be."


CLINTON IS WARNED BY VATICAN PAPER
The Vatican newspaper L'Osservatore Romano today urged President-elect Bill Clinton against opening the door to fresh discussion of "fundamental" moral issues, and it specifically alluded to abortion and euthanasia.
That message, in the paper's Acta Diurna, or "daily events" column, appeared to reflect broad concern among senior Vatican officials that a Government guided by Mr.
Clinton could promote tolerance of behavior or actions the Vatican considers immoral.


A Pro-Israel Lobby Gives Itself a Headache
THE American Israel Public Affairs Committee, the main pro-Israel lobby in Washington, was rocked by a scandal last week that shocked many who know the organization, but surprised few.
The shock was that Aipac's president, David Steiner, had to resign after making a series of grandiose boasts about the lobby's power to influence Washington.
The absence of surprise arose from the fact that for a long time many diplomats, Congressmen and even Israeli officials have been whispering that Aipac had grown so powerful that it had lost a sense of proportion and would eventually overreach itself.


BUT CAN YOU DANCE TO IT?
I am a member of the baby-buster generation and have been watching MTV ever since I was 12 years old ("But Can You Dance to It," by Judith Miller, Oct. 11).
I love the music videos, but what interests me more is "The Day in Rock." MTV spends only a small percentage of time daily on news, but it reports the kind of news that gets the attention of the younger generation.
Most of my friends watch MTV as well, and, with its "Rock the Vote" campaign, MTV has influenced a lot of young people to care about what happens to their Government.
One of my friends used to yawn and say "Booring" whenever I brought up the subject of politics and voting, but a few weeks ago she told me that she was excited about this political campaign.


TRANSACTIONS
Golf
PGA OF AMERICA -- Elected Gary Schaal president; Tom Addis vice president; and Ken Lindsay secretary.
Soccer  National Professional Soccer League  CHICAGO POWER -- Named Steven S. Davidson director of operations.


Dresden Shows How to Contain Rightist Violence
For more than a year after German unification in October 1990, this city on the Elbe was a center of the violent rightist movement that has spread through the country and has been especially virulent in eastern Germany.
Gangs of skinheads and neo-Nazis functioned openly here, holding public meetings, assaulting foreigners and throwing firebombs at hostels where asylum seekers lived.
Today, Dresden and nearby cities are less turbulent.
There are still attacks on foreigners, but they are not nearly as regular or as brutal as in other parts of eastern Germany.
Officials are certain that attacks like the one in August in Rostock, where rightist gangs terrorized asylum seekers in a siege that lasted nearly a week, will not happen here.


Israeli Study Finds Birthrate At Lowest Level Since 1948
The Jewish state learned this week that staying Jewish is a bit harder than it used to be, a demographic discovery with important political implications.
New Government statistics, compiled last year, show that the birthrate among Israel's Jews has dipped to its lowest level since the founding of the state in 1948: an average of 2.6 children per Jewish woman.
By comparison, Muslim women in Israel have an average of 4.7 children apiece, a slight increase from the previous year although barely half the figure of 30 years ago.


New &amp; Noteworthy
STALIN: Breaker of Nations, by Robert Conquest. (Penguin, $12.) This biography analyzes the personal attributes and political machinery that enabled Stalin to seize power and then maintain it through state terrorism.
Last year our reviewer, Richard Pipes, described the book as "fascinating reading," noting that it is "briskly written, authoritative yet not pedantic, filled with interesting incidents and anecdotes."
DAUGHTERS, by Paule Marshall. (Plume, $11.) This novel proposes that black women must learn to separate from their fathers -- and, by extension, patriarchy -- to make the most of their lives and their culture.
Ursa MacKenzie, who is of West Indian and American heritage, accomplishes this task when she battles the corrupt political system that has seduced her father, a leader of a fictional Caribbean island.
"You close 'Daughters' feeling as if you have taken a dangerous trip that cannot leave you unchanged," Susan Fromberg Schaeffer said here last year.
"Flawless in its sense of place and character, remarkable in its understanding of human nature, 'Daughters' is a triumph in every way." Also available in a new paperback edition is Ms.
Marshall's 1969 novel THE CHOSEN PLACE, THE TIMELESS PEOPLE (Vintage Contemporaries, $13), which depicts the conflict arising when American social researchers come to another mythical island.
Our reviewer, Robert Bone, called it "one of the four or five most impressive novels ever written by a black American."


Whitney Ross, Stephen Moseley
Whitney Beekman Ross, the daughter of Sarah R. Whitehouse of Ringoes, N.J., and Dennis B. Ross of New Canaan, Conn., was married in New York yesterday to Stephen James Moseley, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Roger V. Moseley of Princeton, N.J.
The Rev.
Judith T. Baumer performed the Episcopal ceremony at St.
Bartholomew's Church.
The bride, 26 years old, is a psychotherapist at the Center for Comprehensive Health Practice, a medical clinic in New York.
She graduated from Hamilton &amp; Kirkland College and received a master's degree in counseling from Harvard University.
She is a stepdaughter of Edward Whitehouse of Ringoes.


Retaliation Alleged in Black Lawyer's Indictment
A lawyer who served as the first black Federal prosecutor in Mobile, Ala., and who later helped block the appointment of a Reagan judicial nominee whom he accused of being racially biased, was indicted Friday on Federal charges of attempting to bribe a witness.
The charge and the timing of the indictment drew criticism from Alabama's black political leaders, who have long accused Reagan-era Federal prosecutors of racially motivated prosecutions.


BUSH'S GAMBLE
Safire credits Pat Buchanan and himself for coming up with Spiro Agnew's "awesome alliterations," like "pusillanimous pussyfooters" and "nattering nabobs of negativism." Too bad for poor Agnew.
This verbal vitriol led many to believe that he was a babbling bastion of buffoonery.
ROBERT W. MOTTA
Hempstead, L.I.


Corrections
An article on Sept. 13 about rooftop restaurants in Rome misstated the location of Trajan's Forum.
It is the last in a series of forums to be seen looking north from the Hotel Forum, not the first.


Perspectives: Housing Low-Income Elderly; A Wish Fulfilled In Greenpoint
THE late Mary DeAngeles was a pusher in the good sense.
She was a union leader and community activist in the Greenpoint section of Brooklyn and her special interest was the elderly.
"What will you do for the elderly?" she kept asking, according to one person who was frequently asked, Pearl Anish, executive director of the North Brooklyn Development Corporation, which is based in Greenpoint.


About Men; The Uninvited
MY ELDER daughter has never shied from pointing out the flaws she has seen in my arguments or my character.
I have often been confused, sometimes to the point of anger, by her directness.
I remember that we fought political fights in the late 60's -- she the teen-age partisan of what I, the birthright liberal, saw as excessive and frightening radicalism.
I remember one argument very clearly.
She was sitting on the stairs leading up from the kitchen, tearful, fierce and lovely.
I remember that I reached out suddenly, took both her hands and pulled her down to my level.
My first marriage failed in the next decade and my daughter's in the following one.
We saw each other rarely after that.


First, We Need to Have a Peacetime Economy; More Than Skin Deep
To the Editor:
In "Economic Scare Stories" (Op-Ed, Oct. 16), Professors Robert E. Hall and John B. Taylor would have us believe that the sad state of the American economy is simply due to massive withdrawal by a misunderstanding and angst-ridden public.
The professors seek to exorcize this psychic condition with charts presenting statistical evidence that shows our problems to be mild compared with previous recessions.


Katherine Cole, Scott J. Liotta
Katherine Riggs Cole, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles W. Cole Jr. of Owings Mills, Md., was married there yesterday to Scott John Liotta, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Carmine Liotta of Elizabeth, N.J.
The Rev.
William Baxter, an Episcopal minister, officated at St.
Thomas Church.
The Rev.
Michael Hanley, a Roman Catholic priest, took part in the ceremony.
Mrs.
Liotta, 26 years old, teaches the fifth grade at the Woodland School in Weston, Mass.
She graduated from Brown University and received a master's degree in arts in teaching from Simmons College.
Her father is the president and chief executive of First Maryland Bancorp in Baltimore.


A Computer Clues You In To the Joke
The words "Just Kidding!!!" flash on the computer screen.
They accompany the sound of a teasing phrase from the Scherzo of Beethoven's Ninth Symphony.
The flashing exclamation offers emphatic commentary on the musical joke.
In turn, the music, which emerges from two speakers, responds to the text and is controlled by computer commands.
The musical phrase can be repeated again and again.
The cursor just has to be clicked over a small box on the screen.
This is how one "reads" a new sort of publication that has been evolving over the last few years -- the electronic book.
This particular tome is called "Multimedia Beethoven: The Ninth Symphony" and looks like an ordinary compact disk.
It is played not through an audio system but through a CD-ROM machine hooked up to a personal computer.
It can be read on-screen, like an ordinary book, which dutifully and carefully surveys Beethoven's life and times, and then analyzes the symphony; the music can also be listened to without interruption, as if it were coming from a CD.


New Jersey's Budget Crisis Set for Replay as Costs Rise but Revenues Stay Weakened
After three straight years of fiscal crisis, beleaguered New Jersey budget makers may be about to tangle with the worst budget year yet.
Barring a bold upswing in the economy, which most analysts consider unlikely, the state is looking at yet another year of lean revenues.
Furthermore, in closing last year's budget gap, legislators used nearly a billion dollars in one-time opportunities, like a revaluing of pension plans, that will not be available again.


Katherine Magill, Mitchell Krapes
Katherine Elizabeth Magill, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Allen B. Magill of Monroeville, Ala., was married yesterday to Mitchell Glen Krapes, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Saul Krapes of Brooklyn.
Judge Michael Zoghby of the Mobile County Circuit Court in Mobile, Ala., officiated at the Grand Hotel in Point Clear, Ala.
Mrs.
Krapes, 27 years old, graduated from Duke University and is studying for a master's degree in public and private management at Yale University.


Europe's State-Industry Ties: Successes, and Utter Failures
In 1969, a discussion began in Germany between the Government and industry about the development of a train without wheels, powered by electromagnets.
After an investment of $1 billion of German taxpayers' money, the Transrapid train is now ready for use; its first route may be between the Orlando, Fla., airport and Disney World in 1996.
It is too early to say whether the Transrapid, which travels at 180 miles an hour, will be a commercial success.
But the development of this relatively quiet, fast and ecologically desirable train illustrates the way in which governments and private companies have frequently worked together in Europe on innovative but costly industrial projects.


Clinton's Three Moves For Sports
THIS may sound like heresy coming from somebody who earns a living writing about sweaty people, but I was cheered by the prospect that the President-elect is more of a music buff than a hard-core sports fan.
Bill Clinton would apparently rather play saxophone with his favorite musicians than glom onto the latest sports champions.


Democrats Gain Edge in Delegation To the Assembly
WESTCHESTER voters gave United States Representative Nita M. Lowey the margin she needed last week to win an old battle against the former two-term Republican Representative Joseph J. DioGuardi and retain control of the 18th Congressional District, formerly the 20th District.
The rematch of the race that Mrs.
Lowey won four years ago dashed Mr.
DioGuardi's hopes for a political comeback.
It was the most bitterly contested of four House races affecting Westchester.
In those contests, voters re-elected each incumbent, two Republicans and two Democrats.


Supermarket Chain to Face Child-Labor Case
The Labor Department is preparing to bring one of the largest child-labor complaints ever against a supermarket chain, department officials said today.
The officials said the complaints would charge the Belgian-owned chain, Food Lion Inc., with allowing teen-agers to work around hazardous equipment, like meat slicers, and making teen-agers work longer hours than allowed under Federal child-labor laws.


'If I Wished Hard Enough, He Wouldn't Get Killed'
DON'T YOU KNOW THERE'S A WAR ON?
Written and illustrated by James Stevenson.
Unpaged.
New York: Greenwillow Books. $14. (Ages 5 and up)


DELAY ON NEW RULE FOR FOOD LABELING
A dispute between the Agriculture Department and the Department of Health and Human Services will delay the announcement of the Government's most comprehensive set of food-labeling regulations past the Monday deadline set by law, senior Administration officials said today.
The delay throws into chaos a yearlong effort to rewrite the rules to make nutrition labels on food more truthful and useful to consumers.
By law, a different and more stringent set of rules will automatically take the place of the ones that are being withheld.


Anne M. Azzi, Rory Davenport
Anne Marta Azzi, the daughter of Dr.
Constance Azzi of Dallas and Dr.
Victor Azzi of Rye, N.H., was married yesterday to Rory Dean Davenport, the son of Sandra Davenport of Miami and Bruce A. Davenport of Atlanta.
The Rev.
Deborah Elder performed the Episcopal ceremony at Christ Church in Alexandria, Va.
Mrs.
Davenport, 28 years old, is an assignment editor at ABC-TV in Washington.
She graduated from Brown University.
Her father is a structural engineering consultant in Durham, N.H., and a vice president of campus planning at the University of New Hampshire there.
Her mother is the president of Azzi &amp; Associates, a management consulting company in Dallas.
The bride is the stepdaughter of Cecilia Azzi of Rye.


A Point Guard Like No Other
MY LIFE
By Earvin (Magic) Johnson with William Novak.
Illustrated. 329 pp.
New York: Random House. $22.


Mad Hatter Alert!
During New York's Fashion Week last week, many designers were concerned with huge hair.
Not so the editors, celebrities and groupies in the audiences, who seemed to care more about hats.
Although the black beret continued to be the hat of choice, baseball caps, leopard-print hats and grungy stocking caps abounded.
Another favorite, popularized by the young Conde Nast set, was the Greek fisherman's cap.
HATS NEVER OFF: The photographer Steven Meisel, in a faded black rain cap -- not his other favorite, the fur one with the flaps -- hugged Stephen Sprouse, wearing his usual black baseball cap, at the designers' preview at Bergdorf Goodman Men on Wednesday.
Naomi Campbell didn't know who had designed her oversize patchwork hobo hat.


Long Wharf Offers Turgenev Comedy
TURGENEV'S "Month in the Country" is a comedy of soft hues, seething intensity and hot flare-ups.
Even though nothing much seems to be going on at an isolated estate near Moscow in the 1840's, there are no brooding idlers.
Passions surface.
Momentous decisions are made.
Action is more important than plot.
Mixing delicacy and excess, the tone is rueful and, yes, this is a comedy, undoubtedly so, and a warming one, for Turgenev smiled upon it.


How Shorter Days Bring Brighter Blooms
PLANT lovers sometimes wonder why the Christmas cactus sets buds in late summer and bursts into bloom in November or early December.
They might also ponder why chrysanthemums always bloom in fall, or why a poinsettia is on schedule with bright red bracts for the holiday season.
The easiest answers are that these events are supposed to happen, but there is a better answer: Nature sends out specific signals, and one of the most obvious at this time of year is that the days are growing shorter.
Though to many observers the phenomenon is probably not worth a second thought, to the natural world it is very important.
The biological response to the phenomenon is called photoperiodism.


Off-Key
To the Editor:
It might have been useful if Tim Golden's article about the filming of "Danzon" in Mexico City  [ " 'Danzon' Glides to a Soft Mexican Rhythym," Oct. 11 ]  had mentioned that the danzon is one of Cuba's national dances and has nothing to do with Mexican music.
GUILLERMO SIMEON New York


A Search for Understanding and Love
IF "Idioglossia" sounds like a baffling title, hold on. That's just the beginning.
Mark Handley's play at the George Street Playhouse means to probe major things: the mystery of language, the magic of learning, even the meaning of love.
More important -- more important? -- Mr.
Handley's theme is the freeing of the mind.


ABOUT-FACE
Michael Norman questions the fiber of a putative leader who played it safe and dodged "the trials and challenges of a dangerous era, an uncertain day," but he does not go far enough (About Men: "About-Face," Oct. 11).
Clinton didn't simply escape military service with a high draft number.
He set out with the intent of dodging the draft and he shouldn't have lied about it.
DAN MCEVILY
Houston


Something to Celebrate At Fairleigh Dickinson
TWO years ago few would have predicted that Fairleigh Dickinson University's 50th anniversary this year would have been anything to celebrate.
The university was awash in debt, enrollment had fallen more than 40 percent from its high in 1980, the faculty and administration were at odds and morale at the school was low.
But on Sept. 30, as a colorful academic procession of more than 300 slowly wended its way down the commencement green on the university's Teaneck campus to honor the installation of a new president and the official start of the golden anniversary, the institution's future seemed as bright and brisk as the day itself.
The two years have brought profound change, in terms of financial stability and a renewed sense of vigor, to Fairleigh Dickinson -- the state's largest private university, with campuses in Rutherford, Teaneck-Hackensack and Madison-Florham Park.
The feeling on campus and within New Jersey's higher education community is that the school has made a remarkable comeback.
"The university uses the term 'cautious optimism,' but we're probably even more optimistic," said Elizabeth Cayer, assistant director of the New Jersey Department of Higher Education's Office of Senior Institutions.
"While we're cautious, we're saying, 'Heavens, it looks terrific.' "


A Republican Message That Roiled the Waters; Question of Fairness
President-elect Clinton has said that an economic stimulus program, including money for new roads and other public works projects, s at the top of his agenda.
As an indication of how dominant an issue the economy was in the Nov. 2 elections, readers are continuing to respond very strongly to "The Beauty of Indexing Capital Gains" (Viewpoints, Oct. 25) by Theodore J. Forstmann, national co-chairman of the Bush-Quayle re-election campaign.
Some of their letters follow.
To the Editor:


Broad Stripes, Bright Stars
There was a zip to the step of the fashion crowd last week, as it rushed and pushed to see more than 70 designers' spring collections, from Seventh Avenue showrooms to the splendid Celeste Bartos Forum at the New York Public Library to vast open lofts in SoHo.
The message was one of diversity, with a mix of patterns to please a band of circus clowns.
Harlequin jackets and richly embroidered boots mingled with hippie styles.
Calf-length skirts coexisted with knee-length conservatives of the Brooke Astor school.
There was even a patriotic note on Election Day when Sandy Pittman wore her flag-length chiffon scarf.


Results Plus
TENNIS Becker Keeps Burning Up the Courts It was just like old times: Boris Becker playing like a champion, lunging after volleys, diving to score winning points.
Becker beat the hottest player on the tour, Goran Ivanisevic of Croatia, 6-1, 6-2, yesterday in the semifinals of the Paris Open.
Ivanisevic had won 2 of his last 3 tournaments and 15 of his last 16 matches.
The defending Paris champion, Guy Forget of France, won the other semifinal, beating Jakob Hlasek of Switzerland, 6-3, 7-6 (7-1).
On Friday, Becker, whose ranking has drifted to No. 9, beat the No. 1 player in the world, Jim Courier, in the quarterfinals of the indoor tournament. (AP)


The Rap on Hip-Hop
BUT THE CZAR Never Knew About Hip-Hop" was the headline in a recent U.S. News &amp; World Report. The article was about the Siberian Cadets Corps in Novosibirsk, Russia, where students are learning the real history of Russia along with the cultural activities associated with that country before the rise of Communism.
"We are learning the mazurka, polonaise, waltz," says 15-year-old Yevgeny Kondratiev, undoubtedly a good dancer, possibly an avid cyclist.
"Later, they promise to teach us the
hip-hop
."


CURRENCY
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen
123.44
123.44
130.38
per Dollar
German Mark
1.5423
1.5423
1.6745
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar
1.2388
1.2388
1.1308
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound
1.5565
1.5565
1.7637
U.S. Dollar per British Pound
Gold
$335.80
$389.50
$353.80
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


Students in a Silver Igloo Get A View of the Nighttime Sky
THE stars came to the R. J.  Bailey School here recently stars with names like Dubhe, Merak and Betelgeuse.
Fourth graders who might have had trouble seeing them in the night sky -- because street lights and pollution obscured the view -- instead gazed raptly into the overhead galaxies of Starlab, a portable planetarium making its rounds in the county this fall.
Starlab, a program of the Queens-based New York Hall of Science, is a 10 1/2-foot-high, 16-foot-wide inflatable silver dome that from the outside looks like a cross between a giant igloo and a U.F.O.
Visitors must crouch and hunch themselves through a short tunnel to enter the dome room, a cozy place big enough for a class of 30.
Once in, students sit in a circle around the projector as though it were a campfire, the floor-level lamplight shining Halloween-like on their uplifted faces.


Conflict


About Those Stats on Women's Pay
To the Editor:
I am frankly appalled by the headline "Women's Progress Stalled? Just Not So" and by the conclusions drawn in the article.
Census figures and general population trends cannot substitute for longitudinal data which insure that the same group of people is being compared over time.


Using Wild Rice for an Autumn Flavor
WILD rice is very much an autumn dish.
Its distinctive nutty flavor goes extremely well with game and roasts.
It makes an excellent pilaf mixed with pine nuts, pecans or wild mushrooms, and it can be used as a stuffing for such birds as pheasant or grouse.
It is also delicious folded into pancakes and served with smoked salmon as a first course.
Chef Bradley Ogden of the Lark Creek Inn in California serves it in a superb fall salad made with smoked chicken in cranberry vinaigrette dressing.
The name wild rice is misleading.
Wild rice, which has a black sheen and a faint earthy smell, is not really rice but the seed of a marsh grass native to the Great Lakes region.
For centuries it was harvested by Indians in Minnesota, Wisconsin and Canada who traveled in birch-bark canoes.
They used a stick to knock the seeds off the grass into the bottom of their canoes.
It was not until the mid-70's that commercial wild-rice farming began in Minnesota and in the Sacramento Valley in California.


Israel Focuses on the Threat Beyond the Arabs -- in Iran
IT is hardly a formal pronouncement, but Israel has some foreign-policy advice for the newly elected American President: Watch out for Iran.
The temptation for Bill Clinton, officials here say, may be to focus his anxieties on possible new adventures by Saddam Hussein in Iraq.
But the Israelis caution that a bigger threat to Middle East serenity -- not to mention their own country's security -- lies in Teheran, whose regime they say is sure to become a nuclear power in a few years unless stopped.


Milan Airport
To the Editor: A warning to those airline passengers arriving at Malpensa Airport in Milan, Italy, expecting to catch the still reasonably priced airport bus to the city to avoid the taxi fare of $90 or more.


Gearing Up for Expected Flood of Passport Renewals
AMERICANS are expected to travel overseas in record numbers next year.
The Travel and Tourism Administration, part of the Commerce Department, predicts that 16.7 million will travel outside the country to places other than Canada and Mexico, an increase of 6 percent over this year.
In addition, the first 10-year passports, issued in 1983, start expiring in January.
Passport demand in the early 80's was high; the dollar was strong, air fares were low and the word was go-go.
So the State Department is bracing for an onslaught of applicants for new and renewed passports.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, the "All About" column on Oct. 25, about sports stadiums being built around the nation, referred incorrectly to a new one in Cleveland.
It will be used for baseball, not football.


NOV. 1-7: Untying the Gag; 'Abortion' Can Be Uttered At Federal Clinics
On Tuesday, the day that voters turned President Bush out of office, a Federal appeals court struck down his Administration's rule forbidding abortion counseling in 3,900 Federally supported family planning clinics that serve 4.5 million poor women.
The rule had taken effect Oct. 1.


Conversations/Wang Chigang; An Illiterate Peasant From Nowhere Speaking Volumes About China
HE IS an unimportant man.
He did not go to school, cannot write his own name, and never makes decisions that affect his village, let alone his nation.
Wang Chigang is a Chinese peasant, one of about 800 million.
A sinewy 76-year-old, short, lean and beginning to bend with the years, he lives in the little village of Luqiao, miles and miles from nowhere in the central Chinese province of Anhui.
His face is rough and covered with creases, the texture of a softball that is about to be retired.
He wears a navy blue version of the tunic known as a Mao suit, with a matching cap on his close-cropped head.


Roads to the Real New Mexico
THE smart people don't go to Santa Fe just for Santa Fe itself.
Local residents, some of whom refer ironically to their outrageously successful tourist town as "The Adobe Boutique," will tell you there's very little of the real New Mexico in the countless shops and galleries, or in the trendy restaurants.
To get a taste of the authentic Southwest you've got to hit the road.
Three drives within 75 miles of Santa Fe, all of them leisurely day trips, offer an array of New Mexico's expansive vistas and encapsulate practically the entire history of the state.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: November 8, 1992
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
3
MIDNIGHT WHISPERS, by V. C. Andrews. (Pocket, $5.99.) The travails of Christie Longchamp, haunted by her relatives' passions.
2
41
THE FIRM, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $5.99.) A young lawyer learns that his firm is engaged in secret, possibly illegal activities.
3
3
PRIVATE EYES, by Jonathan Kellerman. (Bantam, $6.50.) The psychologist-detective Alex Delaware goes to the rescue of an actress.
4 *
2
REMEMBER, by Barbara Taylor Bradford. (Ballantine, $5.99.) A television correspondent takes a trip across Europe to learn the truth about her fiance's suicide and herself.
5
5
SCARLETT, by Alexandra Ripley. (Warner, $6.99.) The sequel to "Gone With the Wind."
6 *
1
A RIVER RUNS THROUGH IT, by Norman Maclean. (University of Chicago, $9.95.) Three stories about the pleasures of the outdoors in western Montana.
7
4
THE HELLION BRIDE, by Catherine Coulter. (Jove, $5.99.) The romance of a British rake and a plantation belle in 19th-century Jamaica.
8
7
NO GREATER LOVE, by Danielle Steel. (Dell, $6.50.) The sinking of the Titanic greatly alters the fortunes of Edwina Winfield and her large family.
9
30
A TIME TO KILL, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $5.99.) Racial tensions surface during the trial of a man charged with murder in rural Mississippi.
10
1
HIDEAWAY, by Dean Koontz. (Berkley, $5.99.) A man miraculously resuscitated after he has technically died is haunted by visions of evil.
11
7
A THOUSAND ACRES, by Jane Smiley. (Fawcett, $12.) The fortunes of a family that operates a large industrialized farm in the Midwest.
12
2
A RIVER RUNS THROUGH IT, by Norman Maclean. (Pocket, $4.99.) Three stories about the pleasures of the outdoors in western Montana.
13
7
SAINT MAYBE, by Anne Tyler. (Ivy, $5.99.) The struggles of a young man to atone for the wrong he feels he has done his brother.
14 *
1
THE LAST OF THE MOHICANS, by James Fenimore Cooper. (Pocket, $4.99.) The 1826 novel about the adventures of a frontier scout and his Indian friend during the French and Indian War.
15
2
DEATH COUNT, by L. A. Graf. (Pocket, $4.99.) A new "Star Trek" novel.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
2
2
THE AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF MALCOLM X, with the assistance of Alex Haley. (Ballantine, $5.99.) The life story of the black leader, originally published in 1965.
3
5
PUTTING PEOPLE FIRST, by Bill Clinton and Al Gore. (Times Books/Random House, $7.99.) The authors detail their program for "changing America."
4
4
BACKLASH, by Susan Faludi. (Anchor/ Doubleday, $12.50.) A journalist contends that the media and political groups are staging a war against women's rights.
5
29
AMERICA: WHAT WENT WRONG? by Donald L. Barlett and James B. Steele. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $6.95.) How the practices of Washington lawmakers and Wall Street deal makers have benefited a few Americans at the expense of most.
6 *
1
WHEN YOU LOOK LIKE YOUR PASSPORT PHOTO, IT'S TIME TO GO HOME, by Erma Bombeck. (Harper Paperbacks, $5.99.) The tribulations of travel suffered in all parts of the world.
7
1
MOLLY IVINS CAN'T SAY THAT, CAN SHE? by Molly Ivins. (Vintage, $11.) Essays about the recent political and cultural scene.
8 *
11
THE GOVERNMENT RACKET, by Martin L. Gross. (Bantam, $7.99.) Several hundred examples of waste authorized by the White House and Congress, with suggestions for curbing it.
9
77
YOU JUST DON'T UNDERSTAND, by Deborah Tannen. (Ballantine, $10.) The different languages men and women speak.
10
470
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Inspiration. (LP)
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
7
THE INDISPENSABLE CALVIN AND HOBBES, by Bill Watterson. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $12.95.) A collection of previously published cartoons.
2
94
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $9.95.) Principles for success.
3
65
LIFE'S LITTLE INSTRUCTION BOOK, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $5.95.) Some 500 tips for achieving a self-fulfilling life.
4
113
THE T-FACTOR FAT GRAM COUNTER, by Jamie Pope-Cordle and Martin Katahn. (Norton, $2.50.) How to reduce fat in one's diet.
5
1
MRS. FIELDS COOKIE BOOK, by Debbi Fields. (Time-Life, $12.95.) One hundred recipes.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,000 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 38,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.


Marlene: What We Didn't Know
To the Editor:
In his review of my book "Marlene Dietrich" (Oct. 4), Wilfrid Sheed mangles his opening sentence by misquoting a line about Tallulah Bankhead.
The correct version, as your letter writers pointed out last week, is "A day away from Tallulah is like a month in the country." Turning a well-known witticism upside down doesn't bode well for what follows, and, sure enough, Mr.
Sheed cites William Goldman a few paragraphs later, making Mr.
Goldman's impression of Marlene -- "I didn't know people like that existed  [ and ]  when she looked at me, what I saw . . . I swear . . . was . . . 'Listen, relax; I only got this way for you' " -- sound like something quite different.
In Mr.
Sheed's words: "Dietrich . . . somehow  [ transferred ]  her extraordinary gift for personal friendship to vast herds of people at a time . . . making each of them feel, as the screenwriter and novelist William Goldman reports, as if he or she had spent the whole evening alone with her."


Mutual Funds; The Time Is Right. And Wrong, Too.
The recent volatility in the stock market creates a prime opportunity for investors who use a strategy known as market timing.
But profits don't always follow.
Such investors buy and sell stocks or mutual funds frequently, sometimes even daily, based on an array of technical factors like trading volume, economic data and stock-price movements.
And in a market moving sharply up and down, the frequent trader has more of a chance for sharp gains -- or losses.


Dena M. Bazzie, Kevin E. Gorin
Dena Marie Bazzie, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Gene Bazzie of Beckley, W.Va., was married there yesterday to Dr.
Kevin Elihu Gorin, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Irving J. Gorin of Hewlett, L.I.
Judge Thomas Canterbury of the Raleigh County Circuit Court in Beckley performed the ceremony at the Beckley Hotel.
Mrs.
Gorin, 34 years old, is a regional sales manager in Roanoke, Va., for Medtronic Inc., a manufacturer of medical equipment.
She graduated from Concord College.
Her father, who is retired, was a private branch exchange technician in Beckley for the American Telephone and Telegraph Company.


Q and A
Hiking in the Pyrenees


Mary Ellen Pitt, Stephen P. Cherry
Mary Ellen Pitt, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Scott Pitt of Naples, Fla., was married yesterday to Stephen Patrick Cherry, a son of Sharon R. Mullin of Los Angeles and Don Cherry of Las Vegas, Nev.
The Rev.
David Pitt, the bride's brother, performed the ceremony at the Naples United Church of Christ.
Mrs.
Cherry, 28 years old, is a sales assistant in the equity trading department at Morgan Stanley &amp; Company in New York.
Her father, who is retired, was a sales manager at J. P. Stevens &amp; Company, the textiles concern, in New York.
Her mother, Dorothy Lee Pitt, is an interior designer in Naples.


INSIDE
Alexander Dubcek Dies
The former leader of Czechoslovakia, whose bold reform efforts in 1968 were crushed by a Soviet-led invasion, was 70 years old.
Page 56.
Delay for Food Labels
A dispute in the Cabinet will delay the announcement of the Government's most comprehensive set of food-labeling regulations.
Page 25.
Recriminations Fly in Japan
The governing party is venting its wrath, directing words like "libel" and "impeach" at the judiciary over details released in court that link politics and the mob.
Page 7.


POSTINGS: Two Hours for $15; Seventh Regiment Armory Tour
The Friends of the Upper East Side Historic Districts, a nonprofit planning and preservation group, will conduct a tour of the seldom-seen, Victorian-style rooms in the Seventh Regiment Armory on Saturday.
The tour will be led by Lisa Weilbacker, the curator of the armory, who will chronicle the building's history, highlighting the collections of furnishings, objets d'art and regimental memorabilia.


Business Digest
The Economy President-elect Clinton plans to assemble a conference of business leaders and create an Economic Security Council as two of his first acts in assuming the Presidency.
Members of his transition team said the business leaders would meet with Mr.
Clinton in Little Rock before Inauguration Day in "an attempt to make an audit of where we stand now" and to gather advice from the nation's corporate leaders.  [ Page A1. ]


Books of The Times; An Entertainment for the Literary
English Music By Peter Ackroyd Illustrated. 399 pages. Alfred A. Knopf. $23.


A Hotel Under Attack; Once Grand, It Is Now Controversial
It was once the largest hotel in New York City, the pride of downtown Brooklyn.
Posh and popular, the Hotel St.
George was touted as a favorite haunt of judges, politicians and movie stars who whisked through the elegant Clark Street lobby on their way to the Colorama Ballroom, a huge saltwater swimming pool or the tower with a spotlight throwing light into the night sky.
But the years have not been kind.
Since its heyday in the 1940's, the St.
George has changed owners at least six times.
With the hotel in constant financial straits, four of its eight buildings have been sold.
Three are boarded up, leaving one -- and only 371 of the original 2,632 rooms -- as housing for aging residents and temporary quarters first for Russian emigres, then Red Cross disaster victims and, now, homeless people with H.I.V. or AIDS.


The Nets Win the Mahorn Sweepstakes
Rick Mahorn, the former Detroit Piston forward who played last season in Italy, will sign a three-year contract with the Nets today, his agent said last night.
The agent, Alton Waldon, said that Mahorn had reached agreement with the Nets yesterday and will receive a $500,000 salary this season and increases of 30 percent in each of the following two seasons.
Like all teams that have gone over the salary cap, the Nets were given a $500,000 salary exemption by the National Basketball Association.
That sum is all they could now offer Mahorn.


A Judge's Interest in Being Governor Is Decided the Hard Way
AS Chief Judge of New York State's highest court, Sol Wachtler was the Republican Party's great robed hope -- the suburban, moderate, Jewish jurist who might some day challenge the Democratic hegemony that has held the governorship since 1974.
Judge Wachtler himself was ambivalent about elective politics.
His arrest Saturday by Federal agents, who accused him of a bizarre extortion scheme involving a woman with whom he had had a long relationship, renders the debate all but irrelevant.


Japan and Korea Fear a Vacuum If Clinton Turns the U.S. Inward
Clearly worried that Bill Clinton's promise to emphasize domestic affairs might reduce the United States military presence in East Asia, the leaders of Japan and South Korea indirectly urged the President-elect today to maintain Washington's active engagement in this rapidly changing region.
In an unusual statement tinged with anxiety, Prime Minister Kiichi Miyazawa of Japan and President Roh Tae Woo of South Korea "agreed that a continued active United States role is indispensable to stability in the region, and voiced the expectation that the coming new United States Administration will not change this policy," Korean officials reported.


TRANSACTIONS
Golf PGA OF AMERICA -- Elected Gary Schaal president; Tom Addis vice president, and Ken Lindsay secretary.
Soccer National Professional Soccer League CHICAGO POWER -- Named Steven S. Davidson director of operations.


New Leader In a Lament For Ukraine
Leonid Kuchma used to build the massive rockets meant to keep the Soviet Union invincible.
His new task, a far more daunting one, is to keep Ukraine from total collapse.
"There isn't a single sector of the economy that isn't disastrous -- agriculture, industry, the credit-finance system, the banking system, health, ecology," Ukraine's new Prime Minister said of his country's economy.


A Hole in the Tendon, And a Cry of Disbelief
As soon as Dr.
Russell Warren put his hands on Lawrence Taylor's right ankle today, there was no doubt.
"We knew it was ruptured," the orthopedist said later.
"You could actually feel the hole."


The Wachtler Tragedy, and Cloud
The world can only gape in astonishment at the arrest of Sol Wachtler, the Chief Judge of New York State.
Whatever the outcome of the criminal case against him, his career of brilliant service to the state and the law has been grievously damaged.
This is a tale of monumental personal tragedy that's as sad as it is stunning.
It is also a tale that casts a shadow over New York's courts.
Although the charges of threatening and attempting to extort money from a former woman friend relate to conduct off the bench, they severely compromise Judge Wachtler's ability to lead New York's highest court or administer its vast court system.


Raise Proposed for Yale Graduate Students
The Yale Graduate School's executive committee has recommended the creation of a new job category that would mean raises of as much as 28 percent over last year for many graduate teaching assistants.
A group established to represent Yale's 2,500 graduate students hailed the proposal, which comes almost a year after the group led protests demanding higher pay, better benefits and an increased voice in decisions affecting graduate students, both those who teach and those who do not.


CHRONICLE
IN 1952, DON HEWITT was in charge of political convention coverage for CBS and wondering who to put on the air as a commentator.
"There was this guy who worked in Washington who didn't have all that much broadcasting experience, and I went to Sig Mickelson, president of CBS News and said, 'Listen, what do you think about Walter Cronkite?' " Mr.
Hewitt recalled the other day.
At that time Mr.
Cronkite was known mainly as a war correspondent for United Press International.
"So we hired him and then were talking about how we would operate," Mr.
Hewitt continued.
"I said, 'He ought to be the principal of four broadcasters, like the anchorman on the relay team. Nobody had ever used that term before, but it certainly did stick, and Walter Cronkite and anchorman became household words."


Too Soon to Hail Throwaway Diaper's Victory
To the Editor:
"Among the Earth Baby Set, Disposable Diapers Are Back" (front page, Oct. 23) fails to emphasize three critical facts:


Campaign '92 Not Over Yet For Authors
Campaign workers and reporters, winning politicians and some who lost, former bureaucrats and those hopeful of getting their jobs.
It may sound like a list of the election's victors, victims, volunteers and voyeurs, but in fact it's a sampling of the people who have submitted book proposals to editors and agents in recent weeks or who have signed contracts with publishers for projects about the 1992 elections.


Let's Look Closer at Sidewalk Bookselling
To the Editor:
In "Book Vendors Shouldn't Have Any Sidewalk Privileges" (letter, Oct. 19), Peter Malkin, chairman of the Grand Central Partnership and 34th Street Partnership, tells us of his efforts to remove "the sense of disorder" and sidewalk congestion he says booksellers cause along main thoroughfares.
He states he has gained support from key City Council members for subjecting booksellers to the same restrictions that apply to street vendors of merchandise.


A Quintessential American Store Arrives in Japan


Peruvians Refuse to Give Up Hope; The Struggle Continues
To the Editor:
The arrest of Abimael Guzman Reynoso is undeniably a serious loss for the Peruvian revolution.
However, in "Peru Waiting to See if Rebels Open Offensive" (news article, Oct. 18), you mistakenly state that I share the view of Prof.
David Scott Palmer that the leadership of Shining Path, the Communist Party of Peru, will fracture in a "bitter power struggle" or end up a "loose confederation" with Mr.
Guzman in jail.


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Monday . . .
None Tuesday . . .
Producer Price Index: Oct.
Wednesday . . .
None Thursday . . .
Weekly Jobless Claims Friday . . .
Retail Sales: Oct.; Consumer Price Index: Oct.


THE TRANSITION: Political Memo; Clinton, After Raising Hopes, Tries to Lower Expectations
As President-elect Bill Clinton begins the transition from campaigning to governing, his overarching concern is to cope with the emotion he has stirred: hope.
A volatile expectation colors everything about the beginning of the Clinton years.
Against accepted political wisdom and the currents of an angry year, Mr.
Clinton's Presidential campaign seemed to revive at least a limited belief that Washington can actually do something good for people.


Scott W. McPherson, 33, Actor And Author Of a Hit Stage Play
Scott W. McPherson, an actor and playwright who wrote "Marvin's Room," an award-winning Off Broadway hit, died yesterday at his home in Chicago.
He was 33 years old.
He died of complications from AIDS, said a friend of his, Andrew Patner.


Ann S. Lipshie, Sandy E. Zisser
Ann Sarah Lipshie, a daughter of Burton and Sheila Lipshie of Plainview, L.I., was married yesterday to Sandy Evans Zisser, a son of Lea Zisser of Yonkers and the late Sol Zisser.
Rabbi Morris Bernstein performed the ceremony at Temple Emanuel in Great Neck, L.I.
Mrs.
Zisser, 24 years old, is a research analyst at IDD Information Services Inc., a financial-information company in New York.
She and her husband graduated from the State University at Albany, she summa cum laude.
Her father is a lawyer at the New York law firm of Stroock &amp; Stroock &amp; Lavan and an adjunct professor of law at Yeshiva University.
Her mother is a paste-up artist at the Long Island Jewish World, a newspaper in Great Neck.


Peace Corps' Training Using Camden Schools
In an elementary school in the poorest neighborhood of one of the most impoverished cities in the nation, graduate students from Rutgers University are training as Peace Corps volunteers.
Camden, where 65 percent of the children live below the poverty line, was seen as "perfect training for the third world," the director of the Rutgers program said.


Editorial Notebook; An Unfair Late Hit on Mr. Bush?
President Bush cried foul when four days before the election Lawrence Walsh, the court-appointed prosecutor in the Iran-contra cases, made public evidence challenging Mr.
Bush's claim that he was "out of the loop" of the hostage ransom operation.
Was this a political cheap shot or legitimate prosecutorial action?
That's a fascinating and fair question, one that Mr.
Walsh needs to answer, at the latest when he files a final report on his six-year investigation of the Reagan Administration's major scandal.
The reverse question also needs attention: Would it have been proper to
suppress
the information and release it only after the election?


A.T.&amp; T. Deal Signals a Shift
A.T.&amp; T.'s bold announcement on Wednesday that it was negotiating to team up with the nation's largest cellular company goes a long way toward slaughtering a sacred cow of telecommunications policy: the separation of local and long-distance service.
If it succeeds in acquiring a third of McCaw Cellular Communications Inc., the American Telephone and Telegraph Company will suddenly have a significant presence in local telephone markets around the country and could soon begin muscling into the core businesses of its own offspring, the seven regional Baby Bell companies.


Fuss Churns Over Clock for the Staten Island Ferry Terminal
There was mutinous talk aboard a ferry called the American Legion over the weekend.
It could be heard in the hull and on the bow and decks as the vessel trudged across the East River.


People
*
Larry Tolpin, executive creative director at McKim Baker Lovick/ BBDO, Vancouver, British Columbia, was promoted to the new position of executive vice president and chief creative officer at McKim's Toronto office.
Also, Michael McLaughin and Stephen Creet were named to the new positions of senior vice presidents and group creative directors in Toronto; they were previously vice presidents and group creative directors at MacLaren Lintas, Toronto. *
Sherwin Leff, senior vice president and director of client services at Impact, Chicago, was promoted to executive vice president.


Renana Meyers, R. J. Rosenbloom
Renana Elise Meyers, a daughter of Rabbi and Mrs.
Joel H. Meyers of White Plains, was married there yesterday to Robert Jacob Rosenbloom, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Jake Rosenbloom of Rocky Mount, N.C.
The bride's father performed the ceremony at Temple Israel Center.
Ms.
Meyers, who is 23 years old, is keeping her name.
She is a communications writer at Kwasha Lipton, an employee-benefits consulting firm in Fort Lee, N.J.
She graduated magna cum laude from Barnard College, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.


Dance in Review
Yvonne Meier
Performance Space 122 150 First Avenue (at Ninth Street) East Village Through Sunday


THE TRANSITION: The Republicans; Bush Seems Unsure About His Plans
When President Bush last chatted with architects about his proposed Presidential library in College Station, Tex. the premise was that the archive would open at the end of his second term, in late 1996.
"We may want to speed that up," Perry A. Atkinson, the executive director of the library project, said Saturday.
That, and more.


Knicks Can Boast 2 Strengths
While winning their first two games, the Knicks displayed two of their strengths: defense and depth.
Both the Atlanta Hawks and the Philadelphia 76ers failed to reach the 100-point mark against New York.


The Title Is Hers, if Not the Mount
The 109th National Horse Show, historic in its own right, was upstaged on its closing day here at Byrne Meadowlands Arena by three strikingly different performers: a history-making 13-year-old silver gelding, a survival-prone veteran who not only woke at dawn to judge 136 junior Maclay finalists but sneaked into the saddle to win today's $100,000 grand prix, and a determined teen-ager from New Jersey who finally captured the Rolex-Maclay National Championship on her eighth and final try.
Nicole Shahinian, already the most decorated young rider in the nation, ended her junior career on a crescendo by passing the horse world's strictest test, the Maclay National Championship.
Shahinian earned the other top junior laurel, the Medal, two years ago at Harrisburg, Pa.


Review/Pop; A Singer From Senegal By Way of the World
Youssou N'Dour wore a billowing white robe, like a desert prophet, at the Apollo Theater on Saturday night.
It was nearly the same costume he wore in his first New York shows, in 1986, when he was largely unknown outside his native Senegal and the French-speaking African sphere.
Mr.
N'Dour has changed considerably since then: touring internationally, absorbing more Western pop influences, collaborating with Peter Gabriel, Paul Simon and Ryuichi Sakamoto, becoming a self-conscious voice of the third world.
Along with only a handful of performers -- among them Caetano Veloso and Gilberto Gil of Brazil, King Sunny Ade of Nigeria, Mr.
Simon andMr.
Gabriel -- he has become a musician who acts globally and hears locally.
He sings primarily in Wolof, a Senegalese language, but when he writes a song protesting apartheid or the dumping of toxic waste, he adds lines in English and French.
Amid gleaming synthesizer tones (from Japanese keyboards) and crafty pop hooks, his music is still Senegalese to its core.


350,000 IN GERMANY PROTEST VIOLENCE AGAINST MIGRANTS
More than 300,000 Germans answered calls by their political leaders today to come to the capital to condemn violence against foreigners, and then watched helplessly as jeering rioters bent on violence hijacked the demonstration from them.
Booing the assembled civic leaders as "hypocrites," 300 to 400 anarchists pelted the main speaker, President Richard von Weizsacker, with eggs, tomatoes, sticks and paint bombs as police officers held out plastic shields to protect him.


A Somali Place That Even the Alms Givers Fear
As human wretchedness gouges deeper into this bush town and a team of 128 gravediggers works overtime to bury the dead in the rain-sodden red soil, a United Nations agency and a major private relief group have left the feeding centers they had set up in an attempt to save the survivors.
Complaining of security risks, both the United Nations Children's Fund and CARE, the American-based group, stopped distributing food two days ago and said their workers would return when their safety could be assured.


Alex Ullmann Dead; Novelist and Editor, 34
Alex Ullmann, whose novel "Afghanistan" won this year's Sue Kaufman Prize for First Fiction from the American Academy and Institute of Arts and Letters, died on Friday evening at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Hospital.
He was 34 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died of leukemia, his father said.


Regulator Of S.&amp; L.'s Resigns
T.
Timothy Ryan Jr. today became the Bush Administration's first senior regulator since Election Day to announce that he would step down, leaving the post as the nation's top official overseeing the saving and loan industry.
Mr.
Ryan still had two years left in his term, but as a staunch Republican and loyal official in the Treasury Department, his resignation, effective next month, as director of the Office of Thrift Supervision took no one in Washington by surprise.
Until Bill Clinton appoints a successor, the agency will be run by Jonathan Fiechter, one of Mr.
Ryan's deputies.


Peruvians Refuse to Give Up Hope
To the Editor:
In Peru profound changes are coming from the grass roots, which may explain why President Alberto Fujimori has extensive popular support.
Despite desperate economic times, produced partly by the developed world's demand that Peru repay its foreign debt and damage (estimated at $22 billion) resulting from terrorist destruction, not all is glum in Peru.


Geico Net Falls 25% in Quarter
The Geico Corporation, like a number of other major insurers, has reported third-quarter net income hurt by natural disasters.
Net income sank 25 percent, to $41.6 million, or 58 cents a share, from $55.7 million, or 77 cents a share, in the period a year earlier.
Revenue rose 9 percent, to $613.7 million from $557.7 million.


Too Soon to Hail Throwaway Diaper's Victory; Saving With Cotton
To the Editor:
Your Oct 23 front-page article on disposable versus cotton diapers glossed over what was the deciding factor for me.
At first I was adamant that I would use disposable diapers.
After all, between working outside the home and running a bed and breakfast guest house, I wasn't about to grapple with anything else.
Then a friend pointed out the cost difference.
Assuming your newborn uses 70 diapers a week -- our local diaper service charges $12.50 a week, against $20 for disposables.
These days an extra $30 a month can have a significant impact on the budget, and now that our landfill has started charging a fee per bag, the cost difference becomes even greater!
After three months of using the diaper service, I can say I'm glad I went for cotton.
The service is convenient (weekly pickups, deodorized diaper pails, Velcro diaper wraps, I don't have to lug heavy boxes home from the grocery) and better for the baby (not one rash yet).
As any new mother will agree, concerns about convenience are as valid as concerns about the environment.
But in this economy, concerns about cost are too important to be dismissed when you make your own decision.
KAREN COLE HUTTLINGER  Keene Valley, N.Y., Oct. 23, 1992


Ex-Convict Is Charged In Abduction
A 23-year-old ex-convict was charged early today with the kidnapping and murder of an Edison woman who vanished while on a shopping trip here Tuesday night, the authorities said.
The suspect, Scott R. Johnson, of Piscataway, was arrested Saturday night at the home of a girlfriend here about 200 yards from the water-filled, lumberyard drainage ditch where the nude body of 35-year-old Gail Shollar had been found less than 10 hours earlier.
Today, a folding knife believed to be the murder weapon was found in the woods behind Mr.
Johnson's girlfriend's home.


Wachtler's Reversal of Fortune; Fallout From Chief Judge's Arrest Likely to Extend to Courts
As his six judicial colleagues grapple with the astonishing arrest of Sol Wachtler, the chief judge of New York State's highest court and a man now accused of blackmail and attempted extortion of an ex-lover, much more than Judge Wachtler's personal fate is at stake.
Since his elevation to the state's top judicial post in 1985, Judge Wachtler has in many ways molded the Court of Appeals.
He has pushed vigorously for judicial consensus, and he has advocated using the State Constitution to expand personal freedoms at a time when those freedoms have been restricted by the United States Supreme Court.


Finishing High School With College Credits
To the Editor:
Re "As More Earn Equivalency Diploma, Its Value Is Debated" (Education page, Oct. 21): The exam for the high school equivalency certificate is not the only choice in the New York City area for students who never completed high school.


CHRONICLE
A little-known chapter in the history of World War II will come to light when a new documentary titled "Liberators: Fighting on Two Fronts in World War II" is shown this evening at Alice Tully Hall and again on Wednesday on PBS stations.
The film portrays the discrimination faced by the all-black 761st Tank Battalion and the 183d Combat Engineer Corps and their heroic liberation of the Buchenwald and Dachau concentration camps.


Mowing Down Our Children
The shootings, separated by a thousand miles, underscore an amazing question for the whole country: How can America put so many children at risk of death by gunfire?
Recently, 7-year-old Dantrell Davis died of a bullet to the head, fired as he walked into his Chicago school.
Six days later, gunfire wounded three New York City teen-agers outside Evander Childs High School in the Bronx.
Subsequently, three more youngsters suffered gunshot wounds as they stood outside their Brooklyn school.


Dividend Meetings
Following is a partial list of dividend meetings for this week: MONDAY  McDermott Intl Pitney Bowes


Paris Journal; Some Suave Fumeurs Putting Their Packs Away
The moviegoer's image of the Frenchman -- peasant with beret and baguette, intellectual with coffee and Le Monde, cop with furrowed brow and raincoat -- has invariably included a "dark" cigarette hanging nonchalantly from a pouty Gallic mouth.
The tourist's view of the French may be more sophisticated, but it too has often been clouded by smoke floating from the adjoining table in that otherwise-perfect Left Bank bistro where eating, drinking and smoking are seemingly inseparable evening rituals.


Review/Television; Extraordinary Friends Becoming Ordinary
Simon Gray, the English playwright whose substantial credits include "Butley" and "Quartermaine's Terms," specializes in dissecting, with a distinctive combination of loathing and compassion, aggressively clever types, mostly men, with direct or indirect umbilical ties to academia.
"Common Pursuit," tonight's "Great Performances" presentation at 9 on Channel 13, finds Mr.
Gray at his quietly scathing best.
Spanning 10 years, the play begins in 1975 as a group of Cambridge University undergraduates prepare to start a literary magazine called The Common Pursuit, intended as a showcase for their assumed brilliance and progressive ideas.


Review/Theater; The Manipulations Of a Villain Trapped In His Own Devices
In "Solitary Confinement," Stacy Keach plays a reclusive and tyrannical billionaire.
Isolated in his castle-like office tower, he runs his life and controls the lives of others while sitting at a high-tech computer console.
The supporting characters, any one of whom might have murderous intentions against the billionaire, are seen on a large closed-circuit television screen.
Despite the elaborate electronic hardware, this is a tepid attempt at a mystery, offering neither chills nor thrills, and substituting contrived special effects for dramatic invention.
The Rupert Holmes play opened last night at the Nederlander Theater on Broadway after playing at the Pasadena Playhouse in California and at the Kennedy Center in Washington.
"Solitary Confinement" pushes theater several steps closer to television.
A game-show conclusion puts the final seal on the work's limited aspirations.
In the theater, the play wastes the audience's time and Mr.
Keach's talent.
There is no fast-forward button to get us through the slow parts.


Deborah Small, Howard Leaman
Deborah Jean Small, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Alan R. Small of Easton, Conn., was married yesterday to Dr.
Howard Michael Leaman, the son of Jack Leaman of New York and the late Ruth Leaman.
Rabbi James Prosnit performed the ceremony at Rolling Hills Country Club in Wilton, Conn.
Mrs.
Leaman is a managing director at Nathan &amp; Lewis Securities, a securities brokerage in New York.
She graduated magna cum laude from Tufts University.
Her father is an internist in Bridgeport, Conn.
Her mother, Muriel T. Small, is a retired director of the legal assistant training program at Sacred Heart University in Fairfield, Conn.


Second Car is Hijacked in Two Days
Two men were forced from their car at gunpoint on Saturday night off Interstate 95 in Connecticut, in the second carjacking in two days at the same highway rest area, the state police said yesterday.
One of two suspects was arrested an hour later at the Fairfield train station, about half a mile from the rest area, after town police officers saw the two changing the tire of the stolen 1992 Chevrolet Blazer.


THE TRANSITION: The Republicans; Bush Seems Unsure About His Plans
When President Bush last chatted with architects about his proposed Presidential library in College Station, Tex. the premise was that the archive would open at the end of his second term, in late 1996.
"We may want to speed that up," Perry A. Atkinson, the executive director of the library project, said Saturday.
That, and more.


Mount Monadnock Journal; A Park too Trekked Gets New Rules
Like a slow cresting wave, Mount Monadnock rises up from the plains of southwestern New Hampshire, a lone pinnacle carved by glaciers and commanding a remarkable view of New England for 100 miles around.
History has recorded visits to the mountain for nearly three centuries.
Its spruce-covered slopes have been plowed, scorched, logged and mined.
Camps, taverns, lookouts, refreshment stands, even a hotel, have come and gone.


Dori Bortniker, Jeffrey Dryfoos
Dori Ross Bortniker, the daughter of Ernest and Shirley Bortniker of Stafford, Va., was married yesterday to Jeffrey Alexander Dryfoos, a son of Joan M. Dryfoos of New York and the late Hugh Dryfoos.
Cantor Judy Poreckia performed the ceremony at the Hyatt Regency hotel in Reston, Va..
Mrs.
Bortniker-Dryfoos, a ballet dancer, is studying for a B.F.A. at Marymount Manhattan College in New York.
She is also a personal trainer for Fitness Designs there, an in-home physical training concern.
Her father, who is retired, was an electrical engineer in the Defense Department's night-vision laboratory at Fort Belvoir, Va.
Her mother is an artist in Stafford.


A Quiet Alteration at Brooks Bros.
When Brooks Brothers installed escalators in its flagship store on Madison Avenue three years ago, it incited something approaching hysteria among its clientele.
The offending contraptions, standard fixtures in most stores of more than two levels, became the symbol of unwelcome change at an institution that had stoically upheld the status quo for well over 150 years.
Today the escalators rarely arouse the attention of anyone other than the occasional repairman, and the revolution they were supposed to portend has failed to materialize.
Brooks Brothers has instead undergone an appropriately subdued metamorphosis, evident in Hermes-esque neckwear, stylishly faded sports shirts and stirrup pants hanging unobtrusively alongside the rep ties, button-downs and kilts that are the chain's signature merchandise.


10-Nation Meeting Is Unable to Break Cambodian Impasse
Officials from 10 countries met here this weekend for talks aimed at salvaging Cambodian peace efforts, but the negotiations failed to resolve disputes that threaten to undermine the already fragile transition toward peace and greater democracy in Cambodia.
The failure of the talks is a setback to hopes that the nation's long civil warfare can be ended in existing political forums and that fair elections under international auspices can be assured.


Broncos Don't Need A Two-Minute Drill To March Over Jets
The Jets came here with the concern that most teams have when they play the Denver Broncos.
The Jets didn't want the outcome to hang in the balance with Denver quarterback John Elway in possession of the football with under two minutes to play.
They didn't have to worry about that this afternoon.
It was all taken care of with 6 minutes 54 seconds to go when Broncos running back Greg Lewis sneaked under a pile of bodies at the goal line and edged the ball over to score a touchdown from one yard out.
That sealed the Broncos' 27-16 victory before 74,678 at Mile High Stadium.


'Tempest' And Others The Size Of a Teapot
It may seem vulgar: six Shakespeare plays each cut to 30 minutes and made into cartoons.
But "Shakespeare, the Animated Tales" has the support of such arbiters of British good taste as the BBC, the Royal Shakespeare Company and Prince Charles.
The series begins with "A Midsummer Night's Dream," which is to be broadcast on Monday in Britain on BBC2 and on Tuesday at 7:30 P.M. in the United States on HBO.
"The Tempest," "Macbeth," "Romeo and Juliet," "Hamlet" and "Twelfth Night" will be broadcast over the next five weeks in Britain and during the next six months in the United States.


Japan Shipment Of Nuclear Fuel Worries Asians
No country in the world has nurtured so profound a nuclear allergy as Japan, where virtually every schoolchild takes the stomach-knotting tour of the A-bomb museum in Hiroshima, and the Government has repeated time and again its commitment never to build or possess nuclear weapons.
Nonetheless, even before 1.3 tons of near-weapons-grade plutonium bound for Japan's civilian nuclear program nosed out of Cherbourg harbor in France on Saturday, the question was already nervously being whispered around Asian governments: Has Tokyo figured out a way to possess a post-cold-war nuclear deterrent, without ever violating its national principles by putting together a weapon?


Futch Going Out in Style With Bowe in His Stable
It was January 1989, and the fight manager Rock Newman needed a trainer for the heavyweight he had just signed, Riddick Bowe.
The one he had in mind was Eddie Futch, the soft-spoken, knowledgeable man who had trained champions like Don Jordan, Smokin' Joe Frazier, Ken Norton, Larry Holmes and Michael Spinks.
On Friday night in Las Vegas, Nev., when Bowe (31-0, 27 knockous) fights for the heavyweight title against the champion, Evander Holyfield (28-0, 22 knockouts), Futch will be in the challenger's corner, but it took some convincing to get him there.


THE TRANSITION: The President-Elect; 'He's Still Bill,' but Life Has Changed for Clinton
The Rev.
Rex Horne preached from the Book of Genesis today, telling the story of how Abraham survived God's test of asking him to sacrifice his son, Isaac.
The white-haired man in the fourth row listened carefully, and if he failed to make the biblical connections to his own life, Mr.
Horne explained it for him in his sermon.


Washington Loss Kicks Off New Season
The outstanding defense and kicking game the University of Arizona used to end Washington's 22-game winning streak on Saturday has given the new coalition of college football bowl games an opportunity that once seemed out of reach.
Arizona's 16-3 victory over the Huskies at Tucson created a clear path for the coalition, which includes the Orange, Sugar, Cotton and Fiesta bowls -- but not the Rose Bowl -- to create a matchup that could produce a unanimous, if unofficial, national champion.


2 Turnovers Upset McNeil
Freeman McNeil sat as low as he could in a folding chair.
Nervously, he swung his knees to and fro for 90 consecutive seconds.
"I was responsible for the other team winning," he said, eyes locked ahead.
"I was responsible, I was single-handedly responsible."


Dance in Review
Judith Ren-Lay
St. Mark's Church East Village


Accounts
*
Reebok International Ltd., Stoughton, Mass., to Euro RSCG, London, as the lead agency to handle the footwear and apparel company's advertising and marketing strategies in Europe.
Reebok said its various agencies in individual countries would not be affected by the new assignment, adding that Euro RSCG would work with Chiat/Day/Mojo, New York, Reebok's global lead agency, to implement a global marketing strategy.
Billings were not disclosed. *
U.S.
Shoe Corp., Cincinnati, to DeFrancesco &amp; DeLuca, New York, as the first agency to handle its Capezio footwear and apparel advertising and public relations account.
Billings were not disclosed.


Queens Mother Finds Custody Is Not Enough
In 1984 Linda Clarke, then 18 years old, married Shafiuddin Wyne, a Pakistani immigrant twice her age, who owned the lower Manhattan delicatessen where she was working as a waitress.
The couple quickly had two children.
"Friendship and mutual understandings had grown into a relationship," Linda Wyne recalled on Saturday, recounting a cosmopolitan tale hardly unheard of these days -- of the union of two people of widely divergent backgrounds, here a Queens-born Catholic with parents of German and Ecuadorean heritage and a Pakistani native with Moslem roots.


Modern Bride Forms Agency
Here comes the bride -- Modern Bride , that is.
The New York-based bridal magazine is forming an in-house agency to handle not only its own advertising, marketing and promotional needs but also those of its advertisers.
"We are not competing with agencies," said Joel J. Ehrlich, Modern Bride's vice president and publisher, adding, "We are just encouraging small advertisers that can't afford to hire an ad agency to reach their audiences."


A Culture Strives to Root in Freedom's Stony Soil
The collapse of Communism and the Soviet empire awakened widespread hopes that the arts in Russia, so long repressed, might suddenly blossom into a new golden age.
But that flowering has been blighted by the grim, uncertain realities of the country's economic and political life.
Although there are signs of stability in the provinces and of innovation throughout this vast land, the most immediate image of the country's cultural life is of poverty and creative paralysis.
A cultural establishment accustomed to virtually total state support and centralized control was suddenly cut adrift, its subsidies reduced by fiat and inflation and its administrators forced to cope on their own.
And it was the most prominent museums, theaters and conservatories, the glories of the Soviet system, which had the greatest obstacles to overcome.


M.T.A. Facing Deficit of $260 Million
In the opening move of a complex political joust likely to last into next year, the New York City Transit Authority will announce this week that it is facing a 1993 deficit of about $260 million, Transit Authority officials said.
For New York City residents, such deficits -- the result of declining tax revenues and continued low bus and subway ridership -- have become something of a fall ritual auguring the threat, implied or overt, of a fare increase.
This year is no different.


THE TRANSITION: The Overview; CLINTON TO SUMMON ECONOMIC LEADERS TO SET PRIORITIES
In an effort to demonstrate a commitment to boosting the battered American economy, President-elect Bill Clinton plans to assemble a conference of business and economic leaders within the next few weeks and create an Economic Security Council after he takes office, his transition leaders said today.
The council, Mr.
Clinton's advisers said, would be separate from the three-member Council of Economic Advisers, whose role is to evaluate the economic impact of the President's policies.
The new council would effectively usurp the role of the existing Domestic Policy and Economic Policy Councils.
It would be modeled after the National Security Council and headed by an assistant to the President for economic affairs, who would coordinate the efforts of Cabinet departments that handle economic affairs, the advisers said.
Littler Rock Meeting Planned
The transition leaders, Vernon E. Jordan and Warren Christopher, appearing on four television news programs, said they had been given the responsibility of filling 27 major Administration posts by Inauguration Day.
They also said they would bring "structural change" to the new White House that would include fulfilling Mr.
Clinton's campaign pledge to reduce the White House staff by 25 percent.


Police Officer Critically Wounded in Brooklyn


Kristina Brandt, Richard A. Stein
Kristina Louise Brandt, the daughter of Pamela and Donald Brandt of Wilmington, Del., was married there yesterday to Richard Andrew Stein, the son of Judge Kenneth R. Stein of Livingston, N.J., and Barbara Bernheim of South Orange, N.J.
The Rev.
Robert Doss, a Unitarian minister, officiated at the Hotel du Pont.
Rabbi Israel Wolmark took part in the ceremony.
Mrs.
Stein, 24 years old, graduated from Smith College.
Until recently, she was a marketing associate in New York for Banque Indosuez, the French bank, where her husband is a first vice president.
Her mother is a real-estate broker for Prudential Preferred Properties in Wilmington.
Her father, a retired chemical engineer for E. I. du Pont de Nemours &amp; Company, is an engineering consultant there.


Review/Music; On a High-Anxiety Diet in the Suburbs
"How do I know if what I achieve in life should be called serenity and not surrender?"
That question is a recurrent refrain in "Love and Shrimp," an amiably gabby if shapeless cabaret musical based on the writings of Judith Viorst that plays at the Ballroom (253 West 28th Street, Chelsea) through Sunday.


Ethnic Conflict Is Threatening in Yet Another Region of Yugoslavia: Kosovo
When diplomats and politicians in the Balkans try to imagine where the next regional conflict might break out, their attention quickly turns to the restive Yugoslav region of Kosovo, where ethnic conflicts run deep and prospects for peaceful compromise seem bleak.
More than 90 percent of Kosovo's citizens are ethnic Albanians, most of them Muslim.
They feel a close kinship with neighboring Albania, as well as with Albanians in adjoining parts of Montenegro and Macedonia.
For the Serbs who rule them, they feel only resentment and hostility.


Gunman Kills 6 Then Himself in California
A man killed six people in shootings at two homes and a card-playing club before taking a woman hostage and killing himself, the authorities said today.
The man, Lynwood Drake 3d, 43 years old, shot himself this morning while the authorities were talking to the hostage by telephone, said Sgt.
Tom Wiley of the San Luis Obispo County Sheriff's Department.
Officials said he was apparently seeking revenge for being evicted from his home and banned from the club.


Richard Yates, Novelist, 66, Dies; Chronicler of Disappointed Lives
Richard Yates, who wrote "Revolutionary Road" and other novels about self-deception, disappointment and grief, died on Saturday at the Birmingham (Ala.) Veterans Administration hospital.
He was 66 years old and had lived in Tuscaloosa, Ala., for two years.
He died of emphysema, which he had had for 10 years, and of complications from minor surgery, said his daughter Monica Yates.
She said he smoked heavily until a year ago.


Dance in Review
Doris Humphrey Repertory Dance Company
Gould Hall 55 East 59th Street


Like Old Times
BJORN BORG of Sweden beat ROSCOE TANNER yesterday to win the Advanta Tour of Chicago -- his first tournament victory since 1981.
The top-seeded Borg earned $25,000 for his 6-4, 6-1 victory over Tanner, who also lost to Borg in the 1979 Wimbledon finals.
Tanner earned $12,500.


Sports of The Times; This Time, L.T. Didn't Get Up
Lawrence Taylor had swatted the pass into the air, but when he turned to look for the ball, pain seared his right heel.
He toppled face down, screaming in pain.
In her seat at Giants Stadium, his wife, Linda, assumed he had merely reinjured his right shoulder.
He'll get up.
He always had.
Not this time.


N.B.A. Retirees Pass To a New Generation
Professional basketball passed from one era to another over the weekend, from Magic Johnson and Larry Bird to Shaquille O'Neal and assorted other rookies, whose debuts were a mixed bag on a mixed opening weekend.
There was one familiar sight -- or almost familiar.
In Phoenix, the arrival of Charles Barkley from the Philadelphia 76ers was something to savor, as he had 37 points, 21 rebounds and 8 assists in the victory against the Los Angeles Clippers on Saturday.
He also tied a Suns record with 12 offensive rebounds.


Grey Reports Rise in Earnings
Grey Advertising Inc. in New York reported Friday that net income for the third quarter rose 6 percent from the corresponding period a year ago as revenues rose 13 percent.
Net income increased to $2.9 million, or $2.27 a share, from $2.8 million, or $2.23 a share, as revenue rose to $933.4 million from $827.5 million.


Corrections
A news analysis article in Business Day on Friday about the importance of the General Motors Corporation to the American economy referred erroneously in some editions to remarks made in 1953 by Charles E. Wilson, then president of G.M., during his Senate hearings for confirmation as Secretary of Defense.
According to G.M., Mr.
Wilson said, "For years I thought what was good for our country was good for General Motors and vice versa."


Proposed Accounting Rules Stir Debate About Charities
Americans have a soft spot for nonprofit organizations that champion lofty goals like protecting children and curing cancer.
But in recent years, many nonprofits have been caught using loose accounting practices to mislead the public about how efficient they are with donors' money.
Now, the Financial Accounting Standards Board, the leading authority for the accounting profession, plans to issue proposed rules next week that would introduce more rigor and uniformity into the nonprofit sector by cracking down on how organizations list contributions ranging from gifts of cash to volunteers' time.


Black Concentrations in the U.S.


Career Over for Taylor?


There's Cash In Mining The Courts
IT used to be that people obtained patents for the purpose of enjoying an exclusive right to make or sell their inventions, reaping 17 years of monopoly profits.
But now, a growing number of companies are suing for patent infringement for products they own the rights to but have never actually produced.
Such a strategy is not always quick, but it can be more profitable and less trouble than actually starting a new business.
All you really need are lawyers.
And lawyers, who say the trend is accelerating, are encouraging it.


Norman Stack, 64, Dealer and Expert In Valuable Coins
Norman C. Stack, a leading international numismatic expert and a managing partner of the oldest and largest rare-coin dealer in the United States, died on Friday at North Shore University Hospital in Manhasset, L.I.
He was 64 years old and lived in Shelter Island, L.I.
He died of cancer, his family said.


Bridge
A squeeze is normally defined as a position in which one or both opponents is under pressure in two or three suits.
A one-suit squeeze was long thought to be a mythical beast, but there have been occasional sightings in the past 40 years.
One was spotted recently in Denmark, and reported by Svend Novrup.
Sitting North and South were Knut and Lars Blakset, who have represented Denmark with distinction on many occasions.
The one no-trump opening was the weak variety, and the two-club overcall was not as natural as it appears: It showed, by partnership agreement, a major suit and a minor suit.


No Headline
"We are not in 1938 -- we are in 1992. Violence can only take us to the abyss." -- IGNATZ BUBIS, head of the Central Council of Jews in Germany.  [ A8:3. ]


BUSINESS DIGEST
REPARING TO STEP ASIDE
Judge Sol Wachtler is preparing to step aside as the Chief Judge of New York State's highest court.
The court released a statement saying he would do so because he was "currently unable to exercise the duties" of his office, but retracted it 15 minutes later, saying his family had not approved it.
Colleagues and friends spent the weekend trying to sort out what could have caused the bizarre behavior that led to Judge Wachtler's arrest on Federal extortion charges in connection with threats made to a woman with whom he had had an affair.
A1.
Sol Wachtler: a consensus-minded jurist. News analysis, B6. NEW YORK CITY


Treasury Has a Full Calendar of Financings
The Treasury has a full calendar of financings this week in addition to its regular auction of three- and six-month bills today.
As part of its quarterly refunding, the Government plans to auction 3- and 10-year notes and a new 30-year bond on the days before and after Veterans Day on Wednesday.


World Economies


Post-Election, Bonds Remain Vulnerable
A lot of uncertainties for the bond market were eliminated last week.
But not enough was made clear to fire up a rally or push market yields out of their recent trading range.
Right now, the market is vulnerable to prices falling a little further and yields inching up, even above the 7.76 percent yield reached Friday on the 30-year bond -- the highest since the end of June.
At the same time, balancing forces -- the old friends of slow economic growth and low inflation -- help check any rout.


Energy Bill Spares Taxpayers a Bailout
To the Editor:
Your discussion of the energy legislation passed by Congress (Oct. 9), like that of analysts on both sides, overlooks one of the biggest energy and fiscal policy stories to come out of Washington in six years.


Hoechst Unit Profit Falls
The Hoechst Celanese Corporation, a wholly owned unit of Hoechst A.G. of Germany, said third-quarter earnings fell 82 percent, primarily because of a $31 million pretax restructuring charge against its North American fibers operations.
Earnings for the diversified chemicals and materials company fell to $8 million from $45 million.
Quarterly sales fell to $1.67 billion from $1.68 billion.


Abroad at Home; Suffer The Children
"If you actually see the brutality that has gone on," Ted Forstmann said -- "children's throats slit. . . .
"I went to the village green in Mostar, in Bosnia, which used to be a beautiful city. The green is now a cemetery, with a mound over every grave, the markers showing Muslims and Catholics. Half of the headstones had birth dates in the 1980's."


Save Lives in Bosnia
There is a peculiar repetition, and evasion, in attempts to report on prison camps -- really concentration camps -- in Bosnia.
The former Polish Prime Minister, Tadeusz Mazowiecki, who investigated for the U.N., said: "I don't have words to describe it. It is too horrible."


Uncertainty for Albany Court
As his colleagues on the New York Court of Appeals grapple with the arrest of their Chief Judge, far more than Sol Wachtler's personal fate is at stake.
News analysis, page B6.


Nagle Accepts His Incomplete Game
For a spell today, it looked as if Bruce Coslet was shuttling in plays with his quarterbacks.
The Jets' coach yanked starter Browning Nagle, as if on cue, with 1 minute 42 seconds to go in the first half.
But he had no qualm about re-inserting Nagle 90 seconds later when Ken O'Brien's stomach turned queasy.


Ellen Markstein, David S. Geller
Dr.
Ellen Ann Markstein, the daughter of Donald and Judith Markstein of Springfield, N.J., was married there yesterday to David Steven Geller, a son of Arthur and Toby Geller of Convent Station, N.J.
Rabbi Joshua Goldstein performed the ceremony at Temple Sha'arey Shalom.
The bride, 28 years old, is a first-year resident at Yale-New Haven Hospital in New Haven.
She graduated cum laude from Williams College and received a medical degree from Yale University.
Her father is a retired partner of Price Waterhouse, the accounting firm, in New York.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Magazines; Interior Design and Social History
The sale of Metropolitan Home to Hachette Magazines last week parted the curtains and provided a glimpse into one of the most fascinating and fluctuating categories in magazine publishing -- the interior design and home decorating field.
Tracking these lushly illustrated versions of the American dream usually provides pretty good social history.
It did so again last week when Des Moines-based Meredith Magazines decided to cast its lot with the simpler, more traditional articulation of that dream.
It sold its sophisticated urban child, Metropolitan Home, and will now stick to its knitting with Better Homes and Gardens, Traditional Home and Country Home.


Turcotte Moves Fast to Stay Put
Darren Turcotte isn't going to lie about his motivations.
He went five games without scoring, got benched for an evening and found himself tangled in rather cantankerous contract negotiations with the Rangers.
On the night he sat out -- Oct. 29, when New York was host to the Nordiques -- he heard through his agent that the Rangers' president, Neil Smith, had threatened to trade him if Turcotte won his arbitration hearing with the club.
In the four games since then, Turcotte has notched five points, including four goals, added zest to the Rangers' top power play and made some memorable defensive plays.
It's no coincidence.


Chicago Papers Fight for, and in, Ads
Six weeks ago, when The Chicago Tribune raised its prices from 35 cents to 40 cents for home delivery and 50 cents at newsstands, its bitter rival, The Chicago Sun-Times, faced a tough decision.
Its obvious option was to match the increases and lift revenue, at least temporarily.
Instead, The Sun-Times held the line and, in a blistering ad campaign, decided to use the price gap as a weapon to try to reverse its long losing streak in the battle for readers.


Thompson Gambles And Cashes In Big
It was getting late, and the Giant who had made the biggest plays on defense was on a cot in the locker room, his season ended with a torn Achilles' tendon.
Before he went out with seconds remaining in the third quarter, Lawrence Taylor had been yelling at his defensive teammates when the unit was on the sideline: "Remember to keep it up, let's not lose it, remember what we did to Washington last week."


Ilene Weininger and David Jaroslaw
Ilene Weininger, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Arthur Weininger of Flushing, Queens, was married yesterday to David Jaroslaw, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Harry Jaroslaw of River Vale, N.J.
Rabbi Avi Winokur officiated at Tappan Hill in Tarrytown, N.Y.
Mrs.
Jaroslaw, 29 years old, is an assistant United States attorney for the Eastern District of New York, in Brooklyn.
She graduated from Harvard University and received a law degree from Georgetown University.
Her father, a former Foreign Service officer, is a retired assistant vice president of Merrill Lynch, Pierce, Fenner &amp; Smith in New York.


Jennifer Bersch, Michael Gliedman
Jennifer Bersch, a daughter of Howard Bersch of Englewood, N.J., and Anne Levison of Short Hills, N.J., was married yesterday to Michael Seth Gliedman, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Monroe M. Gliedman of Scarsdale, N.Y.
Rabbi Arnold Turetsky performed the ceremony at the East Midwood Jewish Center in Brooklyn.
Mrs.
Gliedman, 28 years old, is a senior project director in marketing research at Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Advertising in New York.
She and her husband graduated from Brandeis University, and she received a master's degree in journalism from New York University.


A G.M. Issue Has Created An Anomaly
IN a world of uncertainties, it is unusual to find one investment that is absolutely certain to be better than a competing investment, no matter what else happens in the world.
But that is the case now in General Motors securities.
General Motors common stock is clearly a superior investment at current prices relative to one type of G. M. preferred stock, known on Wall Street as a perc, for preferred equity redemption certificate.
That will be true if G. M. stock goes up, or if it falls, or if it does nothing.


Tokyo Stocks Down 2.7%
The Nikkei index of 225 issues ended trading today down 452.76 points, or 2.7%, at 16,417.05.
"It's the same old story," Paul Muller, deputy general manager of international sales at Schroder Securities, said.
"Earnings numbers are coming through. Politics are still a cause for concern. And nobody is in the mood for buying."


Necessity, Ingenuity and Gourmet Tomato Sauce Yield a Thriving Company
The tale of how Nancy Battista DiStefano became a businesswoman could begin with the memory of her father bringing home bushels of tomatoes for her and two sisters to can in Mason jars with a bit of olive oil and basil.
Or it might start with lonely midnight runs in her Volkswagen to the rough-edged Hunts Point market in the Bronx to buy tomatoes to supply a tiny new enterprise.
Once she saw a man stabbed a few feet away from her.


10 Years Later, the Emotions Still Run Deep


Different Methods To Remove a Judge
The law provides for a variety of ways in which Sol Wachter could step down or be forced out as the Chief Judge of the New York State Court of Appeals as a result of his arrest on extortion charges.
He could simply request to step aside while his case is heard, and if acquitted he could then return to the bench.
He would be entitled to receive his pay unless his fellow judges voted otherwise.
If convicted, he would be automatically removed from office.


Method Found To Spot Defect In Heart Valve
In a four-hour operation on Nov. 1, surgeons at a Michigan hospital removed an artificial valve from the heart of Marion F. Genteman, a 72-year-old retired metallurgist.
Afterward, when the surgeons held up the valve to a magnifying glass, they saw a tiny crack.
The operation confirmed for the first time that a new X-ray method could detect even the smallest hidden fractures in a type of heart valve that has been implanted in 55,000 people around the world.


Alexander Dubcek, 70, Dies in Prague
Alexander Dubcek, the Czechoslovak leader whose bold attempt in 1968 to give his country "socialism with a human face" was crushed by an invasion of Soviet-led Warsaw Pact troops, died on Saturday night at a hospital in Prague.
He was 70 years old.
Mr.
Dubcek died of multiple organ failure as a result of injuries he suffered in an automobile accident on Sept. 1.
Mr.
Dubcek had been listed in critical condition at Homolse Hospital for the last two weeks and had been hospitalized since the accident.


Amy Schachter, Brian Hyland
Amy Patrice Schachter, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph Schachter of Great Neck, L.I., was married there yesterday to Brian Kevin Hyland, the son of Marion Hyland of Spring Hill, Fla., and the late William F. Hyland.
Rabbi Richard Chapin performed the ceremony at the Fresh Meadow Country Club.


Burnett Executive Gets Post at CME
To fill the void left when its leading creative executive departed, the Chicago office of CME KHBB Advertising hired Tom Reilly to take the new post of senior vice president and executive creative director.
Mr.
Reilly, 49 years old, arrives seven months after the departure of Michael T. Rogers, who was chairman and creative services director at the agency, formerly Campbell-Mithun-Esty.
He resigned after the agency lost the $14.7 million Bob Evans restaurants account.
Until now, creative employees in Chicago had been reporting to the agency's headquarters in Minneapolis.


Two Principals Form an Agency
Two principals at two small New York agencies have teamed to open Balet &amp; Albert Inc.
Marc Balet, formerly of Marc Balet Inc., is creative director, and Rick Albert, formerly president at Henszey &amp; Albert, now Henszey &amp; Company, is director of new-business development and account management.


INSIDE
Japan's Fuel for Fear?
Although Greenpeace vows to stop it, a ship carrying plutonium is heading to Japan, raising talk about the intentions of a country that has sworn never to exploit the atom for anything but peaceful purposes.
Page A6.
Arrest in New Jersey Slaying
A 23-year-old ex-convict was charged with the kidnapping and murder of an Edison, N.J., woman who vanished while on a shopping trip with her 3-year-old daughter.
Page B1.
Danger of Feeding Somalia
Relief organizations have pulled out the workers who have been putting food in the mouths of starving Somalis because of objections to the lack of protection for the workers.
Page A3.
This Is Brooks Brothers?
Faded sports shirts, stirrup pants and leather varsity jackets now hang alongside rep ties and button-down shirts, a sign of the subdued metamorphosis at the clothier.
Page D1.


Emotions Rise on U.S. Inquiry in Crown Heights
As emotions continued to heat up yesterday over a Federal investigation into the killing of Yankel Rosenbaum, law-enforcement officials said F.B.I. agents and Justice Department lawyers were just beginning a complicated analysis of what charges, if any, could be brought against a Brooklyn man acquitted of the slaying in a state court last month.
The determination will hinge on several factors:


Review/Music; Gathering the Forces To Keep Tradition Alive
The Mahler Eighth Symphony, in all its extravagance, is not a work one might expect an amateur choir to tackle.
For one thing, it means gathering several subsidiary choirs -- including hundreds of children, whose sound must have an angelic purity -- to say nothing of a large orchestra.
And those are just the logistical problems.
The real challenge is making the work's diverse elements crystallize into the mystical world Mahler evoked.
But Charles Dodsley Walker, the founder of the Canterbury Choral Society, has adopted the habit of celebrating his choir's anniversaries by gathering the necessary forces and leading the Mahler Eighth at Carnegie Hall every five years.
This year the chorus, which is resident at the Church of the Holy Rest, at Fifth Avenue and 90th Street, is 40 years old, and at its performance last Tuesday evening, a listener had the feeling that Mr.
Walker is on entirely comfortable terms with this huge piece.


Giants Win the Battle but Lose Their Warrior
On a day when their offense was stopped and their best, and perhaps history's best, defensive player was sidelined for the season and probably forever, the Giants won their third straight game.
They beat the Green Bay Packers, 27-7, because the defense and special teams made one big play after another.
The 72,038 spectators at Giants Stadium will always remember this as the day Lawrence Taylor ruptured the Achilles' tendon connecting his right heel and calf, one of the worst injuries an athlete can suffer.


Ohio State's Cooper Tunes Out Some Static
JOHN COOPER is tired of what he calls irresponsible journalism concerning his future as the Ohio State football coach.
"I want to say one thing and then I'm out of here," Cooper said angrily as he closed a news conference on Saturday after the nationally ranked Buckeyes beat Minnesota, 17-0.
"I am not resigning next week."


Supermarket Faces Federal Complaints In Child-Labor Case
The Labor Department is preparing to bring one of the largest child-labor complaints ever against a supermarket chain, department officials said Saturday.
The officials said the complaints would charge the Belgian-owned chain, Food Lion Inc., with allowing teen-agers to work around hazardous equipment, like meat slicers, and making teen-agers work longer hours than allowed under Federal child-labor laws.


Review/Dance; Reconciling the Contradictions of Japan
Those who are fascinated by Japan as a country that can make flower-arranging an art and also produce kamikaze pilots are not, apparently, restricted to the West.
Saburo Teshigawara, an experimental Japanese choreographer, seems to be wrestling with similar issues.
These contradictions are embodied in the hard-edged and willowy currents of movement that run alternately through his own extraordinary dancing.
Part robot, part fish, he appears buffeted by an invisible wind.


Piniella Goes West
LOU PINIELLA is expected to be named manager of the Seattle Mariners as early as today, according to published reports.
The Seattle Post-Intelligencer reported on Saturday that Piniella had accepted a three-year offer with an option for a fourth year.
Piniella spent two days in Seattle last week discussing the manager's job with team executives and made no secret of his interest.
"They've got a good organization led by a good baseball man, Woody Woodward, and a group of local owners who are committed to winning," he said.


Review/Opera; A Spectacle, Colorful And Tragic, From China
Even by the lofty standard the Taipei Theater has set during its brief existence, the three-week appearance of Li Bao-chun and His Peking Opera Troupe is something special.
Mr.
Li, a commanding virtuoso in all of the crafts that make up his art (musical, dramatic, balletic and gymnastic), is playing two of the most famous roles in Chinese tradition: Lin Chung and the mischievous Monkey King.
In "The Story of Lin Chung," the title character, a well-meaning instructor of the Royal Guards, becomes entrapped in a tragic series of circumstances culminating in the suicide of his wife, brought on by the crude advances of the son of Lin's military superior.
Mr.
Li's portrayal on Thursday evening was brilliant, with an expressiveness that made the language barrier seem trifling.
Chen Mei-lan played Lin's wife touchingly.


House Leaders and Freshmen Agree To Try to Avoid Carter Era's Failures
Freshman Democrats and House leaders met behind closed doors today to exhort each other to work together with the Clinton Administration and to avoid repeating the conflicts of Jimmy Carter's Presidency.
In the first of three regional meetings with their freshman class of 63 or 64 (depending on the outcome of a vote count in one district) the leaders heard two California newcomers, Jane Harman and Lynn Schenk, recall their frustrating days working for the Carter Administration.
Those difficulties, they said, had to be avoided.


Results Plus
TENNIS Becker Tops Forget Boris Becker won a battle of aces in beating Guy Forget, 7-6 (7-3), 6-3, 3-6, 6-3, yesterday and earning his third Paris Open title.
Becker finished off three days of superb tennis that reminded observers of the form that helped him become No. 1 in the world in 1991.
In the quarterfinals, Becker, who had won three other tournaments this year but whose ranking had fallen to No. 9, beat the current No. 1 player, Jim Courier.
Then the German defeated Goran Ivanisevic, the hottest player on the circuit, in the semifinals.
Yesterday, Forget, the defending champion, and Becker had 21 aces each.
Becker won $297,000 for his 35th career title; Forget won $159,700. (AP) Seles Captures Ninth Title: Monica Seles, who didn't drop a set all week, used blistering returns to defeat Martina Navratilova, 6-3, 6-4, in the $350,000 Bank of the West Classic in Oakland, Calif., as she won her ninth title of the year.
Meeting Navratilova in the final of this tournament for the third consecutive year, Seles won for the second time.
The world's No. 1 player has established her dominance over Navratilova, 18 years her senior, by winning five of the last seven matches they have played. (AP) GOLF U.S.
Edges Sweden Fred Couples and Davis Love 3d both sank birdie putts on the 18th hole yesterday, giving the United States team a one-shot victory over defending champion Sweden in the World Cup of Golf in Madrid.
It was a heartbreaking setback for the Swedes, who had taken a two-shot lead to the 17th tee after Per-Ulrik Johansson, who shot a 65, knocked in a 45-foot putt for an eagle on the par-5 16th hole.
The putt offset a bogey by Anders Forsbrand, who finished with a 70, and a birdie by Couples, who matched Johansson's 65.
But Love hit a 7-iron to 5 feet and then putted out for a birdie on the par-3 17th, reducing the Swedish margin to one, then nailed a pitching wedge to 16 feet on the par-4 18th, while Couples hit a wedge to within 2 feet.
Love made his tricky downhill putt to put the pressure on Johansson, who missed for birdie from 7 feet, while Forsbrand saved par after landing his approach in a bunker.(AP) King Surges to Victory: A surprised Betsy King caught Helen Alfredsson with birdies on the last two holes of regulation play, then beat her with another on the fourth playoff hole yesterday in the Mazda Japan Classic in Hanno, Japan, the final Ladies Professional Golf Association Tour event of the year.
The 27-year-old Alfredsson, the L.P.G.A.'s rookie of the year, had opportunities to win and tie on the final playoff holes, but missed short birdie putts.
The 37-year-old King earned $97,500. (AP) AUTO RACING Berger Wins Finale Gerhard Berger survived a fuel scare and held off hard-charging Michael Schumacher to win the Australian Grand Prix, the season-ending Formula One race, in Adelaide yesterday.
But Berger's victory, by less than a second in his final race for McLaren Honda, was nearly overshadowed by a spectacular crash in which 1992 world champion Nigel Mansell was rear-ended hard by longtime nemesis Ayrton Senna as they approached a turn on lap 19 of the 81-lap event.
The winning time on the 2.349-mile street circuit was 1 hour 46 minutes 54.786 seconds. (AP) BASEBALL Griffey Stars in Japan  Ken Griffey Jr. drove in two runs with a homer and a double, leading a team of major league all-stars to a 4-3 victory in Tokyo yesterday over its Japanese counterpart in the finale of an eight-game series.
Detroit's Cecil Fielder added three hits as the major leaguers ended the series with a 6-1-1 record.
Mark Grace of the Chicago Cubs was named the series' most valuble player.
Jack McDowell (2-0) of the Chicago White Sox pitched seven innings yesterday.
Duane Ward of the Toronto Blue Jays pitched the final two for the save.
Playing before 47,000 at Tokyo Dome, Griffey, of the Seattle Mariners, hit a home run with two out in the first inning off Yoichi Okabayashi (0-1) of the Yakult Swallows. (AP) HORSE RACING 'Spree' Still Unbeaten  Our Shopping Spree, ridden by Chris Antley, came from just off the pace to win by 1 1/4 lengths yesterday in the $88,950 East View Stakes for 2-year-old fillies at Aqueduct to continue her undefeated streak.
The daughter of Talc-Angel Dance remained perfect in four career starts.
It also was her third straight stakes victory.
Our Shopping Spree covered seven furlongs on the fast track in 1:251/5 to earn $53,370 for Sandandsable Farm.
The winner returned $3.20, $2.40 and $2.20 for $2 across the board. (AP) HOCKEY Blackhawks Get Even  Five months after being swept in the Stanley Cup finals, the Blackhawks found a way beat the Pittsburgh Penguins, 7-2, last night in Chicago.
Michel Goulet had three goals for his 15th career hat trick as the Blackhawks handed goalie Tom Barrasso his first loss in 13 games this season.
Goulet, without a goal since Oct. 10, moved into 14th place on the career list with 514 goals, passing Hall of Famer Gil Perreault. (AP)
Flames 5, Nordiques 5: Gord Roberts scored his second goal of the game with 26 seconds remaining in the third period, and Calgary stretched its unbeaten streak to five games in a tie at Quebec. (AP)


Staying Warm May Take Extra Fuel This Winter
People coming home from work in the dark in the last week or so may have started to wonder what divides "crisp autumn weather" from just plain cold.
It is not just the imagination; winter has a headstart this year and so has heating-fuel consumption.
So far this heating season, which began July 1, the weather in New York and much of the Northeast has been almost 37 percent colder than usual.
That may not mean much now for the fuel-oil industry, because the bulk of the heating season is still ahead, but many forecasters are predicting a colder-than-usual winter.


Mandela Appeals to All Blacks to End Attacks
Nelson Mandela made an impassioned plea today to his followers and rivals alike to end the fratricidal violence that has torn the predominantly Zulu province of Natal and disrupted South Africa's transition to democracy.
Speaking at the funeral of Reggie Hadebe, an African National Congress leader who was gunned down after leaving a Natal peace conference on Oct. 27, Mr.
Mandela urged A.N.C. supporters to forswear violence.


Calvin Graham, 62, Who Fought in War As a 12-Year-Old
Calvin L. Graham, who gained attention as the boy who lied so he could enlist in the Navy at age 12 during World War II, died Friday in his house in Fort Worth.
He was 62 years old.
He died of heart failure, said his stepson, Ronnie O'Donley.
The young Mr.
Graham was a gunner on the U.S.S.
South Dakota while it was buffeted by the Japanese in the Battle of Guadalcanal in 1942.
He was struck in the jaw and mouth by shrapnel while his battleship suffered 47 enemy hits.
Though seriously wounded, he helped pull other crew members to safety.


Islanders' New Nasty Boy Must Sit Out
When they try to break a four-game losing streak on Thursday in Philadelphia, the Islanders will be without Darius Kasparaitis, their rookie defenseman from Lithuania, who will be suspended for one game because ofhis second major stick foul of the season.
The penalty, for high-sticking Tampa Bay's Mikael Andersson, occurred moments before the end of the game Saturday night at Nassau Coliseum, a 6-5 victory in overtime for the Lightning.
Kasparaitis was cited by the referee, Richard Trottier, but the penalty was delayed because the Lightning had possession of the puck.


Bettina Goldstein, Allen Kramer
Bettina Ruth Goldstein, the owner of an advertising agency in Woodmere, L.I., and Allen Kramer, a lawyer in New York, were married yesterday.
Rabbi Milton E. Kramer of Brooklyn, the bridegroom's father, performed the ceremony at Abigael's restaurant in Cedarhurst, L.I.
Mrs.
Kramer, 36 years old, owns Creative Effects Inc.
She graduated from Queens College and received an M.B.A. from New York University.
She is the daughter of Dina Wallenstein of Forest Hills, Queens, and the late Morris Wallenstein.
Her father was the chief executive officer of Harco Chemical Coatings Inc., a manufacturer of industrial finishes in Brooklyn.
Her previous marriage ended in divorce, as did the bridegroom's.


For the Rockies and Marlins: At Last, the Envelopes, Please
Sometime this afternoon, the Florida Marlins and the Colorado Rockies will experience their most exciting moment since their owners found out they had won the National League's expansion race.
They will receive the 15-man protected lists of the existing 26 major league clubs, and they can begin preparing seriously for the Nov. 17 draft.
After months of anxiety over the wisdom of their deliberations, the 26 clubs must submit their protected lists by 2 P.M. today.
The commissioner's office then will forward the lists to the Marlins and the Rockies so the new kids on the block will know whom they can't have.


Change in Orpheus Concert
The Orpheus Chamber Orchestra has withdrawn the Shostakovich Symphony No. 14 from the program of its Saturday concert at Carnegie Hall because the bass Paul Plishka, and later his replacement, Sergei Koptchak, canceled their engagements.
The orchestra has substituted a shorter Shostakovich work, the Symphony for Strings, and added Mahler's "Ruckert" Lieder for the soprano Martina Arroyo, who was to have sung in the 14th Symphony.
Also on the program are Haydn's Symphony No. 73 and Beethoven's "Creatures of Prometheus." Tickets are $11 to $36 at the box office or through Carnegie Charge: (212) 247-7800.


Review/Drama; The Summer of '63: A Teen-Age Girl's Coming of Age at Camp
Four teen-age girls gather in their cabin at summer camp, giggling and comparing notes on boyfriends.
Cory, who is a heavy reader and would-be author, remains standoffish until she notices that her counselor is staring at her.
It takes no leap of the imagination to diagnose the reason for the counselor's interest.
In Barbara Graham's "Camp Paradox," the footlockers are crammed with detritus from adolescent fiction.
In the course of the play (at the WPA Theater), Cory comes of age in the summer of 1963 and has her first sexual experience while saying things like "I was a trespasser on foreign soil without a map."
The play's one claim to distinction, or at least to difference, is that Cory's initial liaison is not with a boy in a neighboring camp but with that counselor, a 28-year-old lesbian still sulking after an aborted romance with a woman during her college days.
Except for the older woman's unhappiness, it is difficult to see what draws her into an affair with the young girl, with whom she apparently has nothing in common.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; In Light of Election Results, Companies Stress 'Change'
THE winds of change are blowing through the advertising world.
Drawing inspiration from Bill Clinton's electoral victory, marketers are moving to associate their products with the craving for change that Mr.
Clinton tapped into so effectively.
"You will see a lot of people jump on the change bandwagon," said Adam Hanft, president of Slater, Hanft, Martin, a New York ad agency.
"Marketers, being sort of vultures of culture circle around and see what they need to leap on next."


A Vote For the First Kid
I am feeling a little post-election smugness, because I endorsed Clinton early on.
When I say Clinton, I mean it in the loosest way.
Actually, I mean Chelsea, and her father only in the sense that if he raised her he's got something good going on there.
It doesn't matter whom I endorsed, of course, because I'm too young to vote.
Because of this minor hindrance, it's dubious that any President will directly champion my interests or even understand what they are.
Politicians' ideas of youth are limited to an amorphous rhetorical device, a first cousin of "the future," if you will.
People my age are the reason to uphold rigid concepts of ideal family life, of sexual morality.
It's never narrow-mindedness; it's "Do we really want our children to grow up with this?"


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-9  RIOT DISRUPTS RALLY FOR PEACE
Leaders calling for Germany to unite to combat neo-Nazi violence against foreigners became the victims at a Berlin rally attended by 350,000 people when hundreds of anarchists flung eggs and tomatoes at the speakers.
A1  JAPAN'S CARGO OF WHISPERS
The largest shipment of plutonium ever, en route from France to Japan, has inspired whispers and protests, although Tokyo asserts the nuclear material will be used exclusively for peaceful purposes.
A6


Essay; Telephone Traps
Boasting over the telephone to a potential contributor, the head of the pro-Israel lobby here made some wild claims of having much clout with the Clinton camp.
Unknown to the lobbyist, the caller, one Harry Katz of New York, was secretly tape-recording the conversation.
When the embarrassing tape was turned over to a newspaper, the foolish lobbyist was forced to resign.


Victim of Near Fatal Beating Is Scheduled to Testify at Trial
Alfred Jermaine Ewell, the black high school football star who was nearly beaten to death by a group of white youths on an Atlantic Beach boardwalk 18 months ago, is scheduled to appear as the final witness this week in the trial of the young man charged with leading the assault.
Mr.
Ewell, who is now 19 years old, was at first given little chance of surviving the attack.
He lay comatose for a week, with his head fractured in several places and his brain swollen, affecting his breathing.
Fragments of his skull were wired together last October and a blood clot was removed from his right eye in March.


Too Soon to Hail Throwaway Diaper's Victory; Who Pays for Studies?
To the Editor:
You neglect to mention that the chart accompanying your Oct. 23 front-page article comparing the environmental impact of cloth and disposable diapers draws its information from a study financed by Procter &amp; Gamble.
While the source of financing does not guarantee bias, analyses of the relative environmental and economic costs of disposable diapers versus cloth diapers are based on numerous assumptions that leave room for -- and even require -- subjectivity by the researchers.


A Day Along the Hudson: From Leaf Watching to Rock Climbing


Equity Issues This Week
The following equity offerings are expected this week: Breed Technologies Inc., Boonton Township, N.J., initial public offering of 5.4 million common shares, 4.4 million in the United States.
Lazard Freres.
Chiles Offshore Corp., 27 million shares.
Salomon Brothers.
Kranzco Realty Trust, Conshohocken, Pa., initial public offering of 6 million shares, amended from 5.5 million.
Smith Barney, Harris Upham.
Media Vision, Fremont, Calif., 3 million common shares.
Montgomery Securities.
Neoprobe Corp., Columbus, Ohio, initial public offering of 1.5 million units.
Each unit consists of 1 common share and 1 class E warrant.
GKN Securities.
RCG International Corp., New York City, initial public offering of 3.68 million common shares.
Paine Webber.
Santa Fe Energy Resources Inc., Houston, an initial public offering of 5.725 million depository units-secured principal energy receipts units.
Each unit represents an interest in all of the following: a Santa Fe Energy Trust, a 15-year liquidating royalty trust, and an interest in a 15-year zero-coupon Treasury security.
Lehman Brothers.
Scana Corp., 2 million common shares.
Paine Webber.
Transworld Home Healthcare Inc., Hawthorne, N.Y., initial public offering of 1.6 million units.
Each unit consists of 1 common share and 1 redeemable warrant.
RAS Securities.
Union Texas Petroleum Holdings Inc., 30 million common shares, 24 million in the United States.
Goldman, Sachs.
Warehouse Auto Centers Inc., Rochester, initial public offering of 1 million units.
Each unit consists of 1 common share and 1 warrant.
AMR Securities.
Source: MCM CorporateWatch.


New York's Chief Judge Prepares To Step Aside in Wake of Arrest
Judge Sol Wachtler was preparing to step aside yesterday as Chief Judge of New York State's highest court as colleagues and friends struggled to sort out what caused the bizarre behavior that led to his arrest on charges that he blackmailed a woman who had broken off an affair with him.
The tumultuous upheavals at the State Court of Appeals, one of the premier state appellate courts in the country, were evident last night.
A statement announcing Judge Wachtler's plan to step aside temorarily, because he was "currently unable to exercise the duties" of his office, was released by the Court of Appeals but retracted 15 minutes later.


'Home Alone' Contest Set
"Home Alone 2 . . . Lost in New York," will be the subject of a joint promotion by Bloomingdale's, The New York Times's sales promotion department, 20th Century Fox, and its advertising agency, Young &amp; Rubicam, the companies announced yesterday.
The promotion for the sequel to the 1990 hit movie, which is to be released later this month, will feature a contest in The Times involving Kevin, the youngster played in the movie by Macaulay Culkin.


Death Penalty Sought in Slaying of Edison Woman
The 23-year-old former convict accused of kidnapping and killing a 35-year-old woman was ordered held today on $1 million bail, and prosecutors said they would seek the death penalty in the case.
His hands manacled to a chain around his waist, the suspect, Scott R. Johnson, listened impassively during his arraignment in Superior Court as the authorities told Judge Robert P. Figarotta that they planned to seek the death penalty in the slaying of Gail F. Shollar last Tuesday night.


Capitalism Thins the Ranks of China's Rulers; Radio Redundancy
To the Editor:
"An Asian Voice for Democracy" (editorial, Oct. 20) states that a new broadcast service to Asia should be "independent of Voice of America, thus assuring a diversity of voices."
This proposal comes under the heading of expensive redundancy.
There are more than 300 hours of foreign broadcasting a week into China by the Americans, British, French, Germans, Russians and others.
Millions of Chinese listen to the Voice of America's broadcasts in Mandarin, Cantonese, Tibetan and English.
During the terrible days of Tiananmen Square, Voice of America news was broadcast from loudspeakers into the square to the students, who knew that the world was watching.


Before You Let a Parrot in Your Life
To the Editor:
As a pet parrot owner, I applaud Congress for passing a bill to ban the import of many parrot species (Oct. 20, Science Times).
However, you do not discuss the atrocities committed in the exotic bird black market, such as the practice of stuffing parrots under car hubcaps crossing the Mexican border.
If the thief is lucky, one bird might survive the ordeal.
One cannot imagine the suffering endured by these intelligent creatures.
This problem at the Mexican border must be addressed.
It is illegal to sell imported birds in New York and New Jersey.
Other states should pass such legislation.
Prospective parrot buyers should be very cautious about the origin of the bird in question.
A closed band on the leg of a bird usually indicates it has been domestically bred.
Anyone who owns parrots knows that domestically bred birds make much better pets than imports, which go through hell in the importing.


AIDS Research Needed On Building Immunity
To the Editor:
Re "Scientists Assail Congress on Bill for Money to Test an AIDS Drug" (front page, Oct. 26): Instead of circumventing peer review with funds for the trial of one company's vaccine, Congress should supplement the $20 million and let the National Institutes of Health use it to guide study in therapeutic vaccines.
These boost the immune systems of people infected with H.I.V.
Several have demonstrated safety, and years of experience show they increase antibodies and cellular defense, and reduce the load of virus.
PAUL R. EPSTEIN, M.D.
Medical Director, Multidisciplinary AIDS Program, Cambridge Hospital Harvard Medical School Cambridge, Mass., Oct. 26, 1992


Clearing Firm's Worst Nightmare
Lee B. Stern was on his way to Florida on Oct. 22, far from the action, when Darrell M. Zimmerman strode onto the floor of the Chicago Board of Trade and fired off a barrage of orders for Treasury bond futures and options that confused and jolted bond markets around the world.
Despite not being there at the time, the 65-year-old Mr.
Stern has become the focal point of much of the resulting controversy.
Stern &amp; Company, his family firm, had agreed earlier this year to process Mr.
Zimmerman's trades and guarantee settlement of resulting debts to other traders.
But when the call came at the end of the day's trading demanding millions of dollars to cover Mr.
Zimmerman's liabilities, Mr.
Stern balked.


San Francisco? Tampa Bay? Fog Lifts, and Owners Vote
The fight over the San Francisco Giants intensified today on the eve of the baseball owners' decision on the team's future home.
Faced with an uphill battle after a belated entry in the bidding, the group of prospective owners who want to keep the Giants in San Francisco submitted an amended offer to the National League.
The submission came before the major leagues' executive council and ownership committee met today to discuss the issue.


BRIEFS
Debt  *
Arrow Electronics Inc., Melville, L.I., filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission for a public offering of $75 million of convertible subordinated debentures due in 2002 through Donaldson, Lufkin &amp; Jenrette Securities Corp.
*
CIT Group Holdings Inc., New York, owned by Dai-ichi Kangyo Bank and Chemical Banking Corp., is offering $100 million of medium-term floating-rate notes due in 1993.
The securities, initially priced at par, will float at prices 245 basis points less than the prime rate, currently at 6 percent.
The issue is noncallable and rated A-1 by Moody's Investors Service Inc. and A+ by Standard &amp; Poor's Corp.


When Cars Are No Longer Havens From Fear
Sarah White of Scarsdale, N.Y., always thought she was being sensibly cautious, waiting in her locked car for someone else to appear for an evening writing class at a Briarcliff church before crossing the unlighted parking lot.
Now she isn't so sure that her locked car will keep her safe.


Canseco Is Content
JOSE CANSECO has decided not to exercise his option to demand a trade and will return to the Texas Rangers next season.
He could have become a free agent and forfeited the remainder of his contract, $13.6 million through 1995, had the Rangers not been able to deal him.


This Is No Joke (Really): They Love the Browns
SANDY HARRISON realized what day it was when she saw her husband, Roger, don his orange socks.
Dean Morgan put on his favorite Sunday shirt.
So did Joe Bellofatto, Dave Schuster and Howard Honigman.
Jay Bernstein wore a particular cap
and
shirt.
As did John Lamb and Chyai Mulberg, who brought her daughter, who arrived on a similar day 410/12 years ago.
They all drive familiar routes to their usual tables here at Bobby Valentine's Sports Gallery Cafe.
In scores of communities across the nation, the scene is quietly duplicated. (Well, it's not quiet in their special rooms, but we'll get to that.)


Summer Sanders Honor
SUMMER SANDERS, a Stanford University swimmer who won four medals in the Olympic Games in Barcelona, Spain, won the 1992 Babe Zaharias female amateur athlete award yesterday.
The other finalists were GAIL DEVERS, an Olympic gold-medal runner, SHANNON MILLER a 15-year-old Olympic gymnast, and a second-time finalist, VICKI GOETZE, a golfer at the University of Georgia. (AP)


Tartabull May Stay In Pinstripes
The Yankees yesterday completed their 15-man protected list for the National League expansion draft, submitted it to the commissioner's office, then vanished.
None of the club's top officials were available to discuss the list or whether the Yankees had protected Danny Tartabull, the highest-paid player in their history.
Although the Yankees were tight-lipped about their list, a person familiar with the club's approach said General Manager Gene Michael had called Dennis Gilbert, Tartabull's agent, Friday and informed him that his client would be protected.
Because Tartabull missed 39 games last season and is slated to earn $19 million over the next four seasons, the Yankees considered exposing the expensive and often injured outfielder in the draft, which will take place next Tuesday.
Gilbert said teams wanted the lists to remain secretive, so he declined to discuss Tartabull's status.


How F.B.I. Closed In on Top New York Judge
Early Saturday morning, Federal agents sat in three cars in Manhasset, L.I., their eyes trained on the doorway of Judge Sol Wachtler's home.
Other agents were positioned a few blocks away, ready to pick up his trail.
Dozens more were stationed in Manhattan, along with top officials from the Federal Bureau of Investigation.
Several hours later, Judge Wachtler, the Chief Judge of the New York State Court of Appeals, was pulled over on the Long Island Expressway in his dark state-issued sedan and handcuffed.
By then, a small army of agents -- roughly 80 -- had taken part in his arrest.


Review/Theater; Marching Out of the Closet, Into History
Some visionary playwrights want to change the world.
Some want to revolutionize the theater.
Tony Kushner, the remarkably gifted 36-year-old author of "Angels in America," is that rarity of rarities: a writer who has the promise to do both.
As a political statement, "Angels in America," a two-part, seven-hour epic subtitled "A Gay Fantasia on National Themes," is nothing less than a fierce call for gay Americans to seize the strings of power in the war for tolerance and against AIDS.
But this play, by turns searing and comic and elegiac, is no earthbound ideological harangue.
Though set largely in New York and Washington during the Reagan-Bush 80's, "Angels in America" sweeps through locales as varied as Salt Lake City and the Kremlin, and through high-flying styles ranging from piquant camp humor to religious hallucination to the ornate poetic rage of classic drama.


No More Hmmms About Hems
Confused about what length skirt to settle into for spring?
Do not worry. It is a decision you may not have to make.


The Case of the Frustrated Shopper
A COLLEAGUE went to the local computer store and ordered a Macintosh Powerbook 145.
The store took his money and said delivery would be in three to four weeks.
Five weeks passed, then six.
He complained, and was told the Model 145's were "seriously backordered." He got the same story from a couple of other computer stores.
And it's not just Powerbooks.
Shoppers trying to find Compaq Prolinea machines, I.B.M.
Valuepoints, Dell Dimensions or any other popular computers often find that they must wait weeks, and sometimes months, for their orders to be filled.
Supplies of color monitors, hard disk drives and power supplies are also "constrained," as salesmen like to say when the elves have not been working fast enough.


Germans Emphasize the Non-Rioters at Rally
Chancellor Helmut Kohl, President Richard von Weizsacker and other leaders insisted today that despite disruption by left-wing rioters, Sunday's peaceful demonstration by an estimated 350,000 people had shown that an overwhelming majority of Germans condemn violence against foreigners.
The images that went around the world, showing the President trying to speak behind a phalanx of police as a hail of eggs, tomatoes and paint bombs rained down, "do not show the important thing," Mr. von Weizsacker said.


Fight Behind the Fight: Bowe Vs. the 2 Soups
Picture an undisputed world heavyweight champion who conducts his business as if the governing bodies of the sport do not exist.
Could it happen?


STATE DEPARTMENT STUDIED PEROT FILE
The State Department, which came under criticism shortly before the election for having searched the passport files of Gov.
Bill Clinton and his mother, was disclosed today to have conducted a similar search of Ross Perot's file.
The search of the Clinton files embarrassed the Bush Administration in the closing days of the campaign because it was widely seen as an effort by the Administration to use its resources to find ammunition against a political opponent.


THE TRANSITION: The New Team; Anti-Smoking Groups Question Clinton Transition Chief's Ties to Tobacco Company
Anti-smoking groups voiced concern today that the head of the Democratic transition team, Vernon E. Jordan, serves on the board of a tobacco company, saying the association could influence decisions on health-related appointments like the Secretary of Health and Human Services and the Surgeon General.
"On the surface, it obviously raises eyebrows," said Alan Davis, chairman of the Coalition on Smoking or Health, which is made up of the American Cancer Society, the American Heart Association and the American Lung Association.
"He's going to be confronted daily with this dilemma: 'Do I serve the interests of health or do I serve the interests of the tobacco industry?' "


Rangers Embarrassed, Messier Angry
Mark Messier isn't happy.
And according to his comments last night at Madison Square Garden, neither are any of his teammates.
Messier doesn't think the Rangers' system is working.
He thinks there are too many line changes.
Too much rotation.
Not enough chemistry.
He thinks, quite frankly, that it is high time the Rangers' organization made a change.


Knicks vs. Nets: Get Set For First Shots of the War
Whenever the Knicks play the Nets, players on both sides talk a tough game.
Sometimes, they don't even wait until the game starts.
Take Knicks forward Anthony Mason, who was busy today anticipating Tuesday night's showdown against the Nets at Madison Square Garden.
What did Mason think about the Nets' signing of Rick Mahorn today?


Prospects for the Elderly Differ Widely by Sex
As life expectancy increases and the time from retirement to old age stretches out, men and women find themselves with markedly different prospects, according to a new report from the Census Bureau.
Men tend to die earlier than women, but if they survive, men are more likely to be healthy, self-sufficient and living with their families rather than alone.


Successors Are Sought to an Irreplaceable Giant
The Giants, trying to fill an unfillable hole, began the post-Lawrence Taylor era today with several moves.
Coach Ray Handley said Corey Miller and Kanavis McGhee would share Taylor's job at right (or weakside) outside linebacker.
Both players said they were told that Miller would play in running situations, generally first and second down, and McGhee in passing situations, generally third down.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  And Now, It Counts
The European Community Championship in Antwerp, Belgium, for years merely an exhibition, became a legitimate tournament yesterday and celebrated with a series of tight three-setters that had seeded players Michael Chang and Richard Krajicek fully extended.
Chang, seeded second, needed two and a half hours to get past Aleksandr Volkov of Russia, 6-3, 6-7 (2-7), 6-3.
The sixth-seeded Krajicek, of the Netherlands, beat Wally Masur of Australia, 6-3, 4-6, 6-2.looked like an easy winner before a lapse of concentration allowed Volkov, ranked 17th in the world, a second-set tie breaker, which he won easily. (AP) Martinez Advances: Fifth-seeded Conchita Martinez of Spain advanced to the second round of the Virginia Slims of Philadelphia tournament by defeating Nathalie Herreman of France, 6-4, 6-1, yesterday.
Amanda Coetzer of South Africa advanced when Shaun Stafford quit after the first set because of an injury.
Coetzer will play Arantxa Sanchez Vicario, the third-seeded player, who drew a bye. (AP)


COMPANY NEWS
ASEA BROWN BOVERI INC., Stamford, Conn., said two of its power plant systems businesses had been awarded a $72 million contract to supply power-generation components for a 236-megawatt electricity plant at the Lakewood Co-generation site in Lakewood, N.J.
ERICSSON, Stockholm, has been awarded an $11 million contract by India for the delivery and installation of the company's AXE digital switching telecommunications equipment.


Veterans' Journal; Back to a Valley of Death, With Love
Ernie Savage, sergeant 1st class, United States Army, retired, was having a hard time of it.
His voice kept choking up and the words just wouldn't come.
"Well," he stammered, "well, I'm, I'm just going to keep on till I finish. I've been in a worse place."


Corrections
An article yesterday about a meeting of new members of Congress identified a California Representative-elect incompletely in some copies.
He is Dan Hamburg.


Colombia Is Racked by Guerrilla Armies


Guerrillas Are Imperiling Colombia's Oil Bonanza
A recent series of attacks by two left-wing guerrilla armies is spreading anxiety in the Colombian Government, endangering the economic future of the country and clouding its hopes to become one of the Western Hemisphere's major oil exporters in the 1990's.
Responding to the threat, the Government has strengthened its armed forces and dispatched them to strategic areas to try to stop the violence.


Capitalism Thins the Ranks of China's Rulers
To the Editor:
A careful study of the complete roster of the newly elected Central Committee of the Chinese Communist Party at its 14th Congress (front page, Oct. 20) shows a startling fact: few of the "princes" -- the children of China's top leaders -- are on the list, not even, widely expected as shoo-ins, Chen Yuan, the son of Chen Yun; Deng Nan, the daughter of Deng Xiaoping, and Wang Jun, the son of Gen.
Wang Zhen.
To Beijing insiders, this has not been surprising since the news that Bo Xicheng has stepped down as head of China's National Tourism Administration to go into private enterprise.
As the son of Bo Yibo, another octogenarian leader, Bo Xicheng has found it more profitable to be in business than in government, despite all the perquisites of the chief of a national travel agency.
Therein lies the conventional wisdom among the princes: use family influence and official connections to engage in a business sure to succeed.
This is known, among cynical commoners, as "guandao" (fallen officials).


CHRONICLE
It's never too soon to watch Dad on television, at least not for ISABELLA HOLMES RIVERA, who was born on Saturday evening to GERALDO RIVERA and his wife, C. C. DYER.
Mr.
Rivera said he and his wife arrived at Lenox Hill Hospital just as back-to-back shows in which he played himself were being broadcast on NBC-TV.


Classical Music in Review
Prague Chamber Orchestra  Avery Fisher Hall
Although orchestras that perform without conductors are still novelties in the United States, they are more plentiful in Europe, where the tradition of midsize orchestras taking cues from their concertmasters goes back to Baroque times.
On Sunday evening, the 36-player Prague Chamber Orchestra, founded in 1952, demonstrated both the benefits and pitfalls of this kind of orchestral democracy.


Boy in Divorce Suit Wins Right to Choose His Lawyer
An 11-year-old boy has won the right to have his own lawyer represent him in a court battle his parents are waging over his custody.
The unusual issue involving a child's lawyer in a divorce dispute grew out of the boy's desire to "fire" a court-appointed law guardian, Goldah Magill, with whom he did not get along.
He asked to be represented instead by Martin Guggenheim, a professor at the New York University School of Law.


Evangelicals and Taxes
To the Editor:
Re "Evangelicals Gain With Covert Candidates" (front page, Oct. 27): The Federal tax code, which confers tax exemption for religious organizations, withdraws it if the group participates in any political campaign of a candidate for public office.
This law is on the books.
All it needs is enforcement.
ALAN PRIGAL  New York, Oct. 27, 1992 The writer is a lawyer.


In Provinces, Artists Learn Self-Sufficiency Is Price of Freedom
Bouncing along in a used right-hand-drive Toyota on the pothole-ridden streets of this, the capital of the Ural Mountains region, one passes a movie theater playing "Vampires of Beverly Hills" and "Phantom II" as an American rapper boasts from the car radio about how bad he is and warns us not to disrespect his brother.
As in Moscow and St.
Petersburg, Russia's outlying capitals sometimes seem dizzy with change and awash in Western trivia.
Yet like the provincial cities themselves, more tightly run and less rampantly chaotic than the centers, the arts in Perm, which is on the borderline between European Russia and Asian Russia, Voronezh in southwestern Russia, and Novosibirsk and Irkutsk in Siberia actually appear steadier and more settled than the anarchic volatility of the western Russian metropolises.
Points of Interest Indeed
Many of these cities have fascinating cultural histories.
Voronezh, today a shabby but still picturesque city in the midst of the Russian agricultural heartland, was the first stop for Stalinist exiles in the 1930's.
They were detained there while evidence of further crimes against the state was sought, and if no greater sins turned up, they were allowed to stay.
The result was a disproportionate number of lively Moscow and Leningrad artists and intellectuals, who fostered local culture.


No Ordinary Reunion; Berlin Stories From Special Alumni
At home, fathers were arrested and uncles hidden from the authorities.
Visas were hunted with desperation and valises readied for uncertain journeys.
But at school, life went on with an insistent veneer of normality.
In the roiling terror of Nazi-ruled Berlin of the 1930's, the Kaliski School, founded by a plucky young woman of 23 who simply wanted to start her own school, served as an island of safety for Jewish boys and girls.
Yet it also had to prepare them for the lives they would lead as refugees, teaching them to peel potatoes and polish shoes as well as algebra and chemistry.


Bridge
In some circumstances it takes an angel to smile sweetly at your partner and keep your temper.
Suppose you make a risky and inspired opening lead and coax the declarer on to a losing track.
Unfortunately your partner fails to appreciate what is going on and ruins the defense.
What do you say to him in the post-mortem?
On the diagramed deal, played many years ago, North-South bid to a normal four spades, and were apparently headed for an overtrick.
But Giorgio Belladonna, a star of Italy's famed Blue Team of yesteryear, made a brilliant decision.
He placed the heart ten on the table, convinced that the heart ace was on his left and that the lead would do no harm.
This threw South off the normal track, and he put up the ace fearing that a finesse would allow a ruff.


Variable-Rate Sallie Mae Notes
The Student Loan Marketing Association, or Sallie Mae, a Government-chartered, privately owned corporation that sells guaranteed bonds to investors to raise money for student loans from financial institutions, is offering $500 million in six-month floating-rate notes through various dealers.
Underwriters said the notes were priced at par to yield a variable rate equal to 8 basis points more than the bond-equivalent yield of the three-month Treasury bill.


Books of The Times; Confrontation Between Post-Soviet Bureaucrats
The Porcupine  By Julian Barnes  138 pages. Alfred A. Knopf. $17.
Julian Barnes's gripping new political novel, "The Porcupine" (which perhaps takes its title from a remark once made by Nikita S. Khrushchev: "If you start throwing hedgehogs under me, I shall throw a couple of porcupines under you") takes place in a fictional Eastern European country shortly after the collapse of the Soviet Union.
The country's longtime Communist President, a vulgar, hard-line Marxist named Stoyo Petkanov, has been deposed and is now on trial for crimes against his nation.
His archrival is the country's new Prosecutor General, an ambitious reformer by the name of Peter Solinsky.


Yield of 3-Year Notes Up Sharply
The Treasury auctioned $15.5 billion of three-year notes yesterday at an average yield of 5.17 percent, almost a half percentage point more than at the auction in August.
The sharp rise in yield was another sign of how quickly the mood in the bond market can change.
"Its a very strange time," said Mary Rooney, an economist at S. G. Warburg &amp; Company.
"People can not get positive. People seem to have given up for the rest of the year."


Capitalism Thins the Ranks of China's Rulers
To the Editor:
A careful study of the complete roster of the newly elected Central Committee of the Chinese Communist Party at its 14th Congress (front page, Oct. 20) shows a startling fact: few of the "princes" -- the children of China's top leaders -- are on the list, not even, widely expected as shoo-ins, Chen Yuan, the son of Chen Yun; Deng Nan, the daughter of Deng Xiaoping, and Wang Jun, the son of Gen.
Wang Zhen.
To Beijing insiders, this has not been surprising since the news that Bo Xicheng has stepped down as head of China's National Tourism Administration to go into private enterprise.
As the son of Bo Yibo, another octogenarian leader, Bo Xicheng has found it more profitable to be in business than in government, despite all the perquisites of the chief of a national travel agency.
Therein lies the conventional wisdom among the princes: use family influence and official connections to engage in a business sure to succeed.
This is known, among cynical commoners, as "guandao" (fallen officials).


Jersey City Mayor Warns of Possible Bankruptcy
The 33-year-old investment counselor who was elected Mayor here last week said today that the city could be bankrupt before he completed his seven-month term.
The new Mayor, Bret Schundler, who finished first in a field of 19 candidates, was sworn into office in a 45-minute ceremony in which he held out the promise, or at least the hope, of lower taxes and improved services, but added a warning.


In Redrawn District, What Went Wrong for Green in Election
Bill Green always seemed to be the quintessential representative for the old Silk Stocking district on the Upper East Side of Manhattan.
Patrician and polite, socially progressive without being strident, Mr.
Green, a Republican, wooed and won Democratic voters in his Congressional district time and again, defeating such formidable opponents as Mark Green, Bella S. Abzug and Andrew J. Stein.
But that all changed last Tuesday when Mr.
Green lost the seat he has held for 14 years to a 44-year-old Democratic City Councilwoman, Carolyn B. Maloney.
There were many reasons for his defeat -- Gov.
Bill Clinton's landslide in New York City, Ms.
Maloney's scrappy campaign, the extra edge given to female candidates across the country.
But perhaps the most significant was the change brought to the district when its lines were redrawn this year.


Mirabella Plans Holiday Gift
After producing a trio of fanciful holiday extravaganzas for Absolut vodka, TBWA Advertising in New York is offering its second consecutive practical advertisement.
About 300,000 newsstand and subscription copies of the December issue of Mirabella magazine, available in Chicago, Los Angeles, Miami, New York and San Francisco, will carry a pair of nylon thigh-high stockings, in a crossword puzzle pattern, designed by Christian Francis Roth.


Black Caucus in Congress Gains in Diversity and Experience
All but one of the 16 new black members of Congress brings a wealth of political or legislative experience to their jobs, a development that many say will mean a significant qualitative difference in Congress as well as a record number of black voices.
Of the 16 new members, 13 are from largely black districts that were created through reapportionment.
Three others are replacing retiring or defeated black incumbents, making the net increase in the number of black members 13, the largest single increase since Reconstruction.


Cheetahs Appear Vigorous Despite Inbreeding
THE cheetah may be a gorgeous Maserati among mammals, able to sprint at speeds approaching 70 miles an hour, yet it has not been able to run away from its many miseries.
Once the cat ranged throughout the African continent, the Near East and into southern India; now it is extinct almost everywhere but in scattered patches of the sub-Sahara.
Farmers and ranchers in Namibia shoot them as vermin.
On reserves, where cheetahs are often forced into unnatural proximity with other predators, they are at the bottom of the meat eaters' grim hierarchy; lions will go out of their way to destroy cheetah cubs, while hyenas, leopards and even vultures can easily chase away a cheetah from its hard-caught prey.


Nets Hire a Clubhouse Patrolman
Rick Mahorn might have arrived just in time to save the Nets from themselves.
Mahorn, a 34-year-old free agent who spent 11 years as an occasional enforcer in the National Basketball Association, signed a three-year contract today and will be in uniform on Tuesday night when the Nets (1-1) play the unbeaten Knicks (2-0) at Madison Square Garden.
His minutes will be limited, but his presence will be significant from the start.


Darwin On a Disk, And More To Come
CHARLES DARWIN was one of the most influential scientific thinkers of all time, and his life and work still repay study.
Now several of his key writings have been brought together on a remarkable CD-ROM.


Reporter's Notebook; Empowered, And in Awe, In the Capitol
They were elected to conquer the Senate, 11 newcomers, several of whom campaigned to do away with the Senate's clubbish ways and pork-barrel politics.
But after their first orientation day, filled with crowded press conferences, blinding television lights and long lectures about rules, ethics and cloakroom etiquette, some of the newcomers appeared, at least for the moment, awe-struck.


Henri Temianka Is Dead at 85; Violinist and Founder of Quartet
Henri Temianka, a violinist and conductor who founded the Paganini String Quartet and the California Chamber Symphony Orchestra, died on Saturday at his home in Los Angeles.
He was 85 years old.
He died of complications related to cancer, said his son David, of Los Angeles.


Sonar Map Puts Lewis and Clark to Shame
WHEN the Lewis and Clark Expedition set out to map the Louisiana Purchase in 1803, it started a survey of territory that doubled the area owned by the United States.
The map was not completely filled in until the frontier closed.
But when the United States Geological Survey was called upon in 1983 to map the Exclusive Economic Zone off the United States coast, it took less than a decade to obtain a detailed picture of 4.5 million square miles of ocean floor, about 30 percent more than the nation's dry land.


Arafat Warning Fundamentalists On Violence in Occupied Lands
Yasir Arafat, chairman of the Palestine Liberation Organization chairman, strongly criticized the Palestinian Islamic fundamentalist movement today, warning the group of unspecified retaliation if its acts of violence, including the killing of Palestinians in the Israeli-occupied territories, were to continue.
In an interview published today, Mr.
Arafat acknowledged for the first time the dimension of the fundamentalist Palestinian challenge to his organization and its widespread presence in the occupied Gaza Strip and West Bank.
But he warned: "There are limits to our patience. One cannot be patient over the use of weapons against the Palestinian people."


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
Continental accepted a bid of $450 million in cash from Air Canada and a Texas investor group.
Ultimately, the two struggling carriers are expected to merge and then seek further alliances to create a competitive global carrier.  [ Page A1. ]
The billionaire Robert Bass has reportedly offered $1.2 billion for Macmillan and Official Airline Guides -- two big pieces of the late Robert Maxwell's publishing empire.  [ D1. ]


VOLKSWAGEN TO EXPAND ITS JOINT-VENTURE PLANT IN CHINA
Volkswagen's Chinese joint venture, FAW-Volkswagen Automotive Company Ltd. of China, has arranged for a $420 million loan to be syndicated by Commerzbank A.G. of Germany and CDFC (HK) Ltd., a Hong Kong unit of Bank of China, to expand capacity at its Changchun plant to 150,000 Jetta and Golf cars a year.
Commerzbank said in Frankfurt that the eight-year loan, guaranteed by the Bank of China, was widely syndicated in Asia, Europe and the United States and was the largest internationally syndicated loan to a Chinese company since 1989.
FAW-Volkswagen Automotive is a joint venture between Volkswagen A.G., which has a 40 percent stake and the Chinese company First Automobile Works Ltd.


Gulotta Proposes $1.1 Billion Budget
The Nassau County Executive, Thomas S. Gulotta, today proposed a $1.1 billion budget for next year that he said would eliminate a $121 million deficit while freezing property taxes, increasing spending and adding at least 1,593 employees to the county payroll.
The proposal comes after four months of fiscal deadlock between Republicans and Democrats on the County Board of Supervisors, and Mr.
Gulotta, a Republican, offered little today that suggested a breakthrough.
Even before they had seen the proposal, Democratic Supervisors called the plan "ludicrous" and "completely unrealistic."


Hale Is Moving On
The New York Racing Association yesterday confirmed reports that LEONARD HALE was stepping down as senior vice president for racing.
Hale, who is 47 years old, joined the management of Belmont Park, Aqueduct and Saratoga race tracks 17 years ago as assistant racing secretary and for the last seven years has directed the detail work on racing operations.


New Architecture Head at the Modern
Terence Riley has been appointed director of the department of architecture and design at the Museum of Modern Art, it has been announced by Richard E. Oldenburg, the museum's director.
Mr.
Riley, who is 38 years old, will oversee the department's exhibition program and its permanent collection.
The appoinment is effective immediately.
Mr.
Riley said he planned to shift the department's focus from large-scale exhibitions to more frequent "thematic" shows, like "Nara Conventional Hall: International Design Competition," which is to open on Nov. 20.
Exhibitions of work by Santiago Calatrava and Rem Koolhaas are among his other projects.


Clinton to Promote High Technology, With Gore in Charge
IF the promises of the Clinton campaign for science and technology now come to pass, America is headed for a new era in which the Government's focus on making armaments will shift to fostering a host of new civilian technologies and industries.
No financial midget, the civil initiative would spend money twice as fast as the Pentagon's Star Wars anti-missile program, one of the biggest research efforts of all time.
The aim, outlined in campaign documents and by advisers to President-elect Bill Clinton and Vice-President-elect Al Gore, is a new wave of research discoveries and applications that will flood the economy with innovative goods and services, lifting the general level of prosperity and strengthening American industry for the international trade wars of the 1990's and beyond.


Accounts
*
Dean Witter Financial Services, Riverwoods, Ill., to Bender, Browning, Dolby &amp; Sanderson, Chicago, to handle its Prime Option Visa card account, previously at DDB Needham Chicago .
A Dean Witter spokeswoman confirmed reports of the assignment this week in trade publications, adding that spending would reach $70 million over three years.


Hicks, Muse Will Acquire A Subsidiary of Du Pont
In a sign that the leveraged-buyout business is rebounding, Hicks, Muse &amp; Company said today that it had agreed to pay about $400 million to acquire the electrical connector division of E. I. du Pont de Nemours &amp; Company that the giant chemical concern had been trying to sell since May.
The agreement, if completed, would be the 10th takeover completed with cash from a $255 million equity fund created in 1990 by the Dallas-based firm headed by Thomas O. Hicks and John Muse, and the third largest.


Capitalism Thins the Ranks of China's Rulers
To the Editor:
A careful study of the complete roster of the newly elected Central Committee of the Chinese Communist Party at its 14th Congress (front page, Oct. 20) shows a startling fact: few of the "princes" -- the children of China's top leaders -- are on the list, not even, widely expected as shoo-ins, Chen Yuan, the son of Chen Yun; Deng Nan, the daughter of Deng Xiaoping, and Wang Jun, the son of Gen.
Wang Zhen.
To Beijing insiders, this has not been surprising since the news that Bo Xicheng has stepped down as head of China's National Tourism Administration to go into private enterprise.
As the son of Bo Yibo, another octogenarian leader, Bo Xicheng has found it more profitable to be in business than in government, despite all the perquisites of the chief of a national travel agency.
Therein lies the conventional wisdom among the princes: use family influence and official connections to engage in a business sure to succeed.
This is known, among cynical commoners, as "guandao" (fallen officials).


We Make Science a Religion at Our Peril
To the Editor:
In "A Cosmology of Your Very Own" (Op-Ed, Oct. 9), on the appeal of Stephen Hawking's "Brief History of Time," Robert L. Park states that, once physics discovers the origin of the universe, religion will be "compressed into a single point -- creation," presumably to disappear.
What prerogative does Mr.
Park have to assume religion has "no further retreat" in the face of scientific progress?
Are the sciences meant to take over where religion left off?
Many people can't live by rational certainty alone.
Mr.
Park's view assumes the orthodox cloak of authority once exercised by a religion that condemned science.
Implicit in his scientific triumphalism is a rejection of other kinds of knowledge.


Takeover Set For a Bank In Colorado
First Bank System, the second- largest banking company in Minnesota, announced an agreement yesterday to buy Colorado National Bankshares, that state's largest independent banking company, for about $500 million of stock.
The acquisition is a coming-out party of sorts for First Bank System, which lost $497 million speculating in Treasury bonds in 1988 and has been operating under new mangement led by John F. Grundhofer, company chairman, since the beginning of 1990.
While the company has shrunk to $18 billion in assets from $28 billion in 1987, it has become very profitable by concentrating on local businesses and consumers and earned a record $178 million in the first nine months of this year.


Europeans Warn of Reprisal For 200% U.S. Tax on Wine
The European Community formally warned the United States today that it would retaliate if Washington went ahead with its threat to impose 200 percent tariffs on some European goods including white wine on Dec. 6.
The community's foreign ministers said in a statement that an American decision to apply the taxes "could only lead to a retaliatory spiral, which would damage both sides through a slump in business confidence and lost jobs." They appealed to European and American negotiators to resume talks soon and expressed the hope that a balanced global trade agreement could be reached and a separate dispute over oilseed subsidies resolved.


MCI Plans Consortium for New Cellular Service
The MCI Communications Corporation said yesterday that it planned to form a consortium of companies to seek a Government license to build and operate national networks for personal communications services, a new generation of cellular telephone service.
The plan is dependent, however, on whether the Federal Government settles on a regulatory plan that allows such a network to go forward.


Capitalism Thins the Ranks of China's Rulers; Taiwan Moved Faster
To the Editor:
"Chinese Communism's Secret Aim: Capitalism" (front page, Oct. 19) states that China's economy today increasingly resembles Taiwan's economy of the 1970's.
Actually, Taiwan in the 70's was far ahead in economic development.
With United States aid, Taiwan enjoyed spectacular growth after 1950, and by 1970 the island had moved from an agricultural to a predominantly industrial economy.
China, in contrast, remains a predominantly agrarian society where peasants who live in small villages constitute more than 70 percent of the population.


CHRONICLE
CLARA HALE, better known as Mother Hale, suffered a mild stroke on Saturday and is recuperating at Mount Sinai Hospital.
"Her prognosis is very good, and she will remain in the hospital until Wednesday or Thursday," her daughter, DR.
LORRAINE HALE, said yesterday.


Capitalism Thins the Ranks of China's Rulers
To the Editor:
A careful study of the complete roster of the newly elected Central Committee of the Chinese Communist Party at its 14th Congress (front page, Oct. 20) shows a startling fact: few of the "princes" -- the children of China's top leaders -- are on the list, not even, widely expected as shoo-ins, Chen Yuan, the son of Chen Yun; Deng Nan, the daughter of Deng Xiaoping, and Wang Jun, the son of Gen.
Wang Zhen.
To Beijing insiders, this has not been surprising since the news that Bo Xicheng has stepped down as head of China's National Tourism Administration to go into private enterprise.
As the son of Bo Yibo, another octogenarian leader, Bo Xicheng has found it more profitable to be in business than in government, despite all the perquisites of the chief of a national travel agency.
Therein lies the conventional wisdom among the princes: use family influence and official connections to engage in a business sure to succeed.
This is known, among cynical commoners, as "guandao" (fallen officials).


Jones, Day Names a New Managing Partner
Patrick F. McCartan, a longtime corporate litigator, will succeed Richard W. Pogue as managing partner at Jones, Day, Reavis &amp; Pogue, the nation's second-largest law firm, at the start of the new year, the firm said yesterday.
Mr.
Pogue, who has been managing partner since March 1984, will reach the firm's retirement age of 65 for managing partner next April.
He will remain with the Cleveland-based firm, which has 20 offices and more than 1,100 lawyers worldwide, as a senior partner.


Teammate of Woman in Assault Trial Calls Her Object of Jokes
A new witness in the Glen Ridge sexual assault trial, a former playmate and teammate of the mildly retarded woman central to the case, testified today that the young woman had often been the object of jokes.
"She would be looking for us when we told her we were playing hide and seek," said Christine Middleton, 23 years old.
"But we would be in the house instead."


Hill Executive To Cliff Freeman
Chuck Kushell, an executive vice president at Hill, Holliday, Connors, Cosmopulos with extensive automotive account experience, said yesterday that he had joined Cliff Freeman &amp; Partners in New York to help attract new business.
Mr.
Kushell, 40 years old, confirmed a report of his hiring this week in Advertising Age, but said that his title, described as executive vice president, had not yet been determined.


Ayer Unit Keeps Spanish Car Work
The Spanish auto maker SEAT said yesterday that Ayer Europe had successfully retained its domestic and international accounts after a three-month review that also included BBDO Europe .
Ayer, which has handled the accounts for five years, was also awarded an additional assignment to introduce next spring a model called the SEAT SO.3 Ibiza.
Combined billings are estimated at $220 million.
SEAT, a unit of Volkswagen A.G. based in Barcelona, hopes to revamp itself by shedding an image as a maker of cheap cars.
Ayer, which already handles advertising for SEAT's Toledo, Marbella and Terra models, was anxious to retain the company's business at a time when the agency could ill afford to lose such large and prestigious accounts.


Nice, McMahon. Back To You, Cunningham.
In the Eagles' 31-10 victory over the Los Angeles Raiders on Sunday, Rich Kotite, the Eagles' coach, pulled off the first part of a bold two-part plan at quarterback to ignite his team.
On Nov. 1, Kotite had benched Randall Cunningham at halftime of the Eagles' 20-10 loss at Dallas, but the coach told Cunningham that he would get back in at some point in the second half.
He did not.
On the following day, Kotite said that Jim McMahon would start against the Raiders, but he added that Cunningham would start for the Eagles against Green Bay on Nov. 15.


Holiday Tomorrow
Veterans Day will be observed tomorrow.
Here are holiday schedules.
NEW YORK  PARADE Begins at 9 A.M. on Fifth Avenue at 39th Street and proceeds south on Fifth Avenue to 24th Street, ending about noon.


Health-Care Caps Pit the Sick Against the Sick
To the Editor:
As the nation deals with proposals to change the health care system, citizens should beware of global budget targets, otherwise known as caps.
"More Cases, Costs and Fears Under Wider AIDS Umbrella" (front page, Oct. 29), which discusses the medical and economic consequences of changing criteria for when people with H.I.V. infections should be said to have AIDS provides an example.
In a system based on caps, such a change would threaten budgets for other disease categories.
The nation's health care bill has risen, as is well documented, because of costs of administration, technology and an aging population, among others.
But costs also rise because the health care system pays for the country's failures in other areas: For example, the epidemics of AIDS, tuberculosis, with its newly emerging drug-resistant strains, and trauma from the unregulated use of guns.


No L.T., So Two Others Will Try to Earn Letters
For 12 seasons, the Giants had Lawrence Taylor, and for 12 seasons, opposing offenses used a great deal of energy to worry about him.
"The offenses never allowed a back to block him one on one, ever," the linebackers' coach, Dave Brazil, explained today.
But now the Giants will be without that leverage, and will have to adjust.


Charles Hoefner, 88, A Priest for 57 Years
The Rev.
Charles E. F. Hoefner, a priest for 39 years at St.
Ignatius Loyola Roman Catholic Church in Manhattan, died on Sunday at the Jesuit Infirmary at the Bronx campus of Fordham University.
He was 88 years old.
Father Hoefner died of cancer, said the Rev.
Matthew Roche, director of communications for the Jesuits in the New York Province.


Chess
Anatoly Karpov has protested that he has not been appreciated for playing brilliant games, that the public persists in regarding him as the genius of delicate positional play.
That would be a sufficient honor for almost anyone else, but the former world champion is not satisfied.
It may be unfair to overlook or ignore his brilliancy prize performances, yet it is natural to do so.
His standby has always been, from childhood on, the creation of subtle weaknesses in the opponent's position and their refined exploitation.
He distrusts speculation and loves to keep every game under tight control at all times.


Classical Music in Review
Kathleen Battle  Soprano Alice Tully Hall
Sunday night offered a chance to hear Kathleen Battle in a space smaller than those her fast-lane career usually allows.
Carnegie or Fisher Halls pack in more listeners, but Tully, despite its deadened response to the human voice, is a more comfortable home for this pure, slender soprano voice.
Ms.
Battle sang with the style we have come to expect.
There were Mozart's "Misera, dove son," six Schumann songs often in a lighter mood, a Strauss group that included "Standchen" and "Die Nacht," and an after-intermission collection of Bizet and Victor Herbert.


3 Companies Hope to Expand Market for Work Stations
The three leading computer work station makers will each announce significantly faster and cheaper systems Tuesday.
"This is being referred to in the computer business as 'Super Tuesday,' " said Gary Eichhorn, general manager for the work station system group of the Hewlett-Packard Company.


Chip Index Up For October
Orders for chips in the United States market set a record in October, and the semiconductor industry's leading indicator rose for the first time in four months, a trade group reported today.
The Semiconductor Industry Association, based in San Jose, Calif., reported a book-to-bill ratio of 1.10 for the three months ended October, up from a revised figure of 1.07 in September and 1.09 in August.
The book-to-bill compares orders with shipments.
A ratio of 1.10 indicates that for every $100 worth of product shipped, $110 was ordered.
A ratio above 1.0 indicates rising demand.


Review/Music; Remembering Messiaen With Works of His Own
Olivier Messiaen, who died in April, was remembered with dignity and variety at the Cathedral of St.
John the Divine on Sunday afternoon.
The Da Capo Chamber Players and their guests played for three hours, fully engaging a large audience seated in this huge and chilly space.
No piece here was less than 42 years old and the "Poemes Pour Mi" went back to 1936.
So this was not a wide-reaching survey of a life; the variety was in the kinds of music: for organ (the "Messe de la Pentecote"), for voice (from the "Mi" cycle), for flute and piano ("Le Merle Noir"), for piano alone (two items from the "Vingt Regards sur L'Enfant-Jesus") and for chamber ensemble (the "Quatuor Pour la Fin du Temps").


Justices Allow Cut Of Health Coverage
The Supreme Court refused to disturb a Federal court ruling that lets employers slash health insurance coverage of workers who develop costly illnesses like AIDS.


Jubal R. Parten, an Entrepreneur In the Oil Industry, Is Dead at 96
Jubal R. Parten, who spent more than seven decades as an independent oil producer and refiner, died Sunday at his home in Madisonville, Tex.
He was 96 years old.
He died after a brief illness, his family said.


A Chief of Staff? Forget It.
Bill Clinton triumphed because Americans chose to march under his banner of change.
That means he should junk a Republican innovation and, like John F. Kennedy, not create a chief of staff.
Presidents Kennedy and Lyndon B. Johnson did just fine.
Neither had a chief of staff.
Presidents Dwight D. Eisenhower, Richard Nixon, Jimmy Carter, Gerald R. Ford, Ronald Reagan and Bush did.
Many of those chiefs of staff resigned in disgrace, performed below par, were flung aside or went to jail.


CHEVRON TO CUT AN ADDITIONAL 1,500 JOBS
The Chevron Corporation said yesterday that it would cut an additional 1,500 jobs, half of which were already vacant because of an early-retirement program that it offered employees earlier this year.
The company, based in San Francisco, will trim 1,000 of its 3,500 headquarters personnel, and 500 from its Chevron Information Technology unit.
This is the fourth time this year that Chevron has announced job cuts.


THE TRANSITION: The President-Elect; Despite Some Signs of Recovery, Clinton Points to Economic Perils
Laying groundwork for a pre-Christmas economic conference intended as part shock therapy and part consensus-building, President-elect Bill Clinton today dismissed signs of economic recovery, insisted that the economy remained weak and said the focus must be "on the gravity of the situation."
While acknowledging that the unemployment rate had dipped, Mr.
Clinton painted an insistently bleak picture of the overall state of the nation's economic health.


INSIDE
Corruption Choking India
Whether it is a payoff of millions to fix a sale or a few extra rupees for a rail ticket, India's corruption is beginning to anger its citizens.
Page A12.
Perot Files Searched
The State Department, criticized for searching the passport files of Bill Clinton and his mother, did the same to Ross perot.
Page A16.
The Arts Beyond Moscow
In Russia's provincial cities, the arts appear steadier and more settled than in the volatile metropolises of the post-Communist era.
Second of three articles, page C15.


VOLKSWAGEN TO EXPAND ITS JOINT-VENTURE PLANT IN CHINA
Volkswagen's Chinese joint venture, FAW-Volkswagen Automotive Company Ltd. of China, has arranged for a $420 million loan to be syndicated by Commerzbank A.G. of Germany and CDFC (HK) Ltd., a Hong Kong unit of Bank of China, to expand capacity at its Changchun plant to 150,000 Jetta and Golf cars a year.
Commerzbank said in Frankfurt that the eight-year loan, guaranteed by the Bank of China, was widely syndicated in Asia, Europe and the United States and was the largest internationally syndicated loan to a Chinese company since 1989.
FAW-Volkswagen Automotive is a joint venture between Volkswagen A.G., which has a 40 percent stake and the Chinese company First Automobile Works Ltd.


Patterns
Clothes to Sink Teeth Into
Beware.
"Bram Stoker's Dracula," the movie, is opening in New York on Friday the 13th, but it's already stopping traffic on West 34th Street.
Shoppers and strollers at Macy's have stopped dead to ogle the store windows filled with mannequins dressed in costumes from the film in appropriately grisly settings.
Along with the actual costumes, designed by Eiko Ishioka, are five Dracula-inspired evening outfits by fashion designers.
A mannequin in Byron Lars's coffinlike bustier complete with bronze handles on the hips is given the evil eye by three of Dracula's brides in tattered costumes.
In another window, Dracula, in a natty gray suit and top hat, threatens a mannequin that is draped over a baptismal font wearing a black dress adorned with crosses by Coviello &amp; Erickson. (Aren't crosses supposed to protect you from vampires?)


Corrections
An article yesterday about President Bush's future referred incorrectly to his relationship with Yale University, his alma mater.
The President indeed holds an honorary Yale degree, Doctor of Laws, awarded in May 1991.


Stewart A. Hegleman; Advertising Executive, 60
Stewart A. Hegleman, a retired executive vice president of Grey Advertising Inc. in New York, died on Sunday at St.
Rose's Home in Manhattan.
He was 60 years old.
He died of cancer, his family said.
A native of Albany, Mr.
Hegleman graduated from Siena College and began his career with Bloomingdale's.
He joined Grey Advertising in 1963 and played a role in its growth from a small New York-based firm into a worldwide billion-dollar agency.


David Bathurst Memorial
Memorial services for David Bathurst, president of Christie's in New York from 1977 to 1984, have been scheduled in London and New York.
The London service will be held at 5:30 P.M. on Nov. 18 at St.
James's Church, Piccadilly.
In New York, a service will be held at 4 P.M. on Nov. 30 at St.
Thomas Church on Fifth Avenue at 53d Street.
Mr.
Bathurst died on Sept. 20 at age 54.


Bob Dole's Politics of Rancor
Here's what the three highest-ranking Republicans said after Bill Clinton's victory.
President Bush: "The people have spoken and we respect the majesty of the democratic system."


Classical Music in Review
Horacio Gutierrez  Pianist Carnegie Hall
Fifteen years ago, Horacio Gutierrez was, for this writer at least, a skillful purveyor of pianistic blockbusters.
Since then, either he or I have grown considerably.
Last Wednesday's recital of Haydn, Schumann and Liszt was a model of how intimacy can, through technique and musical intelligence, be translated for the benefit of large audiences in big halls.


Board Is Given Ultimatum On a Gay Teaching Plan
An angry Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez laid down an ultimatum yesterday to a Queens school board that has refused to adopt a plan to teach elementary school children to respect and appreciate gay people.
The board is in District 24, which embraces Elmhurst, Maspeth, and the Middle Village sections of Queens.
It was the only city school board that balked at an Oct. 31 deadline requiring either the adoption of a first-grade teachers' guide or the submission of an alternate teaching plan.
The Chancellor's first-grade guide is called "Children of the Rainbow."


National Security, Redefined
High-tech weapons proliferate.
Dictators flout international law and opinion.
And ethnic strife sunders a galaxy of post-Communist states.
The world, Bill Clinton rightly affirms, remains a dangerous place.
But at least for Americans, the danger has greatly diminished.
For the first time since Pearl Harbor, a new Administration takes power with no global strategic threat hanging over it.
Economic issues like European protectionism, North American free trade and competitiveness with Asia have moved to the center of foreign policy debate.
Mr.
Clinton would be wise to seize this opportunity to change the national security agenda.


U.S. and Russia to Swap Fungi
The United States Department of Agriculture announced that for the first time its researchers are preparing a collaboration with Russian scientists to exchange and study samples of fungi, insects and parasites.
Dr.
Amy Rossman, who studies fungi and was one of the three scientists who spent a week in Russia working out the research exchange, said this kind of scientific trade is an important corollary of free-trade agreements.


Surgery Unit Of Johnson In Contract
Johnson &amp; Johnson said yesterday that it had signed a contract with Volunteer Hospitals of America that could generate $1.2 billion in sales of surgical equipment over the next five years.
Volunteer Hospitals, an alliance of 680 nonprofit hospitals, agreed to urge its members to buy minimally invasive surgical instruments made by Johnson &amp; Johnson's Ethicon Endo-Surgery unit.
Such orders could total about $115 million a year.


Supreme Court Roundup; Justices Examine Limits on Commercial Speech
The Supreme Court heard arguments today in a free-speech case that could help define where advertising fits in the hierarchy of First Amendment protections.
The City of Cincinnati asked the Justices to reinstate a ban on the distribution of advertising brochures from newspaper vending machines that the city licenses for use on public property.


Leader of Bosnia Serbs Proposes Division Based on Their Victories
The leader of the Bosnian Serbs put forward a modified plan today for stopping the fighting in Bosnia and Herzegovina, but it was based on an ethnic division of the territory that international mediators have already rejected.
Speaking in uncompromising language reflecting military victories that have left the Bosnian Serbs masters of 70 percent of the country, their leader, Radovan Karadzic, said that if his proposal was rejected, his forces would continue fighting until a solution acceptable to all factions was found.


Chip Index Up For October
Orders for chips in the United States market set a record in October, and the semiconductor industry's leading indicator rose for the first time in four months, a trade group reported today.
The Semiconductor Industry Association, based in San Jose, Calif., reported a book-to-bill ratio of 1.10 for the three months ended October, up from a revised figure of 1.07 in September and 1.09 in August.
The book-to-bill compares orders with shipments.
A ratio of 1.10 indicates that for every $100 worth of product shipped, $110 was ordered.
A ratio above 1.0 indicates rising demand.


Richard Hartshorne; Geographer Was 92
Richard Hartshorne, professor emeritus of geography at the University of Wisconsin-Madison and author of an enduring university textbook, died Thursday at his home in Madison.
He was 92 years old.
He died of cancer, his family said.
Professor Hartshorne specialized in economic and political geography as well as the philosophy of geography.
He was president of the Association of American Geographers in 1949.


New York's 37th Police Commissioner Is Sworn In


Justices Leave Intact Ruling That Lets Business Cut Health Benefits
The Supreme Court refused today to disturb a Federal court ruling that lets employers slash health insurance coverage of workers who develop costly illnesses like AIDS.
By a vote of 7 to 2, the Court declined to hear an appeal by the estate of a man whose health benefits were cut to $5,000 from $1 million after he developed AIDS and filed his first insurance claims.
The man, John W. McGann, who worked at a music store in Houston, died in June 1991.


Heisman Receives Big Boost
The Downtown Athletic Club announced yesterday a commercial link between its venerable Heisman Memorial Trophy Award and Merrill Lynch, the financial services corporation.
In exchange for $1.5 million or so a year, Merrill Lynch is getting long-term exclusive promotional rights to the Heisman name, but not, traditionalists will be relieved to learn, full title sponsorship.


Sports of The Times; The Great, Flawed Warrior
HE fought no fires, he defended no innocents, he performed no surgery, but he has been called by some a hero.
His job was to jump on people and knock them down.
And he did it better than anyone in recent memory.
His purest joy, he once said, was to hit someone so hard he could see the "snot bubble out of his nose." His was a brutal business, and he loved it.
And many loved him for it.
"I'm a wild man in a wild game," he once said with satisfaction.
And the cheers in the stadium echoed and echoed in his ears.


YELTSIN, IN LONDON, SEEKS AID ON DEBT
Looking to win a firm show of Western backing, President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia swept through London today, signing a flurry of broad agreements on economic and political cooperation with Britain and then making a fresh appeal to the West to do more to ease his country's crippling burden of debt.
Closing the first day of a two-day visit, Mr.
Yeltsin told a group of London bankers and business people that if Moscow is to find a way out of its cash crisis, money borrowed by the Soviet Union in its last 11 months of existence must be included in any debt-rescheduling plan.


Continental Picks Air Canada Bid For a Merger to End Bankruptcy
Continental Airlines announced yesterday that it had accepted a bid from Air Canada as part of a plan to merge the two struggling North American carriers and then look for further alliances to create a competitive global carrier.
The bid was made in an auction intended to enable Continental to emerge from bankruptcy.
It was submitted jointly by Air Canada and an investor group led by David Bonderman, a Texas financier.


New Alzheimer's Study Questions Link to Metal
USING a new, highly sensitive technique, British researchers have failed to find any trace of aluminum in the hard, star-shaped plaques that dot the brains of people with Alzheimer's disease.
And with their report, they have stirred up an old debate over whether aluminum is a cause, effect or completely inconsequential in the development of the degenerative brain disorder, which attacks the memory, thinking and behavior.


Bonds Are Priced By Health Agency
The Health and Education Facilities Authority of Missouri yesterday tentatively priced $170.3 million of tax-exempt health systems refunding revenue bonds with a maximum yield of 6.45 percent for a 6.25 percent bond due in 2016 at a price of about 97.592 through underwriters led by the First Boston Corporation.
Serial bonds with shorter maturities were offered at a price to yield from 3 percent in 1993 to 4.75 percent in 1997 and 6 percent in 2003.
For another long maturity due in 2008, the coupon was 6.25 percent at a price of 99.018 to yield 6.35 percent.


Transit Fares May Rise, M.T.A. Says
The transit fare in New York City will increase 25 cents next year unless the state helps close the Transit Authority's projected $266 million budget deficit, city transit officials said yesterday.
The officials called on the legislature to enact a broad range of proposals that would give the Metropolitan Transportation Authority greater control of its government subsidies and a larger portion of state transportation funds.


NEW YORK JUDGES DON'T SEEK OUSTER OF CHIEF OF COURT
After meeting in an extraordinary closed-door session, New York State's highest court decided tonight to allow Sol Wachtler to remain as its Chief Judge despite his arrest on charges of blackmailing a woman who broke off an affair with him.
The decision by his six colleagues on the State Court of Appeals represented at least a temporary reprieve for Judge Wachtler, who could have been suspended from his post as the chief administrator of the state's court system.


COLLEGE SOCCER REPORT
N.C.A.A. Tournament
Without a single blemish in the regular season in the Big East and then the conference tournament, St.
John's was awarded its first bid to the Division I tournament, the National Collegiate Athletic Association announced yesterday.
A total of 28 teams out of the 192 in Division I are in the tournament, which will be concluded with the semifinals and the final on Dec. 4 and 6, at Davidson College in Davidson, N.C.


Orientation Starts for Senators-to-Be


Bass Seen In Offer for Macmillan
The Texas billionaire Robert M. Bass has offered $1.2 billion for the book publisher Macmillan Inc. and Official Airline Guides Inc., the two largest pieces of the late Robert Maxwell's American media empire, according to a person with knowledge of the details of the bankruptcy of the Maxwell Communication Corporation.
Mr.
Bass's bid, however, was rejected as inadequate by Price Waterhouse, the accounting firm that is one of the British administrators of Maxwell Communication, the individual said late last night.


By Design; Polished Bodies
After looking at American designers' showings for spring '93, the message is clear: the body that wears these new styles will be on view almost as much as the clothes themselves.
Though many of the more extreme examples won't make it to the stores, the rest, made from scanty layers of transparent fabrics and peekaboo laces, with generous decolletages and slashes to the hipbone and beyond, need a confident woman to carry them off -- and one in perfect shape.
This airy attitude is good cause to get to the gym right now.


Exhibition Examines Scientists' Complicity In Nazi-Era Atrocities
It is a question that few have been willing to face or to debate for decades.
Why were so many doctors and scientists so intimately involved in some of the greatest atrocities of Nazi Germany?
There is a tendency to see these atrocities, from the deliberate extermination of millions of people to barbaric medical experiments on thousands of innocents, as isolated occurrences during a period of madness more than a half century ago.


Jerusalem Journal; Who Scares Israelis? An Israeli Behind the Wheel
During a particularly violent week in October, three Israelis were killed by Palestinians.
There was national outrage, as always after such episodes, with newspapers warning of a stalking menace and some politicians screaming for blood.
That same week, 15 other Israelis were also killed.
Their deaths were duly recorded by the press, in some instances on the front page, but passions did not run high, and with a few exceptions the politicians stayed silent.


Missing Limbs, Still Atingle, Are Clues to Changes In the Brain
ONE month after losing his left arm in a car accident, Victor Quintero sat with his eyes closed in a brain-research laboratory as a scientist poked his cheek with a cotton swab.
"Where do you feel that?" asked Dr.
Vilayanur S. Ramachandran, a neuropsychologist at the University of California in San Diego.


Koch Buys Gas Pipeline
Koch Industries, the diversified petroleum, chemicals and agriculture giant based in Wichita, Kan., said today that it had acquired its first natural-gas pipeline, the United Gas Pipe Line Company.
Terms of the transaction were not disclosed, but a spokesman for Koch Industries, Riff Yeager, said the price was higher than $100 million.


Tests for Colts' Emtman
Rookie defensive end STEVE EMTMAN underwent further tests on his left knee yesterday and Indianapolis Coach TED MARCHIBRODA said it appeared the injury could be serious.
Emtman, the first player picked last spring in the N.F.L. draft, went out late in the first quarter of Sunday's 28-0 loss to the Miami Dolphins.


Victim Takes the Stand in Beating Trial
Walking with the natural grace of a promising athlete, 18-year-old Alfred Jermaine Ewell crossed the courtroom with apparent ease but then faltered, unsure of his balance, as he climbed up two steps and painfully lowered himself into the witness chair.
His eyes, which he now has difficulty focusing, swept the courtroom and paused at the defense table where he recognized Shannon Siegel, the 22-year-old youth charged with beating him on the head with a baseball bat 18 months ago on an Atlantic Beach boardwalk.
The assault followed a beer party at which Mr.
Siegel, who is white, is said to have used a racial epithet to describe Mr.
Ewell, who is black, and to have made fun of his dating a white girl.


N.B.A. Fines Maxwell
VERNON MAXWELL of the Houston Rockets was fined $7,000 yesterday for a flagrant foul against NATE McMILLAN of Seattle last week.
Maxwell was ejected after the foul, which occurred with 50 seconds left in the game. (AP)


Music Notes
Forward Into the Past
At a time when classical-music radio stations around the country are diluting their formats in search of an audience that is young, affluent and not all that committed to the classics, WFMT, a Chicago station that is carried by satellite and cable to many other cities, is taking a heartening step backward.
Dan Schmidt, the general manager of the 41-year-old station, has reversed a recent policy change in which the station began accepting recorded advertising.
Until 1990, advertising copy was read live on the air by WFMT's announcers, a charmingly old-fashioned practice long extinct in the world of modern electronic media.
On Jan. 1, the station will return to its live-copy policy.


It's Official in Seattle: Piniella Is the Manager
LOU PINIELLA, who managed the Cincinnati Reds to a World Series championship in 1990, yesterday was named manager of the Seattle Mariners.
Piniella, 49 years old, takes over a club that had the worst record in the American League last season after posting its first-ever winning season in 1991.
Piniella said he knew the team had struggled in the past, but that he was looking forward to working with the Japanese-led management team, as well as with former Reds star KEN GRIFFEY SR., who will be the team's batting coach.
Griffey's son KEN JR.  plays center field for the Mariners and anchors the lineup.
In addition to Griffey Sr., Piniella named a member of his Cincinnati coaching staff, SAM PERLOZZO, as his third-base coach.


COMPANY NEWS: A Microsoft-Intel Production; PC Motion Pictures Via Windows Software
Coming soon to an I.B.M.-compatible personal computer near you: digital video.
On Tuesday, the Microsoft Corporation will announce Video for Windows, which is based on the Intel Corporation's new Indeo digital video technology and allows computer users to integrate full-motion video in programs that run on Microsoft's Windows operating system.
Priced at $199, Video for Windows will be available immediately.


CHRONICLE
Tributes poured in for someone else on Sunday evening, but no surprise this time.
At a dinner that packed the Grand Ballroom of the Waldorf-Astoria, NORMAN LEAR presented the 1992 Spirit of Liberty Award to ARTHUR B. KRIM, citing him for a life's work protecting freedom of expression.
Mr.
Krim, a former chairman of United Artists and Orion Pictures, produced more than 1,000 movies and was the confidant of several Presidents and other world leaders.


For Neilson, a Tardy Reward
Neil Smith, the Rangers' president and general manager, announced yesterday that the team had signed Coach Roger Neilson to a contract extension, a clear message to the players that Neilson, whose future seemed uncertain at the close of last season, has management's support in the bid to end the Rangers' 52-year Stanley Cup drought.
Terms of the contract were not revealed, but a person familiar with it indicated last night that the extension was not only for next season, but through the 1994-95 season as well.


Observer; The White and The Red
If I understand this, which is unlikely, our trade war with Europe is about soybeans.
Before reading this in a newspaper, I hadn't even known that soy came in beans.
I thought it was confined to Chinese restaurants.
Well, it's not.
American farmers, it turns out, grow it in bean form and try to sell it all over the world, but the Europeans are keeping it out of their markets.
Naturally, this enrages our soy farmers because while Europeans are chintzy about taking our soy, we are letting them send us wine galore.


Oilmen Ponder Future Under Clinton
More than 1,000 oil executives gathered yesterday in Manhattan at the American Petroleum Institute's annual convention to ponder what the Clinton-Gore Administration holds in store for them.
Bill Clinton's platform included calls for reducing oil imports and improving energy efficiency, ideas the oil industry finds worrisome at best, and replacing oil with natural gas, which most oil companies see as a silver lining in a very large cloud.
But many executives see the platform as unlikely to be a threat.


Now Duva Takes a Risk In Pay-Per-View Ring
The $2.75 million loss incurred by TVKO for last June's Evander Holyfield-Larry Holmes heavyweight title fight took more than just a stash of cash out of Time Warner's pay-per-view boxing service.
It took the risk out, too.
The risk-free TVKO debuts Friday night with the Holyfield-Riddick Bowe championship bout.
This time, TVKO is paid a fee to market, distribute and produce the TV telecast of the fight, unlike other events when it bought the rights to the fight, guaranteed the fighters' purses and took what profits it could, which, unfortunately, were not many.


A Bosnian War Story With a Happy Ending
"Down there, that sound is the sound of death," the young man said, gesturing at a valley of russet and gold foliage toward Sarajevo, where the morning was rent by the sharp cracking blasts of mortars fired into the city by its besiegers.
The man and his wife, who gave their names as Danilo and Danka -- false, like the identity papers they carried -- had escaped from Sarajevo.
If all goes according to plan, they will soon be rebuilding their lives in Sydney, Australia.
Their professional qualifications should help: Danilo is an engineer and Danka is a doctor.


Britain Drops a Case Against 3 Charged With Arms Sales to Iraq
The British Government dropped a criminal case yesterday against three businessmen accused of illegally selling arms-making equipment to Iraq, bringing an abrupt close to a trial that featured embarrassing disclosures about how the West helped arm Baghdad in the years before the Persian Gulf war.
Prosecutors said they dismissed the case against three executives of the British toolmaker Matrix Churchill Inc. because one of their most important witnesses, a former Cabinet minister, changed his account before taking the stand in the London trial.


No Headline
"Chief Judge Wachtler can't be here for the session of the court next week, so the court will continue to function as if he were ill or whatever." -- JUDGE RICHARD D. SIMONS of the New York State Court of Appeals.  [ A1:6. ]


Petty's Subjects Show Appreciation
The conventional wisdom in North Carolina holds that if Richard Petty decides to be Governor, the incumbent should start cleaning out his desk.
"Of course," said John Shelton Reed, an educated observer of folks in these parts, "the old joke is: 'Why would Richard Petty want to accept a demotion from King?' "


Chip Index Up For October
Orders for chips in the United States market set a record in October, and the semiconductor industry's leading indicator rose for the first time in four months, a trade group reported today.
The Semiconductor Industry Association, based in San Jose, Calif., reported a book-to-bill ratio of 1.10 for the three months ended October, up from a revised figure of 1.07 in September and 1.09 in August.
The book-to-bill compares orders with shipments.
A ratio of 1.10 indicates that for every $100 worth of product shipped, $110 was ordered.
A ratio above 1.0 indicates rising demand.


Corrections
A table on Thursday headed "Portrait of the Electorate," based on a survey of voters leaving polling places around the country, misstated the support for President Bush among female college graduates in some copies.
The poll showed it at 35 percent, not 3 percent.
The table also misstated the vote among black women for Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis in 1988.
It was 90 percent, not 9 percent.


49ers Reclaim The West
The Atlanta Falcons swept the San Francisco 49ers last season for the first time since 1980 and they absolutely reveled in their accomplishment.
Atlanta made the playoffs and San Francisco did not.
The Falcons boasted that a new order had arrived in the National Conference West.
A new day.


From Carter to Clinton, A South in Transition
Sixteen years after Jimmy Carter's Presidency came to symbolize a resurgent South, Bill Clinton and Al Gore have gone him one better, becoming the first all-Southern ticket to win election since Andrew Jackson and John C. Calhoun in 1828.
But after the Southern pageant of Billy Beer and boiled peanuts, which played out here in the late 1970's, what is most telling in Mr.
Clinton and Mr.
Gore is how little of the stereotyped image of the South they seem to carry with them.


Corruption's Many Tentacles Are Choking India
It has many names: "No. 2," "ours," "khilana para" ("feed him").
They are all expressions for corruption, for the money that makes things happen in India, that assures telephones, industrial contracts, land sales, bureaucratic appointments.
From the smallest village, to the jumble of towns that speckle the countryside, to the vast urban warehouses of Bombay, Calcutta and, above all, New Delhi, India's multilayered Government functions less as a provider of services, an upholder of law and a dispenser of justice than as a caldron for greed and venality, Indians and foreigners say.


Review/Theater; A Friend of Animals, Both Living and Dead
Thomas Strelich's shaggy sense of humor is the motivating force behind his new play, "Dog Logic," at the American Place Theater.
This meandering comedy has its canny moments as a man named Hertel, the caretaker of a seedy pet cemetery in the desert, tries to avoid coming to terms with progress.
Taking over Pet Heaven cemetery after the death of his father, he finds that it has become valuable property for real estate development.
But before a shopping mall is built over the graveyard, Hertel (Darrell Larson) will fight to retain his 40-acre heritage.
The play languishes, drifting through monologues as the caretaker goes about his daily nonduties.
Although "Dog Logic" has a wistful respect for more humane times, it is less of a play than it might have been.
This is in contrast to Mr.
Strelich's previous desert comedy, "Neon Psalms," presented several seasons ago at the American Place.
For one thing, the earlier play had a more fully realized central character.
Too often, the caretaker in "Dog Logic" chatters away, offering philosophy and anthropology in lieu of narrative.


Alaska's Winter Blues
For more than a quarter of the people living in Fairbanks, Alaska, the short days of winter cause a sometimes disabling seasonal depression, a survey of 283 longtime residents has found.
Researchers from the University of Alaska at Anchorage found that women and young adults were especially prone to the psychological effects of winter darkness in Fairbanks, where daylight at the winter solstice lasts less than 4 hours.


METRO DIGEST
METRO DIGEST  CONSIDERING WACHTLER'S FUTURE
After meeting in an extraordinary closed-door session, New York State's highest court decided to allow Sol Wachtler to remain as its chief judge despite his arrest on extortion charges.
The decision by the Court of Appeals capped a day of high drama in Albany.
A1.
Weeks of investigation, then an arrest. A1.


Classical Music in Review
Davitt Moroney  Merkin Concert Hall
The English harpsichordist Davitt Moroney has become well known through the many recordings he has made in recent years, both as a soloist and in collaboration with the violinist John Holloway.
The recordings give an impression of a thoughtful and somewhat reserved player, qualities that were confirmed in Mr.
Moroney's New York debut recital last Wednesday evening.


Driver Shot in Struggle
A driver who rammed an unmarked police car in Brooklyn last night was shot during a subsequent struggle with an officer who had been riding in the car, the police said.
The officer, who spotted the man driving what appeared to be a stolen car about 9 P.M., was trying to pull the man over at East 12th Street and Shore Parkway in Sheepshead Bay when the man struck the police car, said a police spokesman, Sgt.
John McCluskey.
After the officer approached him, the two scuffled and the man was shot, but it was not clear who had fired the bullet, the sergeant said.
The man, who was not identified, was taken to Staten Island University Hospital, where he was listed in critical condition, the police said.


Japan: Off Course on Plutonium
Japan has long professed to abhor nuclear arms.
Yet it is needlessly raising the risks of proliferating nuclear arms by choosing plutonium to fuel its nuclear power plants.
A Japanese freighter slipped away from protesters in Cherbourg after picking up some 1.7 tons of plutonium from a French reprocessing plant.
This is the first large-scale shipment of commercial plutonium fuel, the opening step toward global trade in this dangerous material.
Less than 20 pounds of reactor-grade plutonium is enough to build a crude nuclear bomb.


Peter T. Farrell, 91; Judge Who Presided At the Sutton Trial
Peter T. Farrell, who had a long career as a judge on the Queens County Court and the New York State Supreme Court, died yesterday at his home in Manhasset, L.I.
He was 91 years old.
He died of pneumonia, said his son-in-law, Robert Phillips.


No Way to Honor Yankel Rosenbaum
Poisonous fallout from the Yankel Rosenbaum murder continues.
The recent acquittal of the prime suspect deeply frustrates a grieving Hasidic community.
And it spawns reprehensible accusations that Mayor David Dinkins of New York deliberately encouraged the riot in which Mr.
Rosenbaum died.
Rioting began in Brooklyn's Crown Heights area after a car in the entourage of the Lubavitcher Grand Rabbi killed a 7-year-old black child, Gavin Cato.
Police finally gained the upper hand after three days.
Mr.
Dinkins earned praise for going to Crown Heights on the first night, visiting with Gavin Cato's parents and with the dying Mr.
Rosenbaum.
After that, both blacks and Jews criticized him.





Barbara Reach, 75, A Housing Specialist
Barbara Reach, a former mayoral assistant in New York City and a housing and city planning expert, died on Sunday at New York Hospital.
She was 75 years old and lived in Manhattan.
She died of kidney failure, said a friend, Eleanor Stier, who lived with her.


Skull and Air Sacs Fine-Tune Dolphin Sonar
FOR years, researchers have known that dolphins use sonar beams to navigate the murky depths of the ocean.
Now researchers at the University of California at Santa Cruz are using a computer model to study how the skull and a network of air sacs inside a dolphin's head act as an acoustical mirror to focus sonar beams.


On My Mind; Clinton And the Mideast
In the icy days of Polish Communism, an editor in Warsaw slipped past the censors a little drawing that told exactly what Poles felt about their rulers and their Soviet and German neighbors, and the whole hard world.
"The dream of the Polish nation," said the caption.
The drawing was just of the moon in space.
But on the moon was a tiny map of Poland -- high, away, deliciously alone.


Business and Health; U.S. May Impose Care-Policy Rules
INSURANCE executives and advocates for the elderly expect Congress to enact Federal standards for nursing home and home-care insurance next year.
Advocacy groups like the Alzheimer's Association say buyers of the long-term care policies often have trouble understanding them.
Patient advocates say that some policies do not assure reimbursement for people with deteriorating mental conditions.
Some require medically necessary care or treatment prescribed by a physician in accordance with standard medical practice -- wording that they said could be interpreted to exclude the nonmedical care that many people with Alzheimer's require.


Helping Marketers Adjust to Mood Swings of Consumers
TO some, bungee-jumping is a stunt.
To others, it is a sport.
But to a growing number of consumers, it is a metaphor for their attitudes and behavior, according to a new study that urges advertisers to consider the phenomenon when plotting marketing strategies.
The study, prepared by the strategic planning and research department at Backer Spielvogel Bates Inc.  in New York, is called "The American Consumer's 'Quality of Life:' Perception Versus Reality." It posits that the public has been undergoing a series of "bungee-like" mood shifts that are an overreaction to short-term changes in statistical measures covering important areas like the economy, the environment, health care and crime.


CHRONICLE
"Surprise! Happy Birthday!"
Two familiar figures on the legal scene heard those exclamations over the weekend: Judge JOHN R. BARTELS of Federal District Court for the Eastern District of New York, who turned 95 years old, and ARTHUR LIMAN, 60, who was chief counsel to the Senate Iran-contra committee.
Judge Bartels, who was appointed to the bench by President Dwight D. Eisenhower in 1959, expected to be having brunch with his two sons when he walked into the Gage &amp; Tollner restaurant in Brooklyn on Sunday.
Instead he was greeted by 44 guests, including 14 judges and 6 magistrates, from his district.


Swinging the G.M. Ax: Which Plants Are Next?
For John F. (Jack) Smith Jr., the new chief executive of the General Motors Corporation, the hard part is just beginning.
By the end of the year, G.M. has said it will name four more assembly plants to be closed as part of its strategy to cut its excess capacity.
The four plants will be in addition to the G.M. mini-van plant in North Tarrytown, N.Y., and Willow Run in Ypsilanti, Mich., where full-size rear-wheel-drive cars are built.
These plants were named earlier in the year when G.M. announced 12 of 21 assembly and parts-making factories it planned to close.
These were on top of earlier G.M. closing announcements affecting factories like those in Scarborough, Ontario, and the West plant in Pontiac, Mich.


Webb Out 2 Months
Sacramento Kings guard SPUD WEBB tore ligaments in his left wrist during a 124-114 victory Sunday over the Los Angeles Lakers and he will be sidelined at least two months, the Kings announced yesterday. (AP)


Classical Music in Review
'Carmen'  New York City Opera
Jonathan Eaton's attractive new production of "Carmen" at City Opera seemed to have settled in well by Friday evening, though three principal roles had changed hands since the opening.
The look was fresh and the work of the lead singers and chorus was generally likable, though the orchestral playing, under Guido Ajmone-Marsan, was often second-rate, especially in the winds.
Of the cast replacements, Robynne Redmon was especially appealing as Carmen, singing with purity and nuance.
If anything, she was just a bit too refined; except for occasional bursts of temperament, her approach was understated and genteel.


Rockies' First Trade
The Colorado Rockies made the first trade in their history yesterday, acquiring pitcher TRAVIS BUCKLEY from the Montreal Expos for a player to be named.
Buckley is the first player to go on the Rockies' 40-man roster.
Buckley, 22, spent last season at Class AA Harrisburg, going 7-7 with a 2.87 e.r.a. in 26 starts. (AP)


15 Reasons Why Teams Plead the Fifth
All clubs have been sworn to secrecy, with more than one going so far as to compel officials to sign confidentiality oaths.
Leaks will be investigated, no doubt, and maybe baseball, without a commissioner, can at least get itself a special prosecutor or two.
The subject provoking all the stealth?
The protected lists for the expansion draft, the 15 names each club turned over yesterday for the the new outfits in Miami and Denver.


Traffic Plan Aims to Cut Congestion
With $37 million in Federal money to spend by the end of next year to reduce traffic congestion and air pollution, New York City transportation officials want to create dual Fifth Avenue bus lanes and new cab stands in midtown Manhattan, and to change the traffic pattern in Herald Square.
The city's plan, which is to be released today, would expand container-barge service from the docks in Red Hook, Brooklyn, to New Jersey to reduce truck traffic in Manhattan.


Chip Index Up For October
Orders for chips in the United States market set a record in October, and the semiconductor industry's leading indicator rose for the first time in four months, a trade group reported today.
The Semiconductor Industry Association, based in San Jose, Calif., reported a book-to-bill ratio of 1.10 for the three months ended October, up from a revised figure of 1.07 in September and 1.09 in August.
The book-to-bill compares orders with shipments.
A ratio of 1.10 indicates that for every $100 worth of product shipped, $110 was ordered.
A ratio above 1.0 indicates rising demand.


Philip Kolb, 85, Dies; An Expert on Proust
Philip Kolb, a scholar of Marcel Proust, died on Friday at the Covenant Medical Center in Urbana, Ill.
He was 85 years old and lived in Urbana.
He died of leukemia, said his wife, Dorothy.


Couple Stabbed to Death
An elderly couple were found stabbed to death last night in their apartment in a Washington Heights housing project populated mostly by senior citizens, the police said.
The bodies of Andrew Brown, 75 years old, and his wife, Bertha, 65, were discovered by a neighbor at about 8:30 P.M. in the bedroom of their 15th-floor apartment at 1945 Amsterdam Avenue, in the Mary Macleod Bethune Gardens, the police said.
Both had been stabbed numerous times and a kitchen knife was recovered from Mrs.
Brown's body, said a police spokesman, Sgt.
John McCluskey.
There was no evidence of a forced entry, Sergeant McCluskey said.
The police had not identified any suspect early this morning nor determined a motive in the killings.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-13  IRAQI ARMS TRIAL HALTED  Saying a Cabinet minister had changed his story, British prosecutors dropped a criminal case against three men accused of selling arms-making equipment to Iraq.
The trial's end makes it likely that some details of the West's complicity in the arms buildup by Saddam Hussein will not become public.
A1  TERMINALLY GREASED WHEELS  Corruption has long been a feature of life in India.
But people worry it is becoming so pervasive that the country may never emerge from poverty and underdevelopment.
A12  STRIKING AT COLOMBIA'S HEART  Leftist rebel attacks on Colombia's oil industry are endangering the country's economic future and clouding its hopes of becoming a major oil exporter.
A3  YELTSIN COURTS THE BRITISH  Seeking a firm show of Western backing, President Yeltsin of Russia swept through London signing a flurry of accords on economic and political cooperation with Britain.
He appealed to the West to do more to ease his country's debt burden.
A9  IN BOSNIA, A DASH FOR FREEDOM  With racing hearts and hopes of a new life abroad, a Bosnian couple set out on a harrowing 23-mile journey from besieged Sarajevo to Kiseljak.
To make the journey is to cross three fronts in the Bosnian war.
A8  Bosnian Serbs breach peace plan, but mediators are skeptical.
A8  A PEACE MISSION FOR BAKER?
President-elect Clinton told Israel's Prime Minister that he wants Arab-Israeli peace talks to move forward with "no delay." His spokesman said he would support a last-ditch effort by former Secretary of State Baker to revive the negotiations.
A11  Jerusalem Journal: When Israelis kill Israelis -- on the road.
A4  The P.L.O. leader warns fundamentalists against violence.
A6  German leaders insist most citizens oppose attacks on foreigners.
A10  National A14-21  BLEAK ECONOMIC VIEW  President-elect Bill Clinton took a relentlessly negative view of the nation's economy, saying that a focus on the "gravity of the situation" would underlie a forthcoming economic conference.
A1  AND WHAT OF THE POOR?
News Analysis: There was much talk of the middle class in the Presidential campaign, but much less of the inner cities.
It is unclear where the poor, whose numbers are growing, rank in the new Administration's priorities.
A20  Questions of conflicts over a key Clinton appointee.
A20  PEROT FILES SEARCHED  The State Department searched the passport files of Ross Perot as it had those of Bill Clinton, an incident that embarrassed the Bush Administration in the closing days of the Presidential campaign.
A16  MEN, WOMEN AND OLD AGE  A new Government report finds that while American men die earlier than women, the men who live longest are more likely to be healthy, self-sufficient and not living alone.
A1  BUILDING A GLOBAL AIRLINE  Continental Airlines accepted a bid from Air Canada as part of a plan to merge the two struggling North American carriers and then look for further alliances to create a competitive global carrier.
A1  WHITE HOUSE AND THE SOUTH  The new White House team reflects the complexities of the evolving South, which cannot be characterized in a single image any more than Bill Clinton and Al Gore can.
A14.
A VIETNAM REUNION  Washington Journal: The whiskey was flowing, along with the tears and laughter, as aging veterans, most nearing 50 got together to mark the anniversary of the awful Vietnam battle of Ia Drang.
A14  WELCOME TO THE CLUB  They arrived as outsiders, but before the day was over, the crop of new United States senators had been introduced to the privileges, politics and pressures of their new jobs, and some of them seemed awed.
A17  A record number blacks will mean changes in Congress.
A17  AN ADVERTISING CASE  The Supreme Court heard a case that could further define how the First Amendment applies to advertising.
A19  Metro Digest B1  CONSIDERING WACHTLER'S FUTURE  With the Chief Judge of New York State's highest court charged with an extortion plot, his six colleagues said they would not ask him to step aside or resign from the bench.
A1  HOW THE F.B.I.
TRACKED THE JUDGE  When Judge Sol Wachtler was pulled over on the Long Island Expressway, it was the final step in an investigation that began with a telephone call to the F.B.I. director and ended with agents watching the judge hand an envelope to a cabby.
A1  Business Digest D1  Science Times C1-12  What do Clinton's policies mean for science and technology?
C1  Brain found to reorganize itself even in adulthood.
C1  A species designed for survival?
C1  Fashion Page B9  Arts/Entertainment C15-22  Cultural life in the provinces of Russia.
C15  Theater: "Angels in America" in Los Angeles.
C15  Sports B11-17  Auto Racing: Petty traveling a royal route.
B11  Basketball: Nets sign a policeman.
B11  Obituaries B10  Editorials/Op-Ed A22-23  Editorials  National security, redefined.
Japan: off course on plutonium.
Bob Dole's politics of rancor.
No way to honor Mr.
Rosenbaum.
Letters  A. M. Rosenthal: Clinton and the Mideast.
Russell Baker: The white and the red.
William C. Potter: Ukraine's nuclear trigger.
Matt Rohde: The generation that passed the torch.
Jack Valenti: A chief of staff?
Forget it.


Clinton Urges 'No Delay' in Mideast Peace Talks
President-elect Bill Clinton told Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin of Israel today that he wanted the Arab-Israeli peace talks to move forward with "no delay," and his spokesman said Mr.
Clinton would support a last-ditch effort by former Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d to revive the stalled negotiations.
Mr.
Clinton's spokesman, George Stephanopoulos, asked about the possibility that Mr.
Baker might resume his role as Middle East peace negotiator, said Mr.
Clinton "wants anything that makes sure that there is no delay in the peace process to go forward."


When Bad Things Happen to Good Jets
For the fourth time this season, going back to the season opener against Atlanta, the Jets lost a game they thought they should have won.
That empty feeling, which they had after losses to the Falcons, Colts and Bills, was prevalent again in the Jets' locker room in Mile High Stadium in Denver on Sunday after the 27-16 defeat to the Broncos.


THE TRANSITION: How to Lift the Poor; To Aid Those Most in Need, Clinton Wants to Help the Middle Class First
The last time a Democrat lived in the White House, 29 million Americans (13 percent of the population) lived in poverty.
Now 35 million Americans (14.2 percent) do, and their place on Bill Clinton's list of priorities remains unclear.
Mr.
Clinton takes office with a mandate for domestic change.
But he created it with incessant talk about the middle class and relative quiet on topics like inner cities, the homeless and the underclass.


Transactions
Basketball  National Basketball Association
NBA -- Fined Vernon Maxwel, Houston Rockets guard, $7,000 for committing a flagrant foul in a game on Nov. 6.
NETS -- Signed Rick Mahorn, forward. Waived Doug Lee, guard.


Q&amp;A
Let Sleeping Ants Lie
Q.
Do insects sleep?
A.
Some insects spend the winter in a torpid state, and at least some insects, including some ants, exhibit sleep-like behavior day to day, according to "The Ants," by Bert Helldobler and Edward O. Wilson (Harvard University Press, 1990).
Workers of a nocturnal Australian carpenter ant species, Camponotus perthiana, were observed lying on their sides in the pupal position during the day, they write.
The ants could be "wakened" by gentle probling with forceps, and they moved around sluggishly before starting the typical swift movements of a worker ant.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
7.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
4.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.06
2.86
4.50
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.10
3.05
4.63
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.31
3.25
4.69
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.55
6.53
7.03
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.73
7.76
7.86
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.70
8.70
8.90
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.55
6.54
6.81
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Some Signs of a Pickup In Consumer Spending
Three national retailers reported fiscal third-quarter results yesterday that offered support for Wall Street's contention that consumers are beginning to open their wallets in time for the holiday selling season.
Dillard Department Stores Inc. reported a double-digit gain in net income.
Although the May Department Stores Company posted a loss, its operating earnings also grew by double digits.
And the Ann Taylor Stores Corporation, which had struggled for two years to turn its weak specialty store business around, posted an 18 percent increase in net.


60-Minute Gourmet
TROPICAL fruits have increasingly found their way into American and French cuisine.
In this country the influence comes primarily from the Caribbean and Mexico.
All sorts of tropical fruits are now used in poultry and seafood dishes and in combinations that traditional chefs like me would never have imagined 20 years ago.
For the recipe here I have used mango to brighten a dish of sauteed shrimp.
Mangos can be sweet, slightly spicy, tart or acidic depending on their provenance and degree of ripeness.
A nice ripe mango has an affinity with shrimp, for it seems to bring out the sweetness in shellfish.


Award Set In Pay Fight
Three arbitrators have awarded Kenneth Roman, former chairman and chief executive of the Ogilvy Group, about $2 million in a dispute over his departure from the advertising company after it was acquired in a hostile takeover in 1989.
A copy of the arbitrators' award, dated Monday, was made available last night by Stanley Arkin, Mr.
Roman's lawyer.
Calls to Mr.
Roman and to Ogilvy were not returned.


France's Choice on Trade
With pressure on him growing to conclude a world trade agreement, President Francois Mitterrand of France is confronted by a tough choice: incur the anger of France's most important ally, Germany, by continuing to resist a deal, or enrage the powerful and vociferous French farmers' lobby by signing an accord.
The current signs are that President Mitterrand is leaning toward concessions that would once again cement the German alliance, avoid the imposition by the United States of punitive tariffs on white wine and other European products next month and help conclude a trade agreement to revive the world's sagging economy.


Returning to the Court In an Uncommon Role
Standing quietly in the packed Federal courtroom in lower Manhattan, his expression solemn, his fingers entwined, the defendant still looked very much the Chief Judge.
From the moment Sol Wachtler walked in to the moment he rose from his seat, he was the picture of judicial composure.
He looked like a judge out of central casting in his dark gray suit, white shirt and dark tie.
His dark, gray-streaked hair appeared to have just been combed.
But his deeply set eyes never seemed to focus on anything in court.


First Brands Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Corrections
An obituary yesterday about Philip Kolb, a scholar of Marcel Proust who died on Friday in Urbana, Ill., omitted a survivor.
He is a brother, Theodore, of Longboat Key, Fla.


G. Luther Whitington; Editor, 35
G.
Luther Whitington, a magazine editor and former news service correspondent and editor, died yesterday at his home in Los Angeles.
He was 35 years old.
He died of complications from AIDS, his family said.


Gift of Concern Over California Colleges
Voicing concern about the future of higher education in California, a foundation yesterday announced it would put up $6 million -- its largest gift ever for a single project -- to start an independent policy research center to study the issue.
The James Irvine Foundation, a 55-year-old organization devoted to improving the quality of life in California, said the gift would establish the California Higher Education Policy Center in San Jose.
The goal of the center will be to develop strategies for higher education based on the suggestions of educators, government leaders and ordinary citizens in the state.


Review/Television; America's Black Army And a Dual War Front
One of the more poignant and pointed celebrations of Veterans Day can be found tonight, at 9 on Channel 13, in an "American Experience" presentation called "Liberators: Fighting on Two Fronts in World War II." The 90-minute documentary recounts the story of American black battalions fighting for their country in World War II even as they were far from winning the wars of discrimination and segregation on their own homefront.
The producers are William Miles, who has focused much of his documentary-film career on the subject of blacks in the military ("Men of Bronze," "A Different Drummer"), and Nina Rosenblum, a film and television producer, director and writer, whose father documented the liberation of the Nazi concentration camp at Dachau as an Army Signal Corps cameraman.
As might be expected, the archival material in "Liberators" is riveting.
But the producers go further, tracking down several of the black veterans, recording their reminiscences and, in two key instances, reuniting them with some of the Europeans they helped liberate back in 1945.


Corrections
A picture caption last Friday about a deer hunter taking his prey to be butchered misstated Westchester County's deer hunting laws in some copies.
Hunting with firearms is illegal all year, but bow hunting is permitted in November and December.


Real Estate; New Hotel In Downtown Minneapolis
THIS city has increased its inventory of downtown hotel rooms by 20 percent this month, with the opening of a new convention hotel, the 816-room Minneapolis Hilton and Towers.
With a red-brick exterior and an interior done in walnut and marble, the $104 million Hilton is a contrast to the glistening modern metal and glass towers that rose in downtown Minneapolis throughout the 1980's.
Built as part of a municipal effort to improve convention business, the hotel received city and Federal government assistance.


HEARINGS OPENED ON KOREA M.I.A.'S
The top-ranking Republican on the Senate Select Committee on P.O.W.'s and M.I.A.'s asserted today that American prisoners had been transferred to China and the Soviet Union after the Korean War ended in 1953, and he suggested that some might still be alive.
The Senator, Bob Smith, Republican of New Hampshire, also said Government documents showed that United States officials knew about prisoners in the Soviet Union and North Korea and hid the facts from the public.


Zemex Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Syms Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 26


Why Increased Gasoline Prices Mean Inflation; Fairness to Donors
To the Editor:
Contrary to "An Urban Aid Bill That Doesn't" (editorial, Oct. 26), the President should approve, not veto, the tax law Congress has passed.
You overlook many positive features.


U.S. Robotics reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 2


General Motors Files to Issue $1 Billion in Stock
Saddled with large capital expenditures at the same time it has racked up losses from operations, the General Motors Corporation registered with the Securities and Exchange Commission today to raise up to $1 billion from a new issue of preference stock.
Added to G.M.'s seven other equity offerings since June 1991, the issue increases to nearly $8 billion the amount raised in equity markets in less than two years.
The company said it expected to offer the first shares of the new issue within a few weeks.


Yeltsin Ends Visit to London


Subsidized Airlines Won't Give Us a Break
To the Editor:
As a 26-year pilot for Pan Am who was one of the fortunate few to be transferred to Delta Air Lines last year, I was disappointed but not surprised by your myopic "Open Skies, Friendler Skies" (editorial, Oct. 21).


BERINGER VINEYARDS SUSPENDS HEALTH LABEL
Beringer Vineyards said yesterday that it had voluntarily suspended distribution of a "neck hanger" quoting a segment of CBS's "60 Minutes" that linked the consumption of red wine with reduced incidence of heart disease.
Beringer, which is based in Saint Helena, Calif., last week became the first winery to gain the approval of the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms to quote the program in promotional materials.


Lannet Data Communications Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Ben &amp; Jerry's reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 26


Broadway or Seventh Avenue? Fashion Follies Mix the Two
THE finale of Fashion Follies, sponsored by the Fashion Group on Tuesday night, showed just how big the distance is between Broadway and Seventh Avenue.
In an evening of good will and chaos, the chaos had the upper hand.
In the tradition of fashion shows, the performance ended with wedding gowns.
But here it was not a single dress, but more than 100 styles.
They were presented one at a time, slowly, because the models were not ready.
For many in the audience, who began trickling out before the show was over, it was 100 dresses too many.


Citibank Alters Account Fee Rules
Citibank revamped its price list for consumer accounts at its New York branches yesterday to require larger deposits to qualify for free checking.
But customers will be given incentives to use the bank to buy securities, which will be counted toward minimum balances required for free checking.
The adjustments, effective Jan. 1, come as Citibank is battling Chemical Bank for the leading position in the New York consumer market.
In eschewing a price war in the battle for consumers, Citibank will require higher balances than Chemical for free checking.


Sarajevans' Evacuation Ends in Sorrow
A plan to evacuate more than 6,000 people this week from this besieged city went awry today when hundreds of Muslim men, part of the first convoy to leave, were ordered off buses and separated from their families immediately after crossing into Serbian-held territory.
After several hours' delay, the Muslim men were allowed to reboard the buses and continue the journey with their families -- a total of about 700 people -- to sanctuary in Croatian-held territory north of Sarajevo.
But by then the Muslim-dominated Bosnian Government defending the city, suspicious of a trick, had canceled the departure of a second convoy, bound for Belgrade in Serbia, that was to have carried about 800 other evacuees, most of them Serbs.


Checketts in Charge, And Knicks in Gear
There was a day when Dave Checketts wondered how much longer he would last as president of the Knicks.
It was May 31, 1991.
On one floor of a Manhattan hotel room, Checketts was involved in intense negotiations with Pat Riley, trying to reach an agreement with Riley to become the Knicks' head coach.
At the same time, Patrick Ewing and his lawyer, David Falk, were in another Manhattan hotel room ready to inform Checketts that Ewing had decided to file for arbitration.
Ewing wanted to earn the right to become an unrestricted free agent, and if he succeeded, he would likely leave the Knicks.


Conwest Exploration reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Jobs Grow In New York State's Small Factories
The number of small factories in New York State outside of New York City grew in the 1980's, creating jobs even as plunging employment at larger companies resulted in an overall drop in manufacturing jobs, according to a study released yesterday.
The gains at establishments with 99 or fewer workers was one of the few encouraging facts to be found in the study of New York State manufacturing by the regional office of the United States Bureau of Labor Statistics.
Samuel M. Ehrenhalt, the bureau's regional Commissioner, said it was "an oasis of hope in a desert of despair."


Sports of The Times; A New Coach Optimists Can Applaud
After the crisp rendition of "God Bless America," after the Pledge of Allegiance and lunch, the pianist began to play and the largest crowd of the year at the Downtown Optimist Club serenaded its guest.
Now that Stu Jackson has arrived, with creative-marketing skills developed before he gave up a career at I.B.M. for basketball, the concept of the University of Wisconsin coach speaking to an Optimist club is no longer a contradiction.
If you want to be a Badger just come along with me


No Headline
"Despite the hysterics of the opponents of reforms, Russia will not stop and will not turn back." -- PRESIDENT BORIS N. YELTSIN.  [ A6:6. ]


Battling Hunger Transforms Charities Into Big Businesses
Back when the hungry were called hobos, food distribution meant an occasional handout from a church rectory or a homemaker who would serve a meal on the back porch to a guy who was down on his luck.
But today, in Westchester County alone, more than 100,000 people, or about one of every eight residents, receive at least one meal or bag of groceries from a food pantry or soup kitchen every month, according to records kept by those groups.
And feeding the hungry now requires massive organization.


Comdisco Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Citibank Alters Account Fee Rules
Citibank revamped its price list for consumer accounts at its New York branches yesterday to require larger deposits to qualify for free checking.
But customers will be given incentives to use the bank to buy securities, which will be counted toward minimum balances required for free checking.
The adjustments, effective Jan. 1, come as Citibank is battling Chemical Bank for the leading position in the New York consumer market.
In eschewing a price war in the battle for consumers, Citibank will require higher balances than Chemical for free checking.


Savannah Foods &amp; Indus reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 27


PASSPORT SEARCH BRINGS DISMISSAL
President Bush today dismissed the State Department official responsible for late-night searches through the passport files of Bill Clinton, Mr.
Clinton's mother and Ross Perot shortly before the Presidential election.
The official, Elizabeth M. Tamposi, the Assistant Secretary of State for Consular Affairs, was given until Wednesday to leave her office, a State Department spokesman said.


Francis R. Curry, 81, Lawyer and Executive
Francis R. Curry, a retired lawyer, business executive and lay leader in the Roman Catholic Church, died on Sunday at Lenox Hill Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 81 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died of complications from bone fractures, his family said.


Norman Karpf; Executive, 82
Norman Karpf, a director and former president of the John B. Stetson Company, the hat manufacturer, died on Monday at his home in Short Hills, N.J.
He was 82 years old and also lived in Palm Beach, Fla.
He died of cancer, said his son-in-law, Arnold Palmer.


TRANSACTIONS
Basketball  Continental Basketball Association
COLUMBUS HORIZON -- Traded Jerome Henderson, center, to the Oklahoma City Cavalry for a 1993 third round draft pick.
FARGO-MOORHEAD FEVER -- Placed Keith Wilson, guard, on the injured list.


Contraceptive Choice
To the Editor:
In "A Welcome New Choice for Women" (editorial, Nov. 2), you herald Depo-Provera as a valuable addition to the list of contraceptives available to American women.
But the drug has side effects: weight gain, menstrual irregularity, and it may contribute to osteoporosis.
While these side effects may not seem serious, their effect on the quality of women's lives must not be ignored.


G.O.P. Senators Fight Over '94 Races
In a shaky first volley of his expected 1996 Presidential campaign, Senator Phil Gramm of Texas was re-elected today by one vote to lead the effort to elect more Republicans to the Senate.
Mr.
Gramm put the best face on his narrow re-election as chairman of the National Republican Senatorial Committee, saying the race "was very close because my opponent worked hard for two years."


Surgery for Taylor And a Big Question
Lawrence Taylor underwent surgery yesterday to repair his ruptured right Achilles' tendon.
Now he must decide whether, at age 33, he will retire, as he had planned all season, or endure heavy-duty rehabilitation and play pro football again.
People close to him are not sure what he will do.
Taylor was injured Sunday during the Giants' 27-7 victory over the Green Bay Packers.
He is the premier outside linebacker in football history and perhaps the best defensive player ever, and in his 12 seasons with the Giants he has overcome all kinds of injuries.
But none has been as serious as this tear of the long tendon that attaches the ankle to the calf.


3-Card Monte: It's Just a Shell Game, Officials Warn
Early each morning they gather, usually on 42d Street, 70 to 120 of them, most convicted criminals, to plot the day's division of labor, territory and illegal profits.
Drug dealers?
Pimps?
No, this portrait, being painted by city officials and Times Square merchants, is of a less virulent street-corner scourge: Three-card monte dealers.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
7.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
4.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
2.75
2.98
4.87
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.05
3.10
4.63
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.26
3.31
4.70
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.45
6.55
7.01
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.66
7.73
7.82
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.65
8.70
8.80
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.51
6.55
6.79
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Public &amp; Private; A (Rest) Room of One's Own
When good fortune first shone upon me and I was given this position, some acquaintances asked me if I rated a private lavatory.
These were people laboring in the vineyards of investment banking and corporate law, people unfamiliar with any section of an aircraft farther aft than the fourth row, people with ficus trees in their corner offices tended by those people who labor in the vineyards of corporate plant management.
They did not understand that in the newspaper business it is a big deal if you get a private wastebasket.


A Call to Disarm
Some weeks ago, President Bush, on the occasion of the U.S. sale of F-16 fighters to Taiwan, described them as "flawless piece [ s ]  of craftsmanship" and a symbol of "what only Americans can do."
Such deference to instruments of destruction exposes the selfishness of rich nations.
Take, for example, the West's war against drug cultivation and smuggling in the third world.
I do not approve of the production or sale of drugs.


Amvestors Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


GPA's Efforts to Raise Cash Are Said to Be Weakening
A plan by the GPA Group P.L.C. to raise more cash from investors appears to be unraveling, industry executives said today, raising the prospect that the aircraft leasing company could be plunged into a financial crisis that could also jolt the aircraft production industry.
GPA, one of the world's largest purchasers of jetliners, is a major customer of the Boeing Company of Seattle, the McDonnell Douglas Corporation of St.
Louis and Airbus Industrie, the European consortium.


Borough President Declares War on Rats in Downtown Brooklyn
Progress inevitably has its downside.
In downtown Brooklyn these days, it comes in the form of rats.
Driven out of their homes by the recent rush of redevelopment, the rodents have moved unchecked into the courthouses, the busy Fulton Mall, the brownstone streets of Brooklyn Heights, and even the Metrotech office complex.


Mending or Replacing Torn Cartilage in the Knee
IN desperation, Rebekah Howell recently took the extreme step of having a piece of cartilage from a cadaver transplanted into her knee.
For 18 months after a skiing injury, she had been in constant and worsening pain.
Despite two operations, the frayed cartilage in her knee forced her to give up sports and when she walked, she limped.
At 44 years old, she was on the road to developing severe arthritis.
Yet she was too young and active for a total knee replacement, the treatment surgeons recommend for that disease.


Pianist Cancels Recital at Y
The pianist Santiago Rodriguez has canceled the last recital of his all-Rachmaninoff series, scheduled for 3 P.M. on Sunday at the 92d Street Y. The Y said only that he was indisposed, and the concert will not be rescheduled.
The Y is offering a two-for-one ticket exchange for its Horizon series, which presents emerging musicians, many in their New York debuts.
Those holding a pair of tickets for Mr.
Rodriguez's concert, for example, are entitled to four tickets, in any combination, for Horizon concerts.
The exchange must be made by at the Y's box office.
Refunds may be obtained by sending tickets with a self-addressed, stamped envelope to the 92d Street Y Box Office, 1395 Lexington Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10128.
Information: (212) 996-1100.


For Veterans at the Shelter, A Parade of Painful Memories
TODAY we are all supposed to remember.
But at the Borden Avenue Shelter for homeless veterans in Long Island City, they remember all the time.
Sometimes they remember things they have tried to forget, things that happened in war, and sometimes the recollections are more recent, memories of getting high, getting drunk, trying to get straight, trying to keep warm after the battles ended.
Some basic statistics: A third of the city's homeless men are veterans.
Of these, 400 are living at Borden Avenue, a five-year-old shelter run by the Salvation Army in a former tie factory.
Of these, 60 percent were in the Vietnam War, 15 percent served during Korea and 5 percent in World War II.
More than four-fifths are alcoholics or drug addicts and 60 percent are H.I.V. positive.


Museum in Texas Buys a Matisse for $11 Million
Last night's sale at Sotheby's of Impressionist and modern paintings, drawings and sculpture was an evening of bottom fishing as bidders tried to see just how low prices would go.
Without "Asia," a 1946 Matisse bought for an unexpectedly high $11 million by the New York dealer William Acquavella, who was bidding for the Kimbell Art Museum in Fort Worth, the evening could have been a disaster for the auction house.
Of the 66 works up for sale, almost half did not find buyers.
The evening's total was $35.6 million, far below Sotheby's estimate of $59 million to $80 million, but $8.6 more higher than the equivalent sale last fall.
Many works sold for less than their low estimates.


Electrochem Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Deal Maker Takes Aim at Skies
As is his style, David Bonderman is not saying much publicly about his plans with Air Canada to take control of Continental Airlines and pilot the nation's fifth-largest airline out of bankruptcy and into the heavens as a competitive global carrier.
He does have some thoughts, however, about his habit of wearing bright socks.
"There's little enough color in men's lives," he allowed through a spokesman.
Mr.
Bonderman, a Texas takeover artist with the sharp tongue of a trial lawyer and a professorial eye for detail, has never suffered from such a shortage.
At age 49, he has bounced through five different kinds of jobs, quickly achieving milestones that some people chase through their careers.


Metropolitan Diary
THE scene: a polling place in the Brighton Beach section of Brooklyn on Election Day.
One particularly cheerful, well-dressed young woman is about to enter the voting booth.
"Excuse me," she says to an official, "but what do I do?"
"You step inside and then pull the lever to the side."
The woman nods and steps into the curtained booth.
Seconds later, there is the whoosh of a lever being pushed to one side.
This is followed immediately by a second whoosh.
Clearly, the woman has not had time to register her choices.
Several people groan.
"Oh, no, you lost your vote," someone cries sympathetically.
"You blew it!" an accusing voice shouts out.
Hubbub all about her, only the errant woman remains cool.
With an indifferent toss of her hair, she faces the crowd and smiles.
"I was still uncertain who to vote for anyway," she says.
With a wave of her umbrella, she's on her way.
Dear Diary:
I know a celebrity when I see one, and that was definitely Kathleen Turner standing one person away from me in line to vote last week on the Upper West Side of Manhattan.
I recognized her immediately.
She was talking to her companion about places like Cannes.
I wondered how long it would take for someone else to spot her, or were people going to pull the unflappable New Yorker act?
In the 45-minute wait, Ms.
Turner asked to borrow a section of newspaper from the woman in front of me.
When Ms.
Turner returned it, the woman remarked that she had "a great voice."
"It's part of my job," Ms. Turner said with a husky laugh.
"What do you do?" the woman said.
"I'm am actress," Ms. Turner said happily.a
"Oh, really?" the woman said with an indifferent shrug.
Clearly, she was not impressed.
No one else in line turned around.
Oh, blase town. -- MARIE G. LEE
STEPSISTER
November, brooding, won't admit
That lush October bothers it
A bit -- no, not a little bit.
It shrugs a bony shoulder
And, murmuring "I'm older,"
Insists in chilly cheerless tones
There's wisdom in its seasoned bones
Stripped bare of gaudy bright pretense,
I grant its comments make some sense,
And handsome is as handsome does --
But, oh, what joy October was!
-- MAUREEN CANNON Dear Diary:
Finally, to be in my 30's, working in television and living in Manhattan.
How sophisticated!
How soignee!
As I walk past Bergdorf Goodman contemplating what kind of cocktail dress I should buy, the world is my oyster.
And then!
A tap on my shoulder.
"Excuse me, Miss. Your dress is all the way up in the back."
There is no escaping it.
I'll always be Hayley Mills in "The Parent Trap." -- PATRICIA RYAN
Walter Elliott of Long Beach, L.I., was walking behind a stylishly dressed young woman and her son.
The youngster looked up at her.
"Mommy," Mr.
Elliott heard him say.
The woman, paying no attention, kept walking.
After a while, the lad tried again.
"Mommy," he said.
No reply, and none on the three that followed.
Finally, the boy called out, "Tiffany."
Immediately, the woman stopped in her tracks.
"You do not call me Tiffany!" she said.
"You call me Mommy!"
Dear Diary:
I was riding to my restaurant in my favorite stretch limousine, the M104 bus.
An elderly gentleman lugging a shopping bag and a violin case tottered down the aisle, probing with his cane.
Suddenly the bus lurched and the fellow began to pitch forward.
A young man jumped from his seat, caught the toppling senior and gave him the seat.
"You saved my life!" the grateful fellow exclaimed.
"I will play a song for you!" With that, he unsheathed his violin from its case and played a lively rendition of "Happy Birthday," followed by a passage from Puccini.
"How about some Mozart or Bach?" he asked the good samaritan, who by this time was heading for the exit.
"Stay!" the violinist pleaded as the young man stepped off the bus.
The musician sadly tucked away his instrument.
Every day I look for him on the M104, ever ready to swap my seat for a song. -- VINCENT SARDI


Central Pennsylvania Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Navy Will Obey Order to Restore Gay Sailor's Job
The Navy said today that it would comply with a Federal judge's order to reinstate temporarily a sailor who had been discharged after declaring on national television that he was homosexual.
The judge, Terry J. Hatter Jr. of the United States District Court, declared, "This is not a military dictatorship," in reaffirming his order to the Navy to reinstate the sailor, Keith Meinhold, by Thursday.


THE TRANSITION: The F.B.I.; F.B.I. Head Says He'll Keep Job, But Faces Doubt
On election night, as Bill Clinton's lead built toward certain victory, William S. Sessions, the Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, sent a teletype message to all F.B.I. employees announcing that he had reached the midpoint of his 10-year term and intended to stay on.
In calmer times his message would have stirred less notice, advising employees, as it did, that reaching the halfway mark "was an occasion for me to reflect on events of the past five years and to focus on my vision of the F.B.I. for the future." But these are not normal times at the bureau.
Interpreting the Message
Some agents perceived the message as a move by the Director, a Republican who was appointed by President Ronald Reagan in 1987, to head off speculation about whether he would depart under the incoming Democratic Administration.


Plutonium Worries Japan's Neighbors
To the Editor:
As Hiroyuki Kishino acknowledges in "No Fear. The Plutonium Is Safe" (Op-Ed, Oct. 27), it is very natural that there is much concern over Japan's import of a ton of plutonium.
Mr.
Kishino explains that the plutonium Japan is having shipped from France will be used exclusively for nonmilitary purposes and assures readers that the Japanese Government will do everything to assure safe shipment of its newly acquired plutonium.
He even shows why Japan needs a ton of plutonium when cheaper uranium could be used instead.


United Westburne reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Sylvia Friedlander Robins; Producer, 74
Sylvia Friedlander Robins, a theater and television producer, died on Saturday at her home in Manhattan.
She was 74 years old.
She died of natural causes, said her husband, Sy R. Robins.


Review/Concert; The Kirov Orchestra Reviving the Past
There was once a time when cultural organizations from the Soviet Union could count on almost automatic acclaim in the West.
Whatever the evils of the Government were, in the performing arts (as in chess and mathematics), there was something almost otherworldly about Soviet achievements, particularly in contrast with the confused and messy world of democratic culture.
For all the Communist rhetoric, musicians often seemed to possess the aura of the czars, the tradition of the Orthodox Church and the insight of the great Russian novelists.
Now, we know, with the disintegration of central authority, the cultural scene is more like something out of the natural world, with each organization struggling for survival.
Group after group comes to these shores hungry for certification, recognition and Western currency.
But on Sunday afternoon and Monday night in Avery Fisher Hall, when the Kirov Orchestra of St.
Petersburg was conducted by Valery Gergiyev, its music director, the two programs of Russian orchestral music brought back memories of those earlier days.
In July, the orchestra was heard as part of the Kirov Opera, which made a strong impression at the Metropolitan Opera House led by Mr.
Gergiyev, flirting a bit with Western-style opera production, but offering glimpses of idiomatic singing and robust interpretation.
These concerts went further: Mr.
Gergiyev and the Kirov ensemble are clearly among the premier representatives of the formerly thriving Russian performing tradition.


CHRONICLE
MARIA SHRIVER, the NBC newscaster who is the anchor for her own specials, is recovering from viral meningitis at a Los Angeles hospital, an NBC spokeswoman said yesterday.
"She went to the hospital on Thursday after complaining of a headache and was diagnosed with viral meningitis," said the spokeswoman, TORY BEILINSON.
"She is still in the hospital taking a few days off to catch up on some rest, but she will be returning to her home in Los Angeles sometime this week." The name of the hospital has not been disclosed.


United Retail Group reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Bridge
Someone is killing the great bridge players of America.
On one level it is clear that the someone is Matthew Granovetter, since he is the author of "The Bridge Team Murders." To identify the villain on another level, you will have to buy this entertaining book from the author: $17.95 including postage, $5 extra for hardcover; 18 Village View Bluff, Ballston Lake, N.Y. 12019.
In 390 pages the author has provided more murders, and attempted murders, than any other bridge book, and more bridge hands than in any other murder book.
The setting is a world championship in New York City, and nearly all the characters, one of whom is the author, are famous living bridge personalities.
They play themselves, and luckily are neither villains nor victims.
Some of them are shown making brilliant plays, and are unlikely to object.


Higher Profits Reported by 4 Big Retailers
Four of the nation's largest retailers reported broad gains today in third-quarter earnings.
Net income rose 24 percent at Wal-Mart Stores, the nation's largest discounter; 60.3 percent at J. C. Penney; 20.6 percent at Nordstrom, and 9.7 percent at the Limited.


BRITISH WILL STUDY IRAQI ARMS SALES
Prime Minister John Major ordered an independent judicial inquiry today into the sale of arms-making equipment to Iraq, amid assertions of Government complicity in helping British companies arm Baghdad just before the Persian Gulf war.
Mr.
Major's decision came one day after prosecutors here abruptly ended a four-week-old criminal trial involving illegal sales of military equipment to Iraq because a key witness, a former Government official, changed his testimony and said he had helped a company in Britain export to Iraq equipment used in making conventional weapons.


Way Cleared for Nebiolo's Re-election
PRIMO NEBIOLO has cleared the way for his re-election as head of the body representing all summer Olympic federations.


T2 Medical Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


CHRONICLE
AXL ROSE, the rock star, was found guilty yesterday of property damage and assault for his role in a disturbance last year during a Guns 'n' Roses concert near St.
Louis, The Associated Press reported.
About 40 concertgoers and 25 police officers were injured at the July 2, 1991, event in the Riverport Amphitheater in Maryland Heights, Mo.
Damage to the amphitheater amounted to $200,000.
The singer had pleaded not guilty to four misdemeanor counts of assault and one count of property damage, contending that he had jumped into the crowd to stop a fight.
But the A.P. report said that a videotape admitted into evidence showed him spotting a fan with a camera and attacking him, smashing a microphone and storming off stage, bringing the concert to an abrupt halt.


International Aluminum reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Corrections
Because of a transcription error, an article on Monday about the Federal investigation into the killing of Yankel Rosenbaum in the Crown Heights section of Brooklyn rendered two words incorrectly in a quotation from a Bronx rabbi about the case.
The rabbi, Avi Weiss, said Mayor David N. Dinkins was "responsible for the climate after Yankel Rosenbaum," not that he was "responsible for the death of Yankel Rosenbaum."


Corrections
A holiday schedule for Veterans Day in The Metro Section yesterday misstated the plans of the New York City Department of Sanitation.
There will be no trash pickup today.
A corrected schedule appears on page B4.


Lawyer Found Slain In Motel in Bronx
A partner in one of Manhattan's most prestigious law firms was found stabbed to death early Monday morning in a motel in the Bronx, the police said yesterday.
The victim was identified by the police yesterday as David L. Schwartz, 55 years old, the head of the real-estate section of Cravath, Swaine &amp; Moore.


House Democrats Proclaiming Unity
House Democratic leaders said today that they were sure the freshmen in their party would join them in working with the Clinton Administration on jobs, health care and deficit reduction.
"All of us saw very strong support for the principal objectives of the Clinton campaign and the Clinton Administration," House Speaker Thomas S. Foley said.
He spoke after a third meeting with the newcomers here, following sessions in Los Angeles and Chicago.


2 Men Arrested in Weekend Assaults on Motorists
Two young men with a sawed-off shotgun roamed through five communities Saturday evening, accosting people in their driveways and stealing their cars and money, according to the police.
One victim was shot in the arm.
James F. Mulvihill, the acting Essex County Prosecutor, today announced the arrests of Frederick White, 20 years old, of East Orange, and Frederick Ludiver, 18, of Newark, on charges of armed robbery, aggravated assault and weapons possession.
He said the investigators were still trying to determine if others were involved.


92d St. Y's Arts Head to Quit
Raymond T. Grant, the director of the Tisch Center for the Performing Arts at the 92d Street Y, said yesterday that he planned to leave his post at the end of this month.
Since August 1991, Mr.
Grant has been in charge of the Y's arts programming as well as the restructuring of the center's administration.
The Tisch Center, which has one of the city's most active halls, is presenting 135 events this season, including a series by its resident orchestra, the New York Chamber Symphony.
Jacqueline M. Taylor, the managing director, is to be the acting director.
Daniel Kaplan, the president of the Y's board, said yesterday that a committee to search for Mr.
Grant's successor has not yet been formed.
Both he and Mr.
Grant said that finding a successor was not a matter of urgency, since Mr.
Grant has already done most of the programming for the 1993-94 season and some of the programming for 1994-95.


Geneva Steel reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Ramenskoye Journal; Realty Comes to Russia: Is Russia Really Ready?
Technically, land is not for sale in Russia, and has not been since the Bolshevik Revolution in 1917.
But in this old textile mill town outside Moscow, local officials recently auctioned off nine separate lots anyway, by way of experiment, just to see what the reaction would be.


Chuck Connors, Actor, 71, Dies; Starred as Television's 'Rifleman'
Chuck Connors, a former professional basketball and baseball player who gained stardom as an actor on the television series "The Rifleman," died yesterday at Cedars-Sinai Medical Center in Los Angeles.
He was 71 years old and lived on a ranch in Tehachapi, Calif., north of Los Angeles.
He died of lung cancer, the hospital said.


The Pop Life
Money and Music
Stan Soocher says it's war, and he wants to teach guerrilla tactics to the troops on the front line.
"I want to give working musicians a chance to fire a shot back at the lopsided power structure of the music business, which is really in the hands of non-musicians at record companies, who often forget they exist because they have musicians as their product," said Mr.
Soocher, a lawyer who is the editor of Entertainment Law and Finance, a trade publication.


Couple Are Found Slain in Manhattan Home
An elderly man and his wife, who feared leaving home at night because of crime, were found stabbed to death in their Washington Heights apartment Monday evening, the police said.
The couple were killed in a senior-citizens' housing project whose residents say they have long been concerned about security at the 22-story building, Bethune Gardens, at 157th Street and Amsterdam Avenue.
Just last Thursday they held a meeting to discuss the need for more guards, even if at their own expense.


Drug Shows Best Result in Slowing Alzheimer's
In the most positive results so far in research on treating Alzheimer's disease, a new study shows that a much-debated drug can slow the devastating loss of memory and reasoning that plague patients.
But the improvements with the experimental drug were modest, although statistically significant, and the drug has side effects.
The drug is tacrine.
Acting on earlier research, the Food and Drug Administration had refused to approve it for marketing, saying its benefits were unproved and its side effects worrisome.


American Biltrite reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 26


ECI Telecom reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Appeals Court's Senior Judge To Assume Wachtler's Duties
The judge who has temporarily assumed the duties of former Chief Judge Sol Wachtler on the New York State Court of Appeals is considered an experienced and capable jurist who will give the court the stability it needs during an extraordinary time of transition, state officials and legal experts say.
Judge Richard D. Simons, a 65-year-old Republican from Rome, N.Y., was appointed to the court in January 1983 by Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo.
As the associate judge who has served on the court the longest, he now takes over the Chief Judge's duties, including overseeing the Office of Court Administration, which handles the day-to-day operations of the state court system.


Waban Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 24


AMRE Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 27


Kicks in the Head Are All in a Day's Work; Teaching a Defense Course in Mugging Takes a Model of Sensitivity
David Tull recently became the newest fully certified Model Mugger in New York.
He earned his certificate not by mugging models but by modeling as a mugger, which is possibly the toughest job in the city.
As an instructor at the Model Mugging self-defense course for women, he has days when his "to do" list looks something like this:
Attempt to mug four women.
Try to rape eight others.
Tackle them, whisper horribly vile threats, tie their hands, cover their mouths with duct tape or pillow cases.
Fail every time.
Get elbowed in the jaw six times, jabbed in the eyes 20 times, kicked in the groin 60 times.
End up helplessly prone, sweating inside a 40-pound padded suit, as his head is stomped by a "victim" and the audience cheers wildly.


A Ferment in the Kitchen
AT its most basic, bread-baking requires only flour, water and leavening.
Adjusting the proportions, as well as the baking time and temperature, results in a wide variety of breads.
Sourdough, a baking term that evokes images of gritty gold miners, refers to a kind of leavening.
It is popular with serious bread bakers these days, both because it is considered more natural than commercial yeast and because sourdough breads tend to have more "rustic" textures, thicker crusts and a more assertive but not necessarily sour taste.


Only Silence From P.B.A. Chief on Police Panel
When the Patrolmen's Benevolent Association led 10,000 demonstrating police officers in front of City Hall in September, the message was loud and unmistakable: the union would not back down in its fight against a proposal for an independent panel to review police misconduct.
Now, almost two weeks after Mayor David N. Dinkins and the City Council agreed on the formation of an independent board, the union's leadership has said nothing against the agreement.


BRIEFS
Debt  *
Atlanta Detention Center Project is tentatively offering $67.97 million of certificates of participation with a maximum yield of 6.50 percent for a certificate due in 2017.
Serials yield from 4.15 percent in 1995 to 6.10 percent in 2005.
Other long bonds are priced to yield 6.45 percent in 2012 and 6.375 percent in 2008.
All of the securities are insured by the Municipal Bond Investor's Assurance Corp. and rated AAA by both Moody's and S.&amp; P.


Wal-Mart Stores Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Robert C. Forrey; Banking Executive, 65
Robert C. Forrey, recently retired president of the New Jersey Bankers Association, died yesterday at his home in Princeton.
He was 65 years old.
The cause of death was cancer, his family said.


Neorx Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Drug Resistance
While scientists already knew that bacteria could produce certain chemicals that inhibit antibiotics from fighting an infection, a report in a recent issue of the journal Nature describes the precise series of chemical interactions that can disrupt penicillin's ability to attack bacteria.
Penicillin was the first antibiotic that quickly cured a range of potentially deadly diseases, including meningitis, influenza and pneumonia.
But it is no longer a dependable cure for these diseases because resistant strains of the bacteria have proliferated as a result of frequent use of the drug.


Campus Journal; Tenure Dispute at S.M.U. Raises Suspicions of Racism
Southern Methodist University has labored hard in the last two decades to live down a reputation that it is a hostile place for minority teachers and students.
But a tenure fight involving a black professor at the law school now threatens to undermine the institution's efforts.
Ndiva Kofele-Kale (pronounced DEE-va Ko-FAH-lee KAH-lee), a 46-year-old professor born in Cameroon, was a visiting professor at S.M.U. four years ago when he gave up tenure at the University of Tennessee Law School to remain in Dallas at the law school's request.
Implicit in that invitation, the professor said, was tenure.


Sigma-Aldrich reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


THE TRANSITION: Political Memo; Change of Tone for Clinton: High Energy to Low Profile
The most striking thing about Gov.
Bill Clinton since the election has been the intriguing contrast between Bill Clinton the candidate and Bill Clinton the President-elect.
The Bill Clinton the public saw during the campaign was decisive, vigorous and remarkably open, a candidate who spent up to 18 hours a day talking up his ideas in public.
But President-elect Bill Clinton has been seen only rarely.
He has been conspicuously deliberate in making decisions and as obsessed with holding information close to the vest as any President.


Philip Garfinkel; Engineering Executive, 66
Philip Garfinkel, chairman and chief executive of the Stone &amp; Webster Engineering Corporation, died on Sunday at his home in Framingham, Mass.
He was 66 years old.
Mr.
Garfinkel was born in Brooklyn and graduated from the City College of New York, with a degree in electrical engineering.
He joined Stone &amp; Webster as an electrical designer in 1959 and worked in the company's New York City division before being transferred to the company's headquarters in Boston in 1984.


Stage II Apparel reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-13  COLLECTING TAXES OVERSEAS
Japan's largest consumer electronics company has reached an agreement with the I.R.S. on a formula for calculating its American taxes.
The accord uses a new method for reducing disputes over the taxation of multinational corporations.
A1  FRANCE'S TRADE DILEMMA
News analysis: President Mitterrand faces a tough choice on world trade: incur Germany's anger by continuing to resist a deal, or enrage the powerful French farmers' lobby by signing an accord.
A1


Leader of Exile Group Tells of Spying for Cuba
The commander of one of the most militant Cuban exile organizations stunned the anti-Castro movement this week by announcing that he had worked as a spy for Cuba since 1979.
But equally surprising, the man, Francisco Avila Azcuy, also says he has been providing the American Government with information on the Cuba's spy network in the United States and on the activities of various anti-Castro exile groups.


Yes, Devils Are Scoring, but Not So Smoothly
Herb Brooks kept looking at the league statistics in near disbielief as he sat in his office at the Devils' training facility after practice this morning.
"Look at our stats," Brooks exclaimed.
"How many people have been scoring even-strength?" he asked rhetorically.


James Festa, 36, Dies; City Opera Manager
James Festa, the company manager of the New York City Opera, died on Thursday at St.
Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital Center.
He was 36 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died of AIDS, said Susan Woelzl, a spokeswoman for City Opera.


Help a Mail-Order Company: Send Food
AT a recent conference of people who sell things by mail, there was much moaning and groaning among those who sell food.
"There hasn't been real growth," said William Dean, who is a consultant in the catalogue industry.
Mr.
Dean, who with Hannah Bruce publishes the Bruce Report, a catalogue trade journal, says the industry has no one but itself to blame, because it hasn't been responsive to consumer demands.
"People are much more price-value oriented," he said, "and in all segments of mail order -- clothes, equipment -- there is a very definite move downward toward more moderate prices. But not in food. I haven't seen any reaction from them and they need to look at their margins."


Cuomo Remains Bench Jockey of New York Racing
Officials of the New York Racing Association testified yesterday before the Governor's Commission on Racing in the 21st Century and made three proposals: Reduce the state tax on bets, cut six weeks off the winter racing season and allow the race tracks to take over off-track betting.
The proposals came in response to a call from Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo, who created the commission in an attempt to recast the structure of racing in the state.
The Governor's chief target was the association, the private nonprofit organization that is empowered to run racing at Belmont Park, Aqueduct and Saratoga until the year 2000.


Cooper Companies and Former Head Are Indicted
The Cooper Companies, once a leading producer of eye-care products, was charged yesterday in a Federal indictment with participating, along with its former chairman, Gary A. Singer, in an extensive criminal scheme to profit from insider tips on junk bond trades.
In announcing the charges in Manhattan, Otto G. Obermaier, United States Attorney for the Southern District of New York, said Mr.
Singer was "central to the scheme," which was said to involve bribing a Boston mutual fund analyst to get tips about the fund's proposed junk bond purchases and then trading in advance of the fund, both through the company and through family accounts.


Hong Kong Tastes Democracy, and China Chokes
Britain and China are engaged in an increasingly bitter dispute over the degree of democracy in this territory, and the resulting political typhoon has Hong Kong awash with fundamental new uncertainties about its economic and political future.
In recent months, the new British Governor has stunned almost everyone by calling for more democracy, reversing the approach of the last half dozen years, in which the British authorities went out of their way to squelch the colony's democratic impulses.
China has responded with outrage, starting a new cold war against the Governor, Christopher Patten, whom it has promoted to the top of its list of foreign enemies.


Algo Group reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Elbit Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Book Notes
Himself, Again
Shelves at bookstores are stocked these days with courtroom thrillers by authors who are being promoted as "the next Scott Turow." While working first at the United States Attorney's office in Chicago and then as a partner in the Chicago firm Sonnenschein Nath &amp; Rosenthal, Mr.
Turow wrote two best-selling novels, "Presumed Innocent" (1987) and "The Burden of Proof" (1990).
In the process, he started a genre within the immensely popular genre of legal novels: legal novels by lawyers.
The next Scott Turow novel is expected to be in bookstores in June.
Not the next Scott Turow novel as in the next book by a lawyer turned novelist trying to mimic Mr.
Turow's style and success.
The next novel by Mr.
Turow, "Pleading Guilty," is to be published in June by Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, which has planned an 800,000-copy first printing and is in the midst of a heated auction for book-club rights to the novel.


Theater in Review
Three Shouts From a Hill The End of the Beginning A Pound on Demand Bedtime Story  Symphony Space Broadway at 95th Street Through Saturday Three one-act plays by Sean O'Casey; directed by Shivaun O'Casey; set design by Brien Vahey; set decoration by Josie MacAvin; costumes, Nigel Boyd; lighting, Rory Dempster; sound design by Colum and Tommy Sands; production manager, John Ashton; company stage manager, Kate Hyland; production stage manager, Sarah Marshall; company stage manager, John Lyons.
Presented by the O'Casey Theater Company of Newry, County Down, Northern Ireland.
WITH: Risteard Cooper, Patrick Fitzsymons, Pauline Flanagan, Gerard McSorley; Madeleine Potter and Shauna Rooney.
Contrary to appearances, the one-act comedy is one of the most difficult of all literary forms to master.
The offspring of farce and music hall (and the forerunner of the half-hour sitcom), it is also perhaps the hardest form to bring off successfully.
A decidedly mixed evening of three one-acts by Sean O'Casey, billed as "Three Shouts From a Hill" and presented by the O'Casey Theater Company, shows why.


Driver Sentenced in Lion Player's Death
A driver whose truck struck and killed Detroit Lions offensive lineman Eric Andolsek received a 30-day jail sentence and $175 fine after pleading no contest to failure to maintain control.
Last week, a grand jury declined to indict JAMES E. BENNETT of Baton Rouge, La., for negligent homicide or vehicular homicide.
State District Judge JOHN J. ERNY JR. accepted Bennett's plea on Monday and ordered him to serve a jail term in addition to paying the fine.
Andolsek was killed in his yard last summer when Bennett lost control of his 10-wheel flatbed truck while wiping his face with a towel, officials said.  (AP)


Militant Walks Free, and Trinidad Trembles
In this country of elaborate carnival and colorful farce, when Yasin Abu Bakr took over a live evening news broadcast two years ago, many bemused spectators took his rambling speech as a prank promoting a new show.
But with the spreading news that the police headquarters had been bombed, the Prime Minister and several members of Parliament taken hostage, and much of colonial Port-of-Spain set ablaze by Mr.
Abu Bakr's radical Islamic sect, all hints of comedy were soon stripped from Trinidad's worst crisis in 28 years of independence.


Treasuries Rally on Inflation Report
The bond market was treated yesterday to good news on inflation, and the Treasury auction of 10-year notes went relatively well.
So a market that has been depressed enjoyed a rousing one-day rally.
In late trading, the 7.25 percent 30-year bond due in August 2022 was offered at 956/32 , up 25/32 , or $7.81 for each $1,000.
The yield dropped to 7.66 percent, from 7.73 percent Monday.


Eating Well
EDWARD R. MADIGAN, the Secretary of Agriculture, has blocked the publication of new food-labeling regulations, which the Department of Health and Human Services had expected to announce Monday.
It is now up to the White House to resolve the dispute, and a senior Agriculture Department official said his agency's position on the regulations is more in tune with Bush Administration policy than is that of the Department of Health and Human Services.
A senior official in the Health and Human Services Department, who spoke only on the condition of anonymity, said the agency would refuse to engage in a public battle with the Agriculture Department.
"We're obviously fighting an uphill battle," he said.
"We won't get down to their level."


Honestly, There Isn't Any Better Way to Rebuild Sixth Avenue
To the Editor:
The caption on an Oct. 25 photo of the Avenue of the Americas as it undergoes $40 million of reconstruction implies that an excessive amount of cutting and paving has taken place.
The New York City Department of Transportation is well aware of the misconception that if a street is cut and paved more than once during reconstruction something is wrong.


Priorities, Priorities
Take a look at the list below. It includes only
some
of the promises President-elect Clinton made in his 13-month campaign.
Many are sparklingly good and could, if carried out, make America a better, more productive country.
But like politicians generally, he's offered something to everyone -- welfare mothers, high-tech entrepreneurs, chronically ill retirees -- and created frighteningly expensive expectations.
Mr.
Clinton says he can institute his program while gradually cutting the deficit in half.
It's a dubious proposition.
Even if he could do that, he'd be reckless to try.
By pushing too fast on too many fronts, Mr.
Clinton would risk repeating Jimmy Carter's mortal error, drowning Congress in a sea of policies and insuring that he brings none to shore.


Rudman to Join Big Law Firm
Warren B. Rudman, a 62-year-old New Hampshire Republican, will become a partner of the New York law firm of Paul, Weiss, Rifkind, Wharton &amp; Garrison when he retires from the Senate on Jan. 5.
"I expect to do a lot of negotiation in the corporate field," he said yesterday.
"I would also hope to attract some clientele of my own. But I will not be lobbying because both of us feel that this would be unseemly." He will practice primarily out of the firm's Washington office but will also spend time in New York.


Producer Prices Up Only 0.1%
Prices received by American producers edged up only one-tenth of 1 percent in October from the month before, as the weak economic recovery continued to keep inflation at bay, Labor Department figures showed today.
Smaller than usual increases for passenger car prices helped offset higher prices for gasoline and other energy components of the Producer Price Index for finished goods, which are products ready for sale to final business and individual users.
The index had risen three-tenths of 1 percent in September.


A 27-Point Spree by Rice Rallies Heat Past Celtics
Heat 110, Celtics 106
MIAMI, Nov. 11 (AP) -- Glen Rice scored 27 points and hit four free throws in the final 14.6 seconds tonight as the Miami Heat erased a 14-point deficit in the third quarter to defeat the Boston Celtics, 110-106.
Dee Brown scored 7 points and Reggie Lewis added 5 as the Celtics used a 16-4 run to cut a Heat advantage to 104-102 with 17.3 seconds to play.
Rice then sandwiched two free throws on each side of a basket by Boston's Xavier McDaniel to make it 108-104 with 8.1 seconds left.


Penney (J.C.) Co. (N) reports earnings for 13wks to Oct 24


CHIEF JUDGE QUITS POST IN NEW YORK IN EXTORTION CASE
Sol Wachtler, the Chief Judge of New York State's highest court, resigned yesterday, hours after a Federal judge ordered him detained in his home, monitored by electronic surveillance and private security guards.
He is to remain under guard until his Federal trial on charges of trying to blackmail a woman who broke off an affair with him.
The resignation from Judge Wachtler came in a telephone call at 1:30 P.M. to the senior associate judge of the State Court of Appeals, Richard D. Simons, who has assumed the duties of administering the state's court system in Mr.
Wachtler's absence.
But until Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo appoints a successor, the court will operate without a chief judge.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Courier Sets Back Connors  Tom Nijssen of the Netherlands and Grant Connell of Canada scored huge upsets in the European Community Championship at Antwerp, Belgium, yesterday while top-ranked Jim Courier averted the upset bid of Jimmy Connors, who is ranked 84th in the world.
Courier overpowered the 40-year-old Connors from the backcourt and added seven aces to win 6-3, 6-3 in the $1.11 million ATP event.
Nijssen, 278th in the world, beat Malivai Washington, ranked 12th over all, 3-6, 7-6 (7-5), 7-6 (7-1).
Wheaton came back strongly after a close first set to down Lars Jonsson of Sweden, 6-7 (7-4), 6-0, 6-2.
Reneberg beat Girts Dzelde of Latvia, 6-2, 6-3.
The fourth-seeded Cherkasov ousted Dmitri Polyakov of Ukraine, 6-3, 6-4, in a battle of baseliners.
Hlasek scored a 6-3, 7-5 victory over Jeff Tarango, a former Stanford University star.
Jim Grabb, a quarterfinalist last year, was ousted by Markus Zoecke of Germany, 7-5, 6-4. (AP) GOLF  Tough Going in Grand Slam  A planned romp through the desert sunshine turned into a slogging, slow-moving exercise in patience and survival for the big four winners in the Grand Slam of Golf at La Quinta, Calif.
There were no chuckles from Nick Price, Nick Faldo, Tom Kite and Fred Couples after the first 18 holes yesterday in the two-day, 36-hole chase for $1 million by the men who won golf's Grand Slam events this season.
Price's two-under-par 70 was the best score of the day on the Jack Nicklaus Resort Course at PGA West.
Couples shot 71, Faldo had 72 and Kite shot a 75. (AP)


Ex-Chief of Shearson Gets Post at Republic New York
Peter A. Cohen, who resigned under pressure as chairman and chief executive of Shearson Lehman Hutton Inc. nearly three years ago, yesterday was named vice chairman and a board member at the Republic New York Corporation.
Mr.
Cohen, 45 years old, will also be chairman of the Republic New York Securities Corporation, a full-service brokerage that opened for business Nov. 2 with an initial capitalization of $100 million.
For several months, he has consulted for Republic on the creation of the unit.


Dollar General reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Christopher Memorial
A memorial service will be held for Robert C. Christopher, who administered the day-to-day operations of the Pulitzer Prize Board, on Nov. 19 at 4:30 P.M. at St.
Paul's Chapel on the Columbia University campus at 117th Street and Amsterdam Avenue.
Mr.
Christopher died on June 14 at the age of 68.


Nordstrom Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Theater in Review
Sister!
Sister!
The American Place Theater 111 West 46th Street Vinie Burrows's one-woman show; arranged and adapted by Miss Burrows; production stage manager, Ken Starrett; costume designer, Dada's Works.
Presented by Ananse Productions.
Vinie Burrows's solo performance piece "Sister! Sister!" sets itself the daunting task of evoking the very essence of womanhood by interweaving the voices of 19 women of diverse race and culture.
The authors of the selections that Ms.
Burrows has spliced into a theatrical collage range from the Irish playwright Sean O'Casey to the American poet Muriel Rukeyser to the Ugandan author Okot p'Bitek.


Russia's New Culture Begins to Emerge From Soviet Rubble
It was still morning at the cramped studios of AIST-TV in Irkutsk, a park-filled city on the Angara River best known as a stop on the Trans-Siberian Railway and for its proximity to mighty Lake Baikal.
The television station wouldn't even go on the air until 9 that night.
Yet already producers and technicians were swarming about, tending to the shiny Japanese equipment and preparing programs for future broadcast.
AIST -- the call letters stand for Alternative Irkutsk Studio Television -- is one of hundreds of new, private television stations in Russia, and a leader among them: during the Russian coup of August 1991, AIST, which happened to have a crew in Moscow, was the only station in the country to telecast fresh images of the drama in the capital.
Station officials almost arrested for their pains, an action halted by the local authorities and ultimately made moot by the failure of the coup.
But that scoop helped make AIST-TV the most popular station by far in a region that spans vast tracts of south central Siberia.


EASTERN COLLEGE REPORT
Boston College
Time will tell how searing the 54-7 loss at Notre Dame will be to the Eagles' psyche, a defeat Coach Tom Coughlin described as "a strong dose of humility."
"Maybe there's something to be gained from last weekend," he said, "but I don't know what it could be."


Charles Baltin, 81, Radio Program Host
Charles Baltin, who retired in 1988 after more than six decades in broadcasting, died on Monday at the Central New Jersey Jewish Home for the Aged in Somerset, N.J.
He was 81 years old.
He had a cerebral hemorrhage four years ago, his family said.


U.S. Seeking Tighter U.N. Sanctions on Serbia
In an effort to tighten sanctions against Serbia, the United States is pressing to ban the shipment of goods through Serbian-controlled territory to other countries, senior Administration officials said today.
A resolution under discussion at the United Nations would also require countries bordering the Danube River, particularly Romania and Bulgaria, to stop and inspect ships suspected of carrying goods to Serbia.


Massachusetts Governor Seeks Stiffest Law to Collect Child Support
Gov.
William F. Weld of Massachusetts introduced legislation today to give state officials vast new powers to track down parents who owe child-support payments and to punish those who refuse to pay.
Advocates said the proposed laws, which include the power to revoke professional licenses and driver's licenses, would be the toughest in the nation.


Moore Medical Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 26


ON THE SET WITH: Bryant Gumbel; Steady in Storm or Calm
IN recent years, the ride on NBC's "Today" show has been like an adventure on the high seas -- down, then up, then down, now up again.
But the guy at the wheel still shows no signs of losing his equilibrium.
After 11 years as host of the program, the longest tenure in the history of "Today," Bryant Gumbel, now 44 years old, remains secure, self-assured, and just a bit inscrutable.


Pipe Ruptures And Rocks Con Ed Plant
A huge steam pipe at a Consolidated Edison generating station on the East Side of Manhattan ruptured with a deafening roar last night, killing a Con Ed employee, seriously injuring at least seven other people and forcing emergency workers to contend with temperatures as high as 500 degrees as they pulled the injured to safety.
The rupture occurred at 9:05 P.M. at the Waterside Station at 39th Street and First Avenue, which provides electricity and steam heat to commercial and residential buildings on the East Side.
By early this morning, Con Ed officials said they had not yet determined the cause of the pipe break.


PMS Is a Worldwide Phenomenon
WHEN American women complain of premenstrual symptoms and menstrual discomfort, they are often thought to be overreacting and perhaps even concocting symptoms that women in other countries seem never to experience.
But a cross-cultural study of menstrually related symptoms finds that they afflict women from other cultures whose lives are very different from those of American women.
In the first large-scale cross-cultural comparison based on the general population of menstruating women, researchers at the State University of New York at Buffalo found that menstrual cramps, water retention, emotional disruptions and decreased activity related to the onset of menstruation were experienced equally by women in the United States, Italy and Bahrain.
The study involved 179 Americans, 172 Bahrainians and 239 Italians who were interviewed about the symptoms they experience before and during their menstrual periods and during the rest of the month.


Mets Leave Murray Wide Open to Draft
The strategic shift came late, making the stakes high.
Eddie Murray, the team's leading run-producer, could be lost to the Mets in the expansion draft.
Faced with a complication because of the acquisition of shortstop Tony Fernandez, the Mets were forced to expose the veteran first baseman to the draft set for next Tuesday, according to a baseball official with knowledge of the situation.


Using Spin to Power Electric Cars
When General Motors introduces its battery-powered Impact in the middle of this decade, the electric automobile will be powered by a souped-up version of a conventional lead-acid battery.
But even though G.M. believes this energy source can make the Impact a viable alternative to gasoline-powered cars, the auto maker concedes that the lead-acid battery may not be the long-term answer for electric vehicles.
California has given G.M. and the other auto makers a powerful incentive to develop practical electric cars by requiring the companies to insure that 2 percent of their vehicles have zero emissions by 1998.
The auto industry's principal focus is on improving the conventional battery, which has a limited power storage in relation to its weight and takes several hours to recharge.


JB's Restaurants reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 28


Personal Health
ONCE a cocky and adventurous journalist and outdoor enthusiast, Steve Fishman found his self-confidence shattered and his life turned topsy-turvy by the onset of epilepsy at the age of 29.
The disorder developed after malformed blood vessels in his brain ruptured, causing a hemorrhage that required surgery.
Like many people who suddenly learn that they have a chronic and incurable disorder, Mr.
Fishman at first adopted the mental outlook of an invalid.
He could no longer trust his body.
He became afraid to venture far from home and take part in public activities for fear of having a seizure.


BIG JAPAN CONCERN REACHES AN ACCORD
Japan's largest consumer electronics company has reached an agreement with the United States Internal Revenue Service on a formula for calculating its American taxes.
The accord uses a new method for reducing disputes over the taxation of multinational corporations, company officials and Japanese tax authorities said today.
The agreement comes as President-elect Bill Clinton and members of Congress have been accusing foreign companies that operate in the United States of avoiding taxes by shifting their profits offshore.
In his campaign, Mr.
Clinton said he could collect $45 billion in additional taxes from foreign companies over four years by clamping down on this practice.


Philips Tries To Pull Away From Pack
PHILIPS ELECTRONICS N.V. must love a challenge.
The Dutch consumer electronics giant has set out this fall to introduce two revolutionary products -- DCC (digital compact cassette) and CD-I (compact disk interactive) -- and at the same time build recognition of Philips as an innovator.


Different Dimension From Watters
This tells you plenty about Ricky Watters:
He was asked after the San Francisco 49ers had smacked the Atlanta Falcons by 41-3 here on Monday night if he had been insulted by the Falcons' loud music, glittering lights and tumultuous hoopla offered during their pregame introductions.
Watters smiled.


Reds' New Coach Is Club's Ex-Manager
The Cincinnati Reds completed their coaching staff yesterday by naming DAVE BRISTOL, a former manager of the team, as their third-base coach and batting instructor.
Bristol, 59 years old, has been out of baseball for the last three years.
He managed the Reds from 1966 to 1969.
He later managed the Milwaukee Brewers, the Atlanta Braves and the San Francisco Giants.
He was also a coach for Montreal, San Francisco, Philadelphia and Cincinnati.


Telephone &amp; Data Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Why Increased Gasoline Prices Mean Inflation
To the Editor:
"Unfair Shots at a Fair Tax," your Oct. 13 endorsement of Ross Perot's proposed gasoline tax of 50 cents a gallon only proves once again that some of the American people, and you with them, have a 10-minute memory.


TransTechnology Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 27


EMC Shows Faster Data Storage System
While its competitors grasp for comparable technology, the upstart EMC Corporation continued to stay out front in disk storage for mainframe computers yesterday by announcing a faster, more powerful version of its innovative Symmetrix system for I.B.M. mainframes.
The announcement came a day after EMC's rival, the Storage Technology Corporation of Louisville, Colo., said its long-awaited Iceberg system would be delayed until late next year.


A Beacon Of Light Amid The Gloom
Brian Washington has been one of the most consistent, and most unheralded, Jets this season.
The strong safety is tied for the team lead in interceptions with four and in forced fumbles with two.
He is second in tackles with 66, one behind Lonnie Young.
Washington has had a hand in seven of the last 10 Jets takeaways and had at least one takeaway in four of the last five games.
If the Jets were 7-2 instead of 2-7 he might be an early candidate for the Pro Bowl, but he doesn't even have a game ball to show for his efforts.


Sister Calls Woman in Assault Case Pliable
The older sister of the mildly retarded woman in the Glen Ridge sex assault case took the witness stand today and recalled how her sister, at age 5 and 6, ate dog feces and mud cakes at the urging of other children.
The witness, Elizabeth Verillo, also testified that in 1989, the year of the events in question in the trial, the young woman, then 17 years old, frequently played with children 5, 6 and 7 years old.
And Mrs.
Verillo said that she had never heard her sister make any sexual comments.


COMPANY NEWS
ALLIANT TECHSYSTEMS INC., Edina, Minn., said it had received a $122.6 million contract for MK-50 torpedoes from the Naval Sea Systems Command, Washington.
ALLIED-SIGNAL INC., Morristown, N.J., said it had won a $10 million contract to supply avionics for 50 Czechoslovak jet trainers ordered by the Egyptian Air Force.


Joseph B. Dratch; Clothier, 76
Joseph B. Dratch, chairman and co-founder of the Claire Dratch women's specialty store in Bethesda, Md., died Saturday at his home in Chevy Chase, Md.
He was 76 years old.
He died after a heart attack, his family said.


STUDY SEES EXCESS IN X-RAYS OF HEART
About half of all special X-ray procedures to examine the heart performed in this country are unnecessary or could be safely put off for long periods, say authors of a study reported today in The Journal of the American Medical Association.
The conclusion about the procedures, called coronary angiograms, was immediately disputed by the head of the leading group of heart specialists in the United States.


Accounts
*
Great Atlantic and Pacific Tea Co., Montvale, N.J., to Foote, Cone &amp; Belding's Spot Broadcasting Unit, New York, to handle broadcast media planning and buying for the supermarket chain's $10 million account, previously at Bozell New York.
Bozell lost the creative portion of the account last month to the Tom Attea Co., New York. *
Boston Chicken, Naperville, Ill., to Bayer Bess Vanderwarker, Chicago, as the first agency to handle the fast-food franchiser's account, with billings estimated at $6 million.
Bayer Bess was awarded the account after a review that also included three other Chicago agencies: Ayer, Bozell and CME KHBB Advertising.


Food Notes
Prize Truffles
This is the peak season for white truffles from Italy.
Retail prices this year are comparable to those of last season, $65 to $90 an ounce.
And the quality is extremely good.
At a seven-course dinner featuring white truffles on Monday evening at San Domenico on Central Park South, a pound of truffles was auctioned off for $2,500.
This prized collection consisted of four truffles, each about the size of a tangerine, that had been dug near Alba in the Piedmont region.
The auction prize also included a 12-liter bottle of 1988 Ribezzo Barbera d'Alba.


Coors vs. Anheuser: One More Round
A highly publicized dispute between two brewing companies has taken yet another turn as the Coors Brewing Company introduced a television ad featuring its president, Peter H. Coors, answering attacks by the rival Anheuser-Busch Companies.
It is unusual for Mr.
Coors to take so direct and public a role in Coors's marketing and advertising, but then, it is also unusual for Coors to come under such intense fire from a competitor.
Robert Klugman, Coors's vice president for brand marketing, said yesterday that Coors had hoped that after two months, Anheuser would have tired of running commercials that disparage the process Coors uses to brew Coors Light beer in the East.


Venture Stores Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


METRO DIGEST
CHIEF JUDGE RESIGNS COURT
Sol Wachtler, the Chief Judge of New York State's highest Court, resigned by telephone hours after he was ordered detained in his home, monitored by electronic surveillance and private security guards.
He is to remain under guard until his Federal trial on attempting to blackmail a wealthy Republican fund-raiser with whom he had an affair.
Names of possible successors began to surface in Albany.
A1.
A dignified hearing in Federal Court in lower Manhattan. B8.
A difficult choice awaits Governor Cuomo. B8. NEW YORK CITY


Review/Film; Disney Puts Its Magic Touch on 'Aladdin'
"Master, I hear and obey," said the Genie in the storybook version of "Aladdin," and his comments seldom went further than that.
For an exercise in contrast, consider the dizzying, elastic miracle wrought by Robin Williams, Walt Disney Pictures' bravura animators and the Oscar-winning songwriting team of Alan Menken and Howard Ashman in "Aladdin," the studio's latest effort to send the standards for animated children's films into the stratosphere.
It may be nothing new to find Mr.
Williams, who provides the voice of a big blue Genie with a manic streak, working in a wildly changeable vein.
But here are animators who can actually keep up with him.
Thanks to them, the Genie is given a visual correlative to the rapid-fire Williams wit, so that kaleidoscopic visions of Groucho Marx, Arnold Schwarzenegger, William F. Buckley Jr., Travis Bickle and dozens of other characters flash frantically across the screen to accompany the star's speedy delivery.
Much of this occurs to the tune of "Friend Like Me," a cake-walking, show-stopping musical number with the mischievous wit that has been a hallmark of Disney's animated triumphs.


Bass Presses Bid for Units Of Maxwell
A group led by the Texas billionaire Robert M. Bass said yesterday that it was seeking to present its $1.2 billion offer for Macmillan Inc. and Official Airline Guides to the creditors of the Maxwell Communication Corporation, even though that offer was officially rejected as inadequate by the British administrator and American examiner in the Maxwell bankruptcy.
The Bass group has offered to pay $725 million cash and to assume all debt of Macmillan and Official Airline Guides to third parties.
It was not immediately clear how much, if at all, the Bass group might raise its bid.


Claire's Stores Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Messier Doesn't Mind the Controversy
The captain felt it was time to act like a captain.
That's what it was all about.
Mark Messier felt the unhappiness, heard the grumbling, and saw all of it followed by a dismal on-ice performance.
And he decided it was time to break the silence.
Did he know he would cause controversy? Of course he did. Did he care? Not a bit.


Limited Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Diana Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 10


T. G. S. Christensen, Professor, 69, Dies; A Labor Law Expert
Thomas G. S. Christensen, a labor law expert and arbitrator who taught labor law at New York University for the last three decades, died on Sunday during a family visit in Lancaster, Pa.
He was 69 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died of a heart attack, said his wife, Andrea.


THE TRANSITION: The Republicans; Looking to the Future, Party Sifts Through Past
There is something theological to the process now beginning in the Republican Party, as all the factions begin addressing the question that will drive dozens of conferences and political fights in the months ahead: What are the doctrinal foundations of Republicanism beyond Bush and Reagan?
Any Republican who watched the defection of working women, suburbanites, young people, moderates, Reagan Democrats and independents last Tuesday felt something more than simple queasiness.


Books of The Times; Veterans of Foreign Wars and the War at Home
Colin Powell  Soldier/Statesman, Statesman/Soldier  By Howard Means  Illustrated. 369 pages.
Donald I. Fine. $23.
Liberators  Fighting on Two Fronts In World War II  By Lou Potter William Miles and Nina Rosenblum  Illustrated. 303 pages.
Harcourt Brace Jovanovich. $29.95.
Women in the Military  An Unfinished Revolution  By Maj.
Gen.
Jeanne Holm, U.S.A.F. (Ret.)  544 pages.
Presidio Press. $27.50.
Honor Bound  A Gay American Fights for the Right to Serve His Country  By Joseph Steffan  Illustrated. 245 pages.
Villard Books. $22.50.
For the first time in two warring centuries, a black four-star general is leading the American armed forces.
A poster from the film "Glory," about the black Massachusetts regiment whose bravery in Union blue is largely overlooked in the history books, hangs in the anteroom of Gen.
Colin L. Powell's Pentagon office.
The Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff displays similar mementos of the role played by blacks in other American wars.
To older veterans who remember the prejudice in Southern training camps and even on segregated battlefields, the Powell phenomenon is still remarkable to ponder on Veterans Day.


Robert S. Lagattolla; Insurance Executive, 61
Robert S. Lagattolla, a New York insurance executive specializing in marine-insurance issues, died on Friday in Manhattan.
He was 61 years old and lived in Staten Island.
He died of a heart attack while attending the annual dinner of the Maritime Law Association at the Marriott Marquis, said Marilyn Lytle.
She is general counsel for the Water Quality Insurance Syndicate, of which Mr.
Lagattolla was president.


Citibank Alters Account Fee Rules
Citibank revamped its price list for consumer accounts at its New York branches yesterday to require larger deposits to qualify for free checking.
But customers will be given incentives to use the bank to buy securities, which will be counted toward minimum balances required for free checking.
The adjustments, effective Jan. 1, come as Citibank is battling Chemical Bank for the leading position in the New York consumer market.
In eschewing a price war in the battle for consumers, Citibank will require higher balances than Chemical for free checking.


Theater in Review
At the Crossroads  Folksbiene Playhouse 123 East 55th Street By Harry Kalmanowitz; adapted by Miriam Kressyn; directed by Bryna Turetsky; music director, Renee Solomon; set design, Harry Line; costumes, Guy Geoly; lighting, Alan Baron; production manager, Larry Zolotor; translator, Simcha Kruger; stage manager, Judith Scher.
Presented by the Folksbiene Playhouse of the Workmen's Circle, Ben Schechter, artistic director; Morris Adler, president.
In Yiddish, with simultaneous English translation.
WITH: Richard Carlow, Mark Ethan, Shira Flam, Celina Gray, Norman Kruger, David Rogow, Amir Shani, Mary Soreanu, Zypora Spaisman and Debra Turetsky.
What's a widowed mother to do?


Rehabclinics Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


INSIDE
Gay Sailor to Be Reinstated
Strongly rebuked by a Federal district judge for defying his earlier order, the Navy agreed to reinstate a gay sailor temporarily.
Page A14.
Con Ed Accident Kills 1


Sanders Is Reportedly Fined for Dousing
DEION SANDERS was fined $1,000 by BILL WHITE, the president of the National League, for dousing water on TIM McCARVER during the Atlanta Braves' celebration after beating Pittsburgh in the National League playoffs, according to a published report.


No Headline
Veterans Day NEW YORK  PARADE Begins at 9 A.M. on Fifth Avenue at 39th Street and proceeds south on Fifth Avenue to 24th Street, ending about noon.
GOVERNMENT OFFICES State, Federal and municipal offices closed.
POST OFFICE Express Mail and special delivery only; main post office open at 33d Street and Eighth Avenue.
BANKS Option to close.
PARKING Alternate-side rules suspended.
SANITATION No pickups, street cleanings or recycling.
SCHOOLS Closed.
FINANCIAL MARKETS Open.
TRANSPORTATION Subways, buses, Metro-North and Long Island Rail Road on regular weekday schedules.
NEW JERSEY  GOVERNMENT OFFICES State, Federal and municipal offices closed.
POST OFFICES Express Mail and special delivery only.
BANKS Closed.
SCHOOLS Local option.
TRANSPORTATION N.J. Transit on weekday schedules.
CONNECTICUT
GOVERNMENT OFFICES State, Federal and municipal offices closed.
POST OFFICES Express Mail and special delivery only.
BANKS Closed.
SCHOOLS Closed.
TRANSPORTATION New Haven line on weekday schedules.


Sol Wachtler's Fitting Departure
Almost from the moment of his shocking arrest last weekend, Chief Judge Sol Wachtler's swift departure from New York State's highest court seemed inevitable.
Yesterday the judge resigned.
His action was sad but highly appropriate.
Whatever factors influenced the resignation, his lawyer could credibly say that Judge Wachtler wanted to spare further harm to the State Court of Appeals.
New York and its courts have cause for relief that the Chief Judge, facing criminal charges of extortion and threats against his former woman friend, was able to recognize the predicament he had caused.
Less worthy options were available, like clinging to office until the state's removal machinery could operate.


Russian Troops Arrive As Caucasus Flares Up
As Russian troops spread out through the North Caucasus to enforce a state of emergency and quell a new outbreak of ethnic fighting, the leader of the break-away Chechen republic threatened today to take action unless the troops were withdrawn.
The threat by Dzhokhar Dudayev, a former Soviet Air Force general who declared his small ethnic homeland independent last year, added to the complexity and danger of the first conflict in Russia that President Boris N. Yeltsin has tried to resolve with force.


Pennsylvania Insurer Seized by Regulators
Pennsylvania regulators have seized the Fidelity Mutual Life Insurance Company of Radnor, Pa., in a move that blocks 100,000 customers from taking their money out of the company.
This is the first significant failure of a life insurance company in more than 16 months, experts say, and comes as the industry has been trying to restore public trust after the failure of several large companies.
Realty Investments Blamed
Many life insurance companies still suffer from large and languishing investments in commercial real estate.
But few companies, regulators say, have nearly as high exposure to real estate as Fidelity Mutual.
The Pennsylvania Insurance Department took over management of the company late Friday and ordered an indefinite moratorium on policy cancellations and loans to customers after a sudden run on the company's assets, said Ronald Chronister, a Pennsylvania deputy commissioner.
The takeover was not well publicized until yesterday.
The company will continue to pay annuities and death benefits.
But it is unclear what will happen to customers' savings until the state develops a plan to merge, restructure or liquidate the company.
"We certainly can't guarantee that they will see all of their money again," Mr.
Chronister said.
The action Friday froze about $30 million that 1,290 policyholders had requested from the company since mid-October, the insurance department said.
The company had been receiving requests to withdraw cash totaling about $3 million a week since March, with the run on assets rising to $14.8 million in the last week of October.
Public 'Beginning to Forget'
Joseph M. Belth, a professor of insurance at the University of Indiana, said Fidelity Mutual's failure constituted a setback for companies that had been hoping public concerns about their solvency -- and the effect on withdrawals -- had receded.
"I think this is a big trauma to the industry," Mr.
Belth said.
"People were beginning to forget."
Last year, the failures of the Mutual Benefit Life Insurance Company in New Jersey and the Executive Life and First Capital Life insurance companiesin California first raised fears about the industry.
Mutual Benefit Life, the largest life insurance company ever to fail, had more than 700,000 customers.
Mr.
Belth said that his review of Fidelity Mutual last spring showed that at the end of 1991 nearly 43 percent of the company's portfolio was in mortgages and real estate investments.
By the end of 1991, Fidelity Mutual's problem mortgages had risen to $78 million, or 146.5 percent of its surplus capital, he estimated.


Budget Plan Fuels Dispute In Nassau
In a war of words that could help determine who will be the next Nassau County Executive, Democrats and Republicans today painted very different pictures of the proposed $1.9 billion county budget for next year, with each side accusing the other of using the issue for political gain.
On one side was County Executive Thomas S. Gulotta, a Republican, who maintained that the Democrats are trying to manipulate him into raising property taxes, a demand to which he said he would not yield.


Michael R. Gingold ; Consultant, 70
Michael R. Gingold, chief executive officer of MRG Associates, a consulting firm in Wall Township, N.J., died Sunday at St.
Vincent's Hospital in Jacksonville, Fla.
He was 70 years old and lived in Fernandino Beach, Fla.
He died after heart-bypass surgery, his son Dennis said.


North Stars' Quinn Is Accused of Rape
Minnesota North Stars forward DAN QUINN was accused yesterday of raping a 19-year-old woman he met at a restaurant in Bloomington, Minn., the night before.
Police Chief ROBERT LUTZ said the woman called the police at 3:30 A.M. yesterday to report the alleged rape.
The woman said she and her friends went to a hotel for a party with some hockey players and that she was raped after some drinking and socializing, according to the police.


Knicks Win, but Look Like a Diamond in the Rough
Their performance last night contained a lot of rough spots, but the Knicks' record remained unblemished.
Holding off a late rally by the Nets, the Knicks escaped with a 99-96 victory before a capacity crowd at Madison Square Garden to go 3-0 on the season.


Matsutake Madness Seizes The Japanese Every Autumn
In this nation of ardent gift-givers, where people often approach life with chesslike strategies using hand-delivered presents in place of pawns, this is a very special season.
Autumn gives the Japanese a month or so to indulge their passion for what many here regard as the ultimate delicacy: matsutake.
Matsutake are large wild mushrooms whose moment on Japanese menus and in the gift sections of department stores is relatively brief.
The first boxes of the plump, perfumed fungi begin to arrive from China in late September, and the pine forests of western Japan yield the season's last giant specimens around mid-November.


Chargers and Broncos Fined for Fighting
At least 12 San Diego Chargers were fined by the National Football League for their roles in a fight during a game with the Denver Broncos on Oct. 25, General Manager BOBBY BEATHARD said.
Beathard said the fines range from $1,000 to $4,000, but would not give a breakdown.
Among those fined were tackle BRODERICK THOMPSON, who the Broncos said started the third-quarter scuffle when he leg-whipped defensive end BRIAN SOCHIA.


After 10 Years of Tears, Memorial Keeps Healing
The Wall.
It has been there 10 years now, almost to the day, and still they come, alone and in two's and three's, mothers, fathers, sons and daughters, widows, neighbors, total strangers and buddies wearing battered old campaign hats.
Survivors all of a long ago war in a far away place called Vietnam.


London Cheers Yeltsin After His Vow to Use Power to Thwart Foes
President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia told the BritishParliament today that he was willing to assume emergency powers, if necessary, to thwart a cabal of militant nationalists and former Communist officials he says are plotting to oust him.
Ending a high-profile, two-day state visit to Britain intended to demonstrate Western support for his beleaguered Government, Mr.
Yeltsin won a standing ovation after his speech before members of both the House of Commons and the House of Lords.


Larry Levan, 38; His Tastes Shaped Dance-Club Music
Larry Levan, a disk jockey, producer and remixer who changed the sound of dance music, died on Sunday at Beth Israel Medical Center.
He was 38 years old, and a resident of New York City.
He died of heart failure resulting from endocarditis, said Mel Charen, a friend.


Review/Music; From the Calgary Philharmonic
For the past year, Western Canada's gas interests have been busily pumping its product into the northeastern United States via a new pipeline.
Now, in a cultural affirmation of this descent from the north (called "The 1992 Pipeline Tour"), the Calgary Philharmonic has been visiting major cities in Canada and this country, alighting on Friday night at Carnegie Hall.
The music was by Berlioz, Britten, Schumann and Allan Gordon Bell.
The conductor was that old Canada hand, Mario Bernardi.
Prime Minister Brian Mulroney of Canada was in attendance.
There were two legitimate ways to look at this visit.
Any orchestra that presents itself at Carnegie Hall tacitly invites comparisons with the international ensembles that regularly share its stage.
From this point of view, the Calgary was somewhat out of place.
The violin sections and the solo winds played clearly and passionately at moments, most particularly in the slow movement of Schumann's Second Symphony.
Elsewhere, neither of these elements showed the sheen and responsiveness of a major ensemble.
The overall sound is thin and blunt though scrupulously tuned.


Ex-Im Bank Head Resigns
John D. Macomber, the chairman and president of the Export-Import Bank of the United States and a longtime friend of President Bush, announced today in a letter to his staff that he would step down at the end of the month and return to private life.
The Ex-Im Bank offers loans, loan guarantees and insurance policies to exporters.
Mr.
Macomber, who is 64 years old and was the chairman and chief executive of the Celanese Corporation, created the bank's first audit committee and loan-loss reserves.


Look What Wind Blew Back: Baseball's Giants
National League club owners today soundly rejected a move of the San Francisco Giants to St.
Petersburg, Fla., handing the Tampa Bay area its seventh setback in seven attempts to attract a major league baseball team.
The owners, in a secret ballot that required 10 votes for approval, voted 9-4 against allowing Bob Lurie, the Giants' owner, to sell the team for $115 million to the Tampa Bay group, which would have moved the Giants to the Florida Suncoast Dome in time for next season.


Fresh From the Baker, A New Staff of Life
"YOU can travel 50,000 miles in America without once tasting a piece of good bread," the writer Henry Miller once observed.
Miller, who died in 1980, left the scene before American bread began to rise anew to the challenge.
A little more than a decade later, bakeries are opening in cities across the country, offering breads that are first rate, handsomely crisp of crust and, yes, downright sexy.
Bread is so good now that it doesn't need butter.


Israelis Counter Rocket Attacks With a Buildup
Israel said today that it had massed troops and tanks at its northern border after two consecutive nights of rocket attacks by Lebanese guerrillas.
Cabinet ministers warned that continued attacks would provoke a powerful response.
"We are massing forces as a deterrent measure," a military spokesman said.


A Vietnam Veterans Day
Veterans Day is generally viewed as a time to honor Americans who have served in all wars.
But Veterans Day this year also marks a reconciliation -- between those who fought in America's most unpopular war and those who refused to serve because they viewed the war as unjust.
President-elect Bill Clinton did not serve in the military and worked vigorously in the anti-Vietnam War movement.
Vice President-elect Al Gore served in Vietnam.
In electing these two, the voters have ratified the idea that honorable people stood on both sides of the debate over the war.
That's an important step toward finally getting through the traumas of that era.


Companies Cut Research Budgets
American industry is pulling back on scientific research and development as it plans its budgets for next year, keeping that critical activity mired in a recession at least through the end of 1993, according to a survey released yesterday.
The survey on expected trends in research expenditures was conducted by Industrial Research Institute, a trade group based in Washington that represents the research centers of major corporations.


Corrections
A brief article in Weekend on Oct. 30 about ordering tickets to "Henri Matisse: A Retrospective" at the Museum of Modern Art included an incorrect telephone number supplied by Ticketmaster for its outlets.
The correct number is (212) 307-7171.


Community Colleges Forced To Restrict Access, and Goals
With tuition at four-year colleges climbing and a sluggish economy forcing workers back to school to retrain for new jobs, students of all ages have been flocking to the relatively inexpensive classrooms of the nation's community colleges.
But they do not always get in.
For the first time since the start of their explosive growth in the 1960's, community colleges -- which now enroll 36 percent of all students in higher education, and more than 50 percent of all freshmen -- are being forced to narrow their open-access policies and deal with fiscal constraints that will determine, to a large extent, whether they offer legitimate opportunity or just second-rate schooling.
More Harm for Some
The colleges have been criticized for failing to keep their promise to America's most economically and academically disadvantaged students.
Intellectual rigor can be flabby, classroom discipline loose, academic standards abstract.
An associate's degree can be of little help in finding a good job.


Corrections
A front-page picture caption yesterday about an orientation session for newly elected Senators misidentified the Senator-elect from Washington in some copies.
She is Patty Murray.


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Nov. 6
Oct. 30
Nov. 8
1992
1992
1991
Gasoline production, daily
7.0
6.9
6.8
Distillate production, daily
3.2
3.3
3.0
Gasoline stocks
208.3
206.3
200.2
Distillate stocks
135.7
135.0
133.4
Crude imports, daily
6.2
6.9
5.8
Product imports, daily
2.0
1.7
1.9
Crude stocks
326.9
322.3
346.5
Crude production, daily
7.0
7.0
7.4
Refinery utilization (%)
89.0
89.4
81.5
Source: American Petroleum Institute


Despite Delays, First Red Cross Convoys Leave Sarajevo


Why Increased Gasoline Prices Mean Inflation; Urban Aid and Yachts
To the Editor:
Re "An Urban Aid Bill That Doesn't" (editorial, Oct. 26): While I don't disagree that as a response to the events of last April in Los Angeles, H.R. 11, the "urban aid bill," falls short of what our urban areas need, I must take exception to your condemnation of "tax breaks for yacht buyers" in the bill.


Luyendyk Will Be Back Behind the Wheel
ARIE LUYENDYK, the 1990 Indianapolis 500 winner who spent most of the 1992 Indy-car season watching races from the pits, yesterday announced that he had signed a contract to drive for Chip Ganassi's Indy-car team for the 1993 season.


TJX Companies reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 24


Chyron Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Flat Yields Seen on Money Funds and C.D.'s
Yields for bank money market accounts and certificates of deposit will mostly range between unchanged and slightly higher compared with a week earlier when they are posted tomorrow, according to the most recent survey by The Bank Rate Monitor.
Banks will be closed today for Veterans Day.
Interest rates are expected to rise soon because the Clinton Administration is expected to set up a spending program to help spur the economy.
But these shifts are not expected until after the President-elect holds a meeting to evaluate economic conditions.


Wine Talk
THE tumult and the shouting have died; the experts have all been on late-night radio and not a few nervous nellies have been relieved of excess cash by the wine shops.
I'm talking about the furor raised in the cork-sniffing community by the threat of triple tariffs on white wine from Europe.
Negotiations on farm subsidies between the United States and the European Community collapsed on Nov. 3.
Two days later, last Thursday, the United States announced that, barring new developments, it would impose punitive tariffs on $300 million worth of imports, almost all of them French white wines.
The new duties will take effect on Dec. 5.


Market Place; Hospital Stocks: Brighter Outlook
HOSPITAL stocks have skidded in recent months as investors worried that Gov.
Bill Clinton's plans for health care might hurt earnings.
Some institutional fund managers unloaded hospital shares; some stood firm, hoping for better days.
"Investors were spooked by the campaign rhetoric," said John F. Hindelong, a health-care securities analyst with Donaldson, Lufkin &amp; Jenrette.
Both major political parties endorsed managed competition, under which groups of buyers would combine to try to force down prices.
And Governor Clinton also came out for health-care spending targets, which were perceived as a further threat to hospital revenues.


Citibank Alters Account Fee Rules
Citibank revamped its price list for consumer accounts at its New York branches yesterday to require larger deposits to qualify for free checking.
But customers will be given incentives to use the bank to buy securities, which will be counted toward minimum balances required for free checking.
The adjustments, effective Jan. 1, come as Citibank is battling Chemical Bank for the leading position in the New York consumer market.
In eschewing a price war in the battle for consumers, Citibank will require higher balances than Chemical for free checking.


Truman S. Gray, 86, Electronics Professor
Truman S. Gray, widely recognized for his ground-breaking work in electronics, died Saturday at Mount Auburn Hospital in Cambridge, Mass.
He was 86 years old and lived in Lexington, Mass.
He died after a heart attack in his home a few days earlier, said Charles Ball, a spokesman for the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, where Dr.
Gray taught.


Holyfield Finds Himself Fighting for Respect
He has earned more than $50 million as heavyweight champion, is undefeated in 28 fights (22 knockouts) and is acknowledged as a fighter who is brave and utterly professional.
Those sound like virtues that would entitle Evander Holyfield to the unqualified respect of his peers.


Pasta With They-Won't-Miss-the-Meat Sauce
PASTA sauces are the perfect medium for reducing the amount of meat in the diet without annoying the meat eaters in your family: they never notice.
Admittedly, this is no different from pulling a fast one, but when you are trying to talk people into eating a more plant-based diet, it's really better not to hit them over the head with it.
Orzo, the pasta of choice in this recipe, is a comfort food.
Soothing and toothsome, it is shaped like rice and is as good in chicken soup as it is under a sauce.
Although sauces seem to slither away from some pastas, they cling to orzo with fierce attachment.


BUSINESS DIGEST
International
Matsushita of Japan reached an agreement with the I.R.S. on a formula for calculating its American taxes.
Gov.
Bill Clinton and others have claimed some companies artificially deflate the profits that are subject to United States taxes.  [ Page A1. ]
Francois Mitterrand faces a tough choice on world trade.
He can incur the anger of France's most important ally, Germany, or enrage the powerful French farmers' lobby.
News Analysis.  [ A1. ]


Eckersley Picks Up An Elusive Award
His fear of failure is sometimes the thing that motivates Dennis Eckersley most.
By his own recollection, the moments he will never forget are those that led to losses: the Kirk Gibson home run in the 1988 World Series and the collapse last month in Game 4 of the American League playoff against Toronto.
But there have been successes, too, and yesterday Eckersley was rewarded for 51 of them.
The Oakland Athletics' relief pitcher, after twice finishing among the top five in voting for the American League's Cy Young Award, finished first yesterday in results announced by the Baseball Writers Association of America.


Nets Make Nothing Out of 7.5 Seconds
The play that was called from the bench with the Nets trailing the Knicks by 2 points with 7.5 seconds left in the game was straight out of the Detroit Pistons' playbook.
"It's a play we haven't failed with over the years," said Chuck Daly, fondly recalling the days when it was executed with elan by Isiah Thomas and Bill Laimbeer.
First option: big man comes out high to set a screen for the guard, who is supposed to take the inbounds pass from the sideline and break the defense down.
Second option: if the defense reacts and smothers the guard, the ball goes to the big man who, by design, should have a smaller player defending, enabling him to get off a quick jump shot or go to the hole.


Transactions
Football  National Football League
NEW ORLEANS SAINTS -- Re-signed Patrick Newman, wide receiver -- kick returner.
SAN FRANCISCO 49ERS -- Moved John Taylor, wide receiver, to the practice squad and deleted Mark Thomas, defensive end, from the practice squad.
Both remained on injured reserve.
College  NCAA -- Restored the eligibility of Chris Webber, Jalen Rose and Eric Riley, Michigan basketball players who had been suspended for their involvement in a charity tournament, and cleared Webber, Rose, Riley and two other unidentified Michigan players for accepting fees to speak at high school basketball camps.
HOLY CROSS -- Named Bill Bellerose associated athletic director and business manager.
LOUISIANA STATE -- Announced that Maurice Williamson and Jamie Brandon, guards, have been suspended from the basketball team for the fall semester because of a "lack of academic responsibility."


Corrections
Because of an editing error, a news analysis article on Tuesday about the antipoverty policies expounded by Gov.
Bill Clinton referred incorrectly to a comment by Robert Greenstein, a researcher.
He predicted that Mr.
Clinton's domestic proposals would probably have a significant effect on the poor generally, but only a modest impact in the most blighted neighborhoods.


Arkla Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Tuckahoe Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Events: Arts and Crafts, Talks and Garden Tours
Benefit and Show
Seventh Regiment Armory, Park Avenue and 66th Street; (212) 777-5218.
A preview of "Modernism: A Century of Style and Design" will be held on Wednesday from 6 to 9 P.M.
Proceeds will benefit the Brooklyn Museum.
Tickets start at $125.
For information, call (718) 638-5000, ext. 326.


Whole Foods Market reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 27


Margaux Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Where Are Germany's Leaders?
The outbreak of racist violence and propaganda in Germany is part of a Europe-wide problem.
But Germany's history and future obligations impose a special duty to resist the rising tide of hate.
Germany cannot let a recurrence of racism threaten its continuing quest for a constructive role in Europe.
Too many of Germany's leaders, starting with Chancellor Kohl, duck this duty.
Reluctant to risk political capital for principle, they blame everyone but the troublemakers who are arising like a nightmare out of the past, and not just in the formerly Communist East.
More than 1,500 racially motivated assaults have been recorded so far this year, up from 270 in 1990.


Turkish and Greek Cypriots Suspend Talks
Turkish and Greek Cypriots today concluded two weeks of unsuccessful talks on unification, but agreed to resume discussions next March.
Cyprus was partitioned in 1974 when Turkish troops occupied the northern part of the island five days after a Greek military dictatorship ousted the Government of Cyprus.
The talks are part of a long effort to reunite the island.


Robert Lindsay; Economist, 67
Robert Lindsay, a specialist in financial management who taught economics and finance at New York University for the last 28 years, died on Saturday at his home in Ridgewood, N.J.
He was 67 years old.
He died of cancer, said his son John.


Pay TV Is Looking To Score Knockout
Once again -- as in the days when Gillette's hyperactive parrot inquired "How are you fixed for blades?" -- Friday night is fight night.
This time, though, the fight -- the Evander Holyfield-Riddick Bowe heavyweight championship bout -- is not on free broadcast television, the way the "Gillette Cavalcade of Sports" ran on NBC, but on pay-per-view cable television.
This means that those who enjoy watching two men beat each other up must spend $35 to $40 for the privilege.


Columbia Laboratories reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Medical Imaging Centers of America reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Expos Give Alou a Contract Extension
FELIPE ALOU, who managed the Montreal Expos to a second-place finish in the National League East last season, agreed yesterday on a two-year contract that will keep him in the organization when he is through managing.
Alou replaced TOM RUNNELLS on May 22 and Montreal finished at 87-75, nine games behind the Pitsburgh Pirates.


Simard-Beaudry reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Federated Stores Posts Profit in Latest Quarter
Federated Department Stores Inc., the Cincinnati-based operator of department store chains like Burdines, Bloomingdale's and Abraham &amp; Straus, yesterday announced earnings for the third quarter, compared with a loss a year earlier.
The performance made a strong case that retailers can make a profit by protecting their margins by managing inventories skillfully and keeping expenses lean.
Profits were $31.6 million, or 25 cents a share, in the quarter that ended on Oct. 31, reversing a loss of $61 million in the corresponding period last year. (There was no publicly traded stock at that time.)


National Gypsum Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Dataram Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Grains Are Sharply Higher Despite U.S. Crop Forecast
The grain markets demonstrated their lack of surprise today at the Government's sharp increase in its crop projections for corn and soybeans, with prices moving up strongly after a brief dip at the opening.
Traders at the Chicago Board of Trade said futures investors had sold the grains, and related contracts like soybean oils, short in anticipation of the crop numbers.
Selling short is a bet that prices will fall.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Bela Fleck and the Flecktones 1 The Blue Note Greenwich Village
The banjoist Bela Fleck began a five-night, five-club New York City tour on Monday.
It started at the Blue Note and winds up at S.O.B.'s, 204 Varick Street, at Houston Street, SoHo, (tonight) and the Lone Star Roadhouse, 240 West 52d Street, (on Friday).
The stunt demonstrates the music's eclecticism; it can seem at home everywhere.


2 Teen-Agers Arrested in Florida Highway Attacks
Two teen-age boys were arrested this week in connection with a string of sniper and rock-throwing attacks on motorists along a stretch of Interstate 295 near here in the last few months.
The attacks led the American Automobile Association to issue a rare warning last week advising motorists to avoid the stretch of 13 miles of the interstate that forms a beltway around Jacksonville.


TII Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 25


Hot Topic Among Owners Is Labor
One month before the deadline, baseball club owners remained uncertain today whether they would reopen their labor contract with the players, a move that many in baseball believe could lead to a lockout of the players next spring.
The idea of a lockout has made a significant number of clubs reconsider their thinking about the contract.
Bud Selig of the Milwaukee Brewers, who is in charge of the major leagues in the absence of a commissioner, said that neither the six-member board of directors of the Player Relations Committee, which is the owners' bargaining unit, nor the owners in general have reached a consensus on the issue.


Regency Cruises Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Technitrol Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Price Tag: The Top 10 Pets


Ciprico Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


A Second Life for a 30's Classic
THE Air-Line Chair, designed in 1934 by Kem Weber, is back.
Praised in the 1930's in magazines like Architectural Record for its lightness and strength, the original birch-and-ash chairs (right) -- cantilevered wood seats attached to wood frames, with optional cushions -- were bought by the Walt Disney Studios.
Three hundred chairs were used in the company's projection rooms, lounges and offices, but they were never mass produced.


French Farms Gird for War Against U.S.
Even as France risks provoking a trade war between the United States and the European Community, the 200 or so ruddy-faced Norman farmers who gathered here this afternoon were in no mood to thank the French Government for standing up for their rights.
Already feeling betrayed that the Government has allowed the community to cut their subsidies, the farmers now fear they will be sacrificed in the rush to rescue an agreement on global trade liberalization.
And they are determined to raise the stakes.


168 Stakes Worth $23 Million
A 1993 racing schedule with 168 stakes worth $23 million was approved yesterday by the trustees of the New York Racing Association.
It is similar to this year's schedule and includes another five-week season at Saratoga, from July 28 to Aug. 30, plus a renewal of the two Super Saturdays at Belmont Park next autumn as previews for the Breeders' Cup.
The $500,000 Belmont Stakes will be run on June 5 along with three other stakes.
The $1 million Travers will be held at Saratoga on Aug. 21.
And the Super Saturdays will be staged on Sept. 18 and Oct. 16 with a total of 11 graded stakes grouped around the Woodward and the Jockey Club Gold Cup, the landmark races of Belmont's fall season.


Goldwyn (Samuel) Co. (A) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


4th Dimension Software reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Automatix Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 26


International Game Technology reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


It's a Crowd of Sorts At Taylor's Old Spot
With Lawrence Taylor gone for the season and perhaps forever, the Giants began preparing today for Sunday night's game in Denver against John Elway and the Broncos.
In Taylor's position at right outside linebacker, they will have plural replacements for this singular player.
Their basic defense will have Corey Miller in running situations and Kanavis McGhee in passing situations.
The newly claimed Bobby Abrams will be a backup.
At different times, other defenders will probably line up in Taylor's spot, and all will try to rush the passer the way Taylor did.


Shaquille O'Neal's Private Disneyland
Already and forever, Shaquille O'Neal has provided telling moments of what could be: the impossible whirl in the paint that creates space in a human forest, the ballistic extension that erases a sure layup, the post-up move that overtakes a defender like a tidal wave.
In those instants, any of the doubts about how the 20-year-old would do in the National Basketball Association simply fall away.
In the imagination, he becomes a player for the ages, surpassing even the current Ewing-Robinson-Olajuwon axis.
The historical company of Bill Russell, Wilt Chamberlain and Kareem Abdul-Jabbar seems more suitable.


Mute Wins Right to Enter a Speech Contest
A Rhode Island high school student who is deaf and mute hopes that she set a precedent on Tuesday when she won the right to compete in the annual Voice of Democracy contest, a national speech contest for high school students.
Shannon Merryman, a 16-year-old from Bristol, R.I., challenged a contest rule requiring all participants to submit an audiotape of their speech.
She asked that she be allowed to submit a videotape of herself making her speech in sign language.


International Holding Capital Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Jan H. Oort, Dutch Astronomer In Forefront of Field, Dies at 92
Jan H. Oort, the Dutch astronomer who made major discoveries about the dynamics of the Milky Way galaxy, the mass of the cosmos and the origin of comets, died last Thursday in Leiden, the Netherlands.
He was 92 years old and lived in Leiden.
He died as a result of complications from a broken hip, Dr.
Tyeerd Van Albada, an astronomer at the University of Groningen in the Netherlands, said yesterday.
A memorial service was held on Monday near Leiden.


Precision Standard reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Brady (W.H.) Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


DVI Health Services Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Corrections
An article on Saturday about a woman who was abducted and whose car was stolen from a Connecticut rest stop incorrectly described the status of a bill to make carjacking a Federal crime.
It has been signed into law by President Bush.


Emons Holdings Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


BLOC Development reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


William Meng Duke, 76, Is Dead; Was Leader in Space Technology
William Meng Duke, a corporate executive and a leader in space technologies, died on Sunday at St.
John's Medical Center in Santa Monica, Calif.
He was 76 years old and lived at Huntington Beach and La Quinta, Calif.
He died after a two-year battle against pancreatic cancer, said his sister-in-law, Irene Nicholson.


Quayle, in Last Push for Landowners, Seeks to Relax Wetland Protections
Vice President Dan Quayle and his staff are planning a last-ditch attempt to loosen rules that prevent landowners from developing wetlands, a move that would touch off a final battle within the Bush Administration over one of its thorniest environmental policies.
The attempt would please landowners like farmers, who have been pressing hard for the Administration to make the change before leaving office.


Continental Can reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Loblaw Cos. reports earnings for 16wks to Oct 3


PASSPORT INQUIRY SEEKS TIES TO BUSH
State Department officials and Congressional auditors said today that they were investigating whether anyone from the White House or President Bush's re-election campaign was involved in searching passport records for information damaging to Bill Clinton or Ross Perot.
Sherman M. Funk, inspector general of the State Department, said in an interview that his investigators were examining evidence that there might be such a connection.
He also said he had promising "leads" but refused to specify what evidence suggested that there might have been conversations between White House and State Department officials on the subject.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Global Marine Inc., Houston, an offshore drilling contractor, has filed a registration statement with the Securities and Exchange Commission for a public offering of $210 million principal amount of senior secured notes.
In addition, the company has increased the size of its previously announced public offering of common stock to 25 million shares from 20 million shares. *
Integrated Health Services Inc., Hunt Valley, Md., has filed for $50 million of bonds through Smith Barney, Harris Upham &amp; Co.


I.B.M. and NBC Will Market A News Service to PC Users
I.B.M. and NBC said yesterday that they planned to test the market with a desktop news service that would essentially turn a personal computer into a television, providing news and information on demand.
The project will use technology developed by the Numedia Corporation, another partner in the venture, that makes it possible to collect news information in both text and video form on a personal computer.
The information, which can be indexed to a user's specific needs, can be stored and replayed on the computer monitor.


Mpumalanga Journal; A Civility Born in Blood and Stirred in Economics
For two years, extraordinary things have been happening in this battle-scarred black town in Natal, South Africa's most combustible province.
Workers have been commuting to the textile mills without fear of being pulled from their minibus taxis and beaten to death for their political leanings.
Children have completed two school years without their studies being disrupted by gun battles.


Steelworkers' Victory Is Bittersweet
It was a dirty, sweltering job.
But if Tony Pickering could hold on for one more year -- his 20th in the USX steel mill -- he would be fully vested in the pension plan.
He never made it.
The steel giant shut down its mill in 1987.
Unemployed and nearing 50, Mr.
Pickering searched in vain for work.
His wife, Andrea, took a minimum-wage job as a security guard.
The Pickerings, who have a severely handicapped daughter, cut deeply into a lifetime of savings.


A Hopeful Outlook On GATT
After a series of disappointments, including two occasions this year on which he was told a deal had been made only to find it had not, Arthur Dunkel, the man overseeing crucial world trade talks, says he believes an accord can be reached within the next month.
"We have reached rock bottom, and now there is a chance to bring the Uruguay Round back at full speed in the next few weeks," Mr.
Dunkel, the Secretary General of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, said today.
"Everyone knows that if we do not succeed in a very short time, it will be a very long time before we have another opportunity."


School Choice Lets Parents Make Decisions; Stop the Tinkering
To the Editor:
We must stop and consider very carefully before we run headlong down one more blind alley in education by moving into the unworkable policy of choice of schools supported by public money.
We are so anxious to improve an education system (that probably needs only fine-tuning and more enthusiasm) that we adopt every scheme that comes down the road, usually dropping each completely after a few years.


What It Takes to Be Heavyweight Champion, Minus the *
Mike Tyson has become an asterisk for those who are, or would be, heavyweight champion.
Riddick Bowe, who hasn't even won the title yet -- he meets the champion, Evander Holyfield, on Friday at the Thomas and Mack Center here -- got a taste this week of the preoccupation with Tyson, a former champion who is serving time for his conviction on a rape charge.


U.S. Cellular reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


How They Fought Drinking Under Czars; In Vladimir's Time
To the Editor:
"Vodka, Scourge and Balm at Center of Russian Life" (front page, Oct. 23) errs twice in referring to "Vladimir I, who converted Russia to Greek Orthodoxy at the end of the 10th century." The schism between the Roman Catholic and Greek Orthodox churches did not occur until 1054.
In 988, when the conversion occurred, it was a conversion to Catholicism, because the Greek Orthodox Church was not yet a distinct entity.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-13  ISLAMIC MILITANTS DEFY EGYPT  White-robed Islamic militants calling for revolution often gather in Cairo in defiance of a Government ban, a graphic display of their new boldness and the increasing impotence of the Egyptian authorities.
It is also a signal that Egypt is in danger of losing its struggle against the spread of militant Islam.
A1


In Moscow, a New Kind of Big Brother
Besides blue jeans and McDonald's hamburgers, the Russians are importing another American product -- the Big Brothers/Big Sisters volunteer organization.
Yesterday in Moscow, the first Big Brothers/Big Sisters office was dedicated.
A 3,000-square-foot space formerly occupied by a kindergarten at a school, it will open in two weeks.
The first 50 volunteers have been screened and assigned, and 30 children are awaiting their Big Brothers and Big Sisters.


On Veterans Day, Remembering Those Who Served in Vietnam


Vintage Petroleum Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


43 Peaceful Acres of Japan in Connecticut
FIVE days a week, Isao Aiba and Lisa Sorce live in a two-bedroom condominium in TriBeCa in Manhattan, but on weekends they live Japanese style on 43 acres here in the foothills of the Berkshires.
They walk across a Japanese footbridge that overlooks a pond.
They listen to the gurgle of a miniature waterfall that tumbles over a Japanese rock garden.
Their son, Rei, 5 years old, and daughter, Saiyo, 2, fish for speckled trout using bamboo rods.
But the family is never alone.
Each weekend, they share their four-bedroom house, and a guest house that sleeps four, with 3 to 10 Japanese guests.


General Parcel Service reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


MIDWEEK REPORT
Week 11
A lot can happen in seven games, but Dallas, the only 8-1 team after nine games, has become the first team authorized to sell playoff tickets.
It also has an easy path to 9-1.
The Cowboys, who lead the National Conference East, play the 3-6 Rams, who trail the N.F.C.
West.
With four interconference games and five interdivision contests on tap, the weekend's major interest will be on two of the five intradivision games, involving four of the league's five 7-2 teams.
On Sunday, New Orleans and San Franciso fight it out for the undisputed leadin the N.F.C.
West, and Buffalo and Miami do the same thing in the A.F.C.
East on Monday night.
In a possible, if unlikely, Super Bowl preview, the other 7-2 team, Minnesota, which is far ahead in the N.F.C.
Central, crosses conference lines to play the 5-4 Oilers, who are on a possible wild-card pace in the A.F.C.
Central.
New England Patriots
Take a team that has gone 0 for 9 and has allowed a league-leading 42 sacks and you have a team with a quarterback problem.
With original starter Hugh Millen resuming practice yesterday for the first time since suffering a shoulder separation three games ago and first backup Tommy Hodson out with a broken thumb, second backup Scott Zolak, who took over for Hodson in the fourth quarter of last Sunday's loss to the Saints, will be making his first National Football League start on Sunday, against the Colts.
Waiting nervously on the sideline will be new fodder, Jeff Carlson, a one-time Buccaneer who spent the summer in the Giants training camp.
Tampa Bay Buccaneers
An accomplished 12-year veteran who kicks a 52-yard field goal in his only attempt as a one-game substitute for an injured regular shouldn't have to wait long to find more work.
Sure enough, two weeks after he was waived by the Chiefs, Eddie Murray was being measured for a new uniform, this time in Tampa Bay.
Until he was waived by the Lions during training camp, Murray had spent 12 stellar seasons in Detroit.
To date he has connected on 245 of 382 field-goal attempts and is 14th on the career scoring list, with 1,116 points.
Murray, who had been hired by the Chiefs as a temporary fill-in for the injured Nick Lowery, hopes to make a season of it this time.
His Tampa Bay predecessor, Ken Willis, won't be back.
He was waived after missing four of his last five field-goal attempts, including both chances in the loss to the Vikings.
Los Angeles Raiders
You've tried two starting quarterbacks this season.
One is 0-2.
The other is 3-4.
Which one do you start against the Seahawks this weekend?
The one who is 5-0 against the Seahawks, of course.
That helps explain why Jay Schroeder, benched after the second game of the season, will be starting on Sunday while Todd Marinovich returns to the sideline after two dismal outings.
Green Bay Packers  Alfred (Snatch) Oglesby, the kidnapping prone former Miami nose tackle, has been signed as a backup to starter John Jurkovic.
He replaces Danny Noonan, who was waived after failing to live up to his early season promise.
Oglesby, a three-year veteran who started 12 games last year, was relegated to backup duties this season and released by Miami on Oct. 20, not, the Dolphins insisted, because of his bizarre preseason ploy in which he concocted a kidnapping story as a coverup for missing practice.
Minnesota Vikings
He may be too nice a guy to complain, but come on guys, couldn't somebody give Mike Merriweather a little help on defense?
Does the linebacker have to do it all?
O.K., so he didn't do it
all
.
In fact, Merriweather made only 19 tackles in the victory over the Buccaneers, and he actually did have some help on four of them.
Still by the time they got through counting tackles over the weekend, Merriweather was so far ahead he was named N.F.C. defensive player of the week. uffalo Bills
When you lead the league in total yards from scrimmage (1,151) so much is expected of you it's hard to turn heads in any one game.
It took some doing, but Thurman Thomas managed to do just that in the victory over the Steelers on Sunday.
Rushing for 155 yards and a touchdown on a career-high 37 carries made Thomas the A.F.C. offensive player of the week, the fourth time he has earned that honor in his career.
Kansas City Chiefs
What's in a name?
Call it coincidence, but what the Buffalo Thomas was doing on offense on Sunday, the Kansas City Thomas was doing on defense.
After making nine tackles, including four sacks, forcing two fumbles that led to scores and recovering one of them in the victory over the Chargers, linebacker Derrick Thomas was named the A.F.C. defensive player of the week, his fifth such honor since joining the Chiefs in 1989.
Chicago Bears
Saying that "when you're scratching and crawling, you have to find something," Coach Mike Ditka shook up the team for Sunday's game at Tampa Bay in an effort to break a two-game losing streak.
Second-year running back Darren Lewis will start in place of Neal Anderson.
On defense, Richard Fain replaces Lemuel Stinson at cornerback; Ron Cox replaces John Roper at linebacker and David Tate replaces Mark Carrier at free safety.


Unions Agree on Early-Retirement Plan
The Dinkins administration and labor leaders have agreed on an early-retirement program that is seen by both sides as the least painful way to eliminate 2,500 jobs by summer without layoffs.
But the Mayor wants to tie stringent work-rule concessions to the program, and the unions say the concessions are not part of the deal.
The early-retirement program is part of a broad plan by Mayor David N. Dinkins to reduce the city's work force by nearly 20,000 jobs over five years.
As another part of that plan, Mr.
Dinkins plans to slow hiring dramatically to trim another 4,000 jobs by next spring.


Review/Theater; Leaving the Homeland for a New Life in America
The dislocation of exiles in America is given a melancholic treatment in "Between East and West," a brief two-character mood piece by Richard Nelson at the McCarter Theater.
In a series of precise and subtle vignettes, a Czechoslovak director and his actress wife are seen going through a difficult period of adjustment.
After fleeing their native country for political reasons, the two find themselves without cultural baggage.
Having left behind language as well as theatrical credentials, they have to start their careers and their lives from scratch.
One of the artful ways that Mr.
Nelson pictures their displacement is to show them experiencing the kind of problems any American tourists or emigres might feel in a foreign country.


Goldcorp Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


THE TRANSITION: The President; Bush in Florida After Mournful Evening
After a cathartic evening in which he wistfully reflected on his future and paid an unplanned midnight visit to the Vietnam Veterans Memorial, President Bush arrived here this afternoon for five days of recreation and seclusion.
Veterans Day observances and the first Republican function since the election combined for an emotional and mournful evening in Washington for the departing President.
He attended a Republican leadership dinner that he said he expected would be "something like a wake," and later went to the Vietnam Veterans Memorial for what he called an "extraordinarily moving" ceremony.
In the darkness and with his wife, Barbara, by his side, the President read aloud the names of some of the fallen soldiers listed on the shiny black granite wall.
Leadership Passes to Dole


Ayer Agency Quits Ponderosa Account
Ayer Inc. in New York said yesterday that it had resigned the Ponderosa Inc. steakhouse chain's account, with billings estimated at $10 million to $15 million.
Ayer was awarded the account in September 1991 from the Richards Group in Dallas.
In a memo to employees, Dom Rossi, president at Ayer U.S.A., wrote, "We have done some outstanding work for Ponderosa, but unfortunately at the expense of our own bottom line."


Pop and Jazz in Review
Sweet Honey in the Rock  Carnegie Hall
"In these trying times, you have to have company," said Bernice Johnson Reagon, her queenly head bowed, during a break in the wave of song offered by her group, Sweet Honey in the Rock, at Carnegie Hall on Saturday night.
Reagon's aside is a fine statement of purpose for this a cappella group, which for two decades has helped define the black American folk tradition.
Sweet Honey in the Rock is a living museum and a secular church, carrying on old customs but also providing inspiration for an audience that shares the group's commitment to the progressive politics and life style choices of the 1960's counterculture.


Cincinnati Microwave reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 27


A Place to Get Styled in Style
TROPICAL fish, velvet thrones and copper basins for soaking the feet are some of the accouterments at Warren-Tricomi, a hair salon at 328 East 61st Street.
Edward Tricomi, who owns the salon with Joel Warren, wanted warm organic forms, and theater.
Bart Halpern, a Manhattan designer, obliged.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Jack Kleinsinger's Highlights in Jazz  Pace University
Jack Kleinsinger's Highlights in Jazz concert series at Pace University has always put forth the notion of a jazz family blind to the racial, generational and sexual divisions that regularly threaten the American experiment.
Mr.
Kleinsinger throws together teen-agers and octogenarians, white stride pianists and black be-boppers.
For the most part, the musicians find a credible neutral ground on which to have a discussion.


Borden Consolidates Two of Its Accounts
Borden Inc. in New York said yesterday that as expected it had consolidated its dairy and pasta products accounts, with billings estimated at $15 million to $20 million for the former and $10 million to $20 million for the latter, as part of strategic efforts to revitalize the brands' images with consumers.
Grey Advertising in New York, which already handles several Borden cheese products, was awarded all the dairy products, including Borden's milk and ice cream and Eagle sweetened condensed milk.
That account was handled for 60 years by Tracy-Locke, a DDB Needham agency in Dallas.


Some Good Old-Fashioned Fun
THE Victorians liked to perch on overstuffed sofas or heavily carved wooden chairs and play board games with titles like Yankee Doodle: A Game of American History, and The Lost Heir.
More than 300 of those antique games, puzzles, building-block sets and card games are on view through Jan. 3 at the New-York Historical Society, 170 Central Park West (77th Street).


Belgrade and Serbia Mired in a Political Battle, Too
Yugoslavia's most powerful politician is trying to defend himself against two political amateurs he promoted to powerful positions this year in the hope they would ease the country's economic difficulties.
Now, they are seeking his downfall.
United Nations trade sanctions imposed on Yugoslavia on May 20 were intended to punish the politician, President Slobodan Milosevic of the Serbian republic, for helping Bosnian Serbs carve out a state for themselves in Bosnia and Herzegovina.


Tetra Tech reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 27


PARENT &amp; CHILD
MANY childless couples eagerly describe how they will equally share the chores of parenthood once their baby is born.
The clear but unbalanced division of labor they saw in their parents' generation is not for them, they loudly proclaim.
But soon after the birth, the images of alternate night feedings and equal numbers of diaper changes quickly disappear in most families.
Within a few months new parents discover that, under the unexpected stress and exhaustion of raising a child, their behaviors do not mirror their hopes and expectations.
"The rhetoric of balance far exceeds the reality," said Dr.
Jay Belsky, a professor of human development at Pennsylvania State University in University Park, who studies how American families raise their firstborn children.
"Study after study documents the fact that mothers are overwhelmingly and disproportionately responsible for the care of their children."


Jerrold Wexler, 68; Chicago Developer Who Built Empire
Jerrold Wexler, a leading real estate developer in Chicago who built and owned dozens of office and apartment buildings, died on Saturday at Stanford Hospital in Palo Alto, Calif.
He was 68 years old and lived in Chicago.
He died of lymphoma, his family said.


Former Iona Player Faces Drug Charges
STEVE BURTT, a former N.B.A. guard playing in Greece, was arrested yesterday in Salonica, Greece, after the police said they found a small quantity of hashish and cocaine in his luggage.
Burtt played at Iona from 1981-84.
A police spokesman said Burtt was taken into custody after getting off a plane from New York, where he visited his family.
Customs officials said he was carrying 11 grams of hashish and 2 grams of cocaine.
He will be charged today on a felony count of narcotics possession, said the spokesman, who asked not to be identified in accordance with Greek practice.
According to the spokesman, Burtt said the drugs were for his personal use.


SNC Group reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Maine's Wild Blueberries and Their Unabashed Champion
Amr A. Ismail knows as much about self-promotion as he does about the succulent little blueberries that grow wild over thousands of pristine acres on the coast of Maine.
He brags about helping triple wild production in the 19 years he spent as the blueberry specialist at the University of Maine.
And now, he said, his company, the Maine Wild Blueberry Company, is doing ground-breaking work to help the industry -- research to create wonders like a nonbleeding blueberry and one that will not explode in a microwave oven.


4 Arrested in Shipments of Detonators to Northern Ireland
Three men were arrested yesterday in New York City and one in New Haven on charges of illegally transporting 2,900 explosive detonators to Ireland for the Irish Republican Army, F.B.I. officials said.
The four were accused of mailing the devices to Northern Ireland, where, the authorities said, the detonators were placed in bombs between January of last year and June of this year.
The authorities said they do not know how many people might have been killed or injured in explosions set off by the detonators.


Shared Technology reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Elias E. Manuelidis, Yale Neurologist, 74; Viral-Disease Expert
Dr.
Elias E. Manuelidis, an internationally known expert on viral brain infections and brain tumors, died yesterday at Yale-New Haven Hospital.
He was 74 years old and lived in New Haven.
He died of a stroke, the Yale School of Medicine said.
He was professor emeritus of neuropathology and neurology at Yale and taught there from 1951 until 1989.
He continued his research until the time of his death, particularly on Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease, a degenerative disease of the nervous system.


Police Officer Found Slain In Marshy Lot Near Airport
The body of an off-duty New York City police officer, who had been shot three times in the head, was discovered yesterday morning in a marshy lot near Jamaica Bay in Queens, the police said.
The 25-year-old community police officer, Milagros Johnson, who lived in Fresh Meadows, was last seen between midnight and 1 A.M. yesterday accompanied by several other off-duty officers at a club in Flushing, Queens, Police Commissioner Raymond W. Kelly said.
The police said they did not know whether she left the club alone.
Not in Uniform


A Bush Pardon Now: Unforgivable
The Republicans urging George Bush to pardon former Defense Secretary Caspar Weinberger do not have the President's interest in mind, much less the nation's.
To pardon any of the defendants accused by the Iran-contra special prosecutor would ensnare Mr.
Bush forever in a scandal in which he was probably only a peripheral figure.
There's nothing new about pleas for such pre-emptive pardons, to block trials as well as punishment.
They have been called for ever since late 1986 when the public first learned of the foolish, deceptive schemes to ransom hostages with weapons sales and illegally divert the proceeds to the Nicaraguan rebels.
What is new is the pressure on the President, in his final days in office, to spring Mr.
Weinberger and others.


Wallace Hoggson; Executive, 95
Wallace Hoggson, a retired business executive and a decorated World War I pilot, died on Monday at a nursing home in Sarasota, Fla.
He was 95 years old and lived nearby in Nokomis, Fla.
He died of pneumonia, his family said.


Calendar: Art, Textiles and Furniture
One Man's Designs
Craftsman Farms, 2352 Route 10 West (off Route 202), Parsippany, N.J.; (201) 540-1165.
A display of sideboards, desks, tables and chairs designed by Gustav Stickley opens Sunday and runs through Jan. 17.
Open Thursday, noon to 3 P.M.; Saturday and Sunday, noon to 4 P.M.
Suggested donation is $4; students and those 62 and older, $3; children under 12 and younger, $2.


HOME IMPROVEMENT
HOUSEHOLD noises like squeaky stairs, a humming refrigerator and rumbling radiators give life to a house or apartment, but they can also be irritating.
Fortunately, most common household noises are usually easy to eliminate with simple repairs.
Some sleuthing may be necessary to discover the cause of a noise.
Be observant and use common sense.
Creaks and squeaks are caused by surfaces rubbing together.
Humming comes from vibration.
Banging, pounding or rumbling in steam pipes and radiators is caused by hot water coming into near-explosive contact with cold.
Other plumbing noises usually involve loose fasteners, worn parts or air in the system.


In Trenton, Hopes Increase For a White House Payback
For reasons ranging from raw politics to philosophy of government, Gov.
Jim Florio and some New Jersey lawmakers from both major parties believe the state will fare better with Bill Clinton in the White House than with George Bush.
New Jersey played an important role in Mr.
Clinton's victory, going for the Democratic candidate in the Presidential election this year for the first time since Lyndon B. Johnson's landslide of 1964.
In addition, Governor Florio's fund-raising machine raised $4 million for Mr.
Clinton, the third-highest total for any state.


Foreign Affairs; Double Dare
Obscured by America's Presidential campaign, the Syrian fox, President Assad, and the Israeli ox, Prime Minister Rabin, have been playing a daring game of peace.
Sometimes publicly, sometimes secretly, but always ambiguously and cleverly in their different ways.
Games are not bankable.
But there is enough stardust here to justify a major diplomatic effort by experienced players in the Bush Administration who could carry on in the Clinton Administration.


Regina Carrol Is Dead; Horror Film Star, 49
Regina Carrol, an actress who starred in many cult horror movies, died on Nov. 4 in St.
George, Utah.
She was 49 years old and had homes in St.
George and in Palm Springs, Calif.
She died of cancer, said her husband, Al Adamson, a film director.


Medex Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Home Video
Promoting the Famous
Video distributors seem to be able to hitch their products to just about any occasion.
This month at least eight major tie-ins are being promoted.
The occasions are four big new films about to open in theaters and the 20th anniversary of an old political drama.
Three of the tapes are related to Spike Lee's "Malcolm X," which opens on Wednesday.
That day CBS Video will release "The Real Malcolm X: An Intimate Portrait of the Man" ($19.98), featuring interviews with Malcolm's widow, Betty Shabazz, and many others.


Lifequest Medical reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Jordan Works Overtime to Beat Buzzer and Pistons
Bulls 98, Pistons 96
CHICAGO, Nov. 11 (AP) -- Michael Jordan's buzzer-beating basket from seven feet behind the 3-point line tonight gave the Chicago Bulls a 98-96 victory in overtime over the Detroit Pistons.
Joe Dumars's 18-footer with 4.0 seconds left gave the Pistons a 96-95 lead.
But after a timeout, Scottie Pippen inbounded the ball to Bill Cartwright, and he passed to Jordan, who finished with 37 points when his 30-footer swished the net as time expired.


Award Now, Reward Later for Maddux
Greg Maddux, whose 20 victories for the Chicago Cubs made him among the more attractive free agents available this winter, may have upped his asking price yesterday when he was named winner of the National League's Cy Young Award.
Maddux went 20-11 and had a 2.18 earned run average for a Cubs team that had a losing record and finished fourth in the National League East.
He is the first National League pitcher on a losing team to win the Cy Young since Randy Jones of the San Diego Padres in 1976.


A Wilderness In Manhattan
OUR city parks are our larger gardens.
Who, after all, has a 100-foot tupelo in the backyard?
Central Park has 26,000 trees of about 100 species on 843 rolling acres of land and rock sculptured by Frederick Law Olmsted and Calvert Vaux more than 130 years ago.
These men thought nothing of moving earth and stone to make a garden.
But don't be content with just the tame stuff.
Go up to the North Woods, just south of the Harlem Mere -- about 90 acres of forest where you can forget you are in the city.
Gone are the cars, the joggers, the roller bladers, the musicians, which are all fine down there in the social whirl.
But up in the woods, other sounds rise out of the silence: water tumbling over rocks, a leaf falling, a cardinal chipping in a bronze-leafed pin oak that could be a century old.
And the silence brings other things into focus.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
7.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
4.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
N.A.
2.75
3.50
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
N.A.
3.05
4.65
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
N.A.
3.26
4.69
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
N.A.
6.45
7.06
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
N.A.
7.66
8.87
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.65
8.65
8.87
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.50
6.51
6.81
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer N.A.- Not available because of the Veterans Day observance Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


How They Fought Drinking Under Czars
To the Editor:
In "Vodka, Scourge and Balm at Center of Russian Life" (front page, Oct. 23), you discuss the failure of Mikhail S. Gorbachev's efforts to combat drunkenness and mention that in the Soviet Union, as under the czars, vodka was a state monopoly.
Readers might be interested to know that Finance Minister Sergei Witte introduced the vodka monopoly in 1894 at the direction of Czar Alexander III, who believed that centralized control of production, sale and consumption was the only way to make inroads on Russia's enormous and crippling alcohol problem.


Panel in Albany Won't Speed Up Choice of Judge
The commission charged with nominating candidates to replace Sol Wachtler as New York's chief judge began its search today by rebuffing Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo's efforts to prod its members into speeding up their decision.
The Governor, who is to choose the new chief judge from a list of seven nominees, said today that the strongest candidates were probably already on the court.
And, clearly trying to remove the taint of Mr.
Wachtler's arrest and resignation as quickly as possible, he questioned why the Commission on Judicial Nomination would need the full 120 days the law provides.


RESULTS PLUS
HOCKEY  Lightning and Thunder in Tampa
The expansion Tampa Bay Lightning climbed into a tie for first place in the Norris Division as Chris Kontos scored twice in a 6-4 victory over the Detroit Red Wings last night in Tampa, Fla.
The Lightning improved to 8-8-2, good for 18 points and a share of the division lead with Toronto, which has played three fewer games.
Tampa Bay has won three in a row and is 4-0-1 in its last five games.
Detroit fell to 8-8-0 after its fourth straight road loss.
Kontos, who had previously never scored more than eight goals in a full season, scored his 17th and 18th in Tampa Bay's 18th game, leaving him behind only Pittsburgh's Mario Lemieux, who has 22, in the National Hockey League goal-scoring race. (AP) Nordiques 7, Senators 3: The Senators' misery continued in Ottawa as Andrei Kovalenko scored three times to lead Quebec and extend the first-year team's streak without a victory to 15 games.
The Senators (1-14-1) have only a tie in 15 games since a season-opening victory over Montreal on Oct. 8. (AP)


Penwest Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Market Place; General Motors' Credibility Check
THE General Motors Corporation's new management, led by John F. (Jack) Smith Jr., will come today to New York for its first meeting with financial analysts.
The analysts are looking forward to the session not so much for important disclosures by the company but rather for the new leaders' willingness to be specific.
For the last five years, a succession of top G.M. executives, starting with Roger B. Smith, has promised detailed plans to coax healthy financial results out of the nation's largest auto maker.
G.M.'s dismal record during much of that period was again recalled on Tuesday when it announced its eighth trip to the equity market in 18 months to raise $1 billion in a new preference stock.


Money Market Fund Yields Are Lower in Latest Week
Yields of tax-exempt and taxable money market funds were down in the week that ended yesterday, according to IBC/Donoghue's Money Fund Report, which tracks 862 funds.
Tax-exempt yields declined after rising for two consecutive weeks.
Analysts at IBC/Donoghue's noted that yields of such funds have moved up and down in a very narrow range in the last few weeks.


CS Resources reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Essay; 1st Global Political Scandal
On Election Day 1992, forty months after the F.B.I. raid on the Atlanta B.N.L. bank funding our illegal arms buildup of Saddam Hussein, Deputy Attorney General George Terwilliger III sent a memo to all Department of Justice section chiefs.
It reveals the current strategy of the Iraqgate cover-up: Finger the C.I.A.
"Anyone who currently possesses . . . information in the possession of the intelligence community regarding the B.N.L. matter," he wrote his fellow political appointees, "and the Department's awareness and/or receipt of that information, is directed to supply any such documents to Charles Platt of Judge Lacey's staff. . . ."


Main St. &amp; Main reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


METRO DIGEST
METRO DIGEST  JUDGING THE JUDGES
Sol Wachtler, who resigned as New York State's Chief Judge after his arrest on charges of extortion, must be replaced, and the panel charged with nominating candidates began by rebuffing Governor Cuomo's efforts to speed a decision.
The Governor said the strongest candidates were probably already on the court.
A1.
Wachtler lets lawyers do the talking.
B8.
NEW YORK CITY  RANDOM BULLET KILLS BOY, 4


Rival Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Bridge
It would be hard to think of anyone who has contributed more to organized bridge in New York City in the past quarter century than Estee Griffin, who died Tuesday.
She was president of the Greater New York Bridge Association in 1974, when the Summer National Championships were staged in Manhattan, but that was only the tip of the iceberg.
She was the editor of the association's Post-Mortem magazine for a decade, and filled many other posts.
Preparing for a national championship is the greatest test of any local organization, and Mrs.
Griffin's leadership in 1974 was outstanding.
Three months earlier she demonstrated her playing skill as South on the diagramed deal, which helped her team reach the final of the prestigious Reisinger Knockout.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, the Banking column in "Your Money" on Saturday about rule changes ordered by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation misstated the starting date for reductions of insurance coverage on retirement accounts.
It is Dec. 19, 1993.


EnergyNorth Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Players Continue Scrimmage To Be Free
Lawyers for National Football League players and owners, unable in recent negotiations to make any progress in their longstanding labor impasse, will meet in Minneapolis today in another court battle.
This dispute involves a request by nearly 600 players, led by the Philadelphia Eagles' defensive end Reggie White, to be granted unrestricted free agency on Feb. 1, when their current contracts with their teams expire.
A similar request for the eight plaintiffs in the Freeman McNeil case will also be heard by United States District Judge David Doty.


Judge Blocks Exxon Cuts In California
A group of service station operators has succeeded in persuading a Federal judge to block the Exxon Corporation at least temporarily from abandoning the Southern California market as planned.
United States District Judge Robert M. Takasugi gave Exxon until Nov. 20 to show cause why he should not order the company to end actions Exxon dealers say are intended to hurt their business.
In issuing a preliminary injunction Monday, the judge ordered Exxon not to terminate any franchise agreements with its dealers until the case was settled.


Anglicans in Britain Vote to Let Women Be Priests
After a bitter and exhausting debate that divided both the clergy and laity, the Church of England voted narrowly today to ordain women as priests.
While the decision cheered liberals and the church's ruling hierarchy, who had pushed to bring women into the pulpit, it also brought warnings of resignations and deepening schism from a conservative minority that says the move violates Scripture and the church's ancient Catholic traditions.


Steve's Homemade Ice Cream reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 26


Economic Scene; President Clinton: Clean or Lean?
GEORGE BUSH, scourge of Ozone Man and the spotted owl, is looking for a new job.
So now the air and water will be entrusted to more sensible folk, right?
Maybe.
President Bush actually played a better environmental game than he talked.
He acted responsibly to protect -- dare one say it -- the ozone layer.
He clamped down on acid rain.
He even signed legislation to keep wetlands wetter at the expense of California's influential farmers.


Corrections
An article in Weekend on Oct. 30 about haunted sites in New York City described the death of Aaron Burr's daughter, Theodosia, incorrectly.
She set sail from South Carolina, not New York City, to join her father in New York.
The ship disappeared and was probably lost in a gale.


Wiser Oil reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Dorel Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


WHERE TO FIND IT
ONE picture can be worth much more than the proverbial thousand words, be it a vintage work by a noted photographer or the sole surviving likeness of a family ancestor.
But it isn't worth much to anyone if it is faded, stained or crumbling beyond recognition.
"Typically, it's the family photographs that are not well maintained," said Mary Schobert, senior photography conservator at the Conservation Center for Art and Historic Artifacts, a nonprofit, 15-year-old conservation laboratory in Philadelphia.


Presidential Life reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


THE TRANSITION: News Analysis -- Challenging the Military; In Promising to End Ban on Homosexuals, Clinton Is Confronting a Wall of Tradition
In saying today that he would honor his campaign pledge to lift the military's ban on homosexuals, President-elect Bill Clinton is challenging one of the military's most entrenched traditions.
Gen.
Colin L. Powell, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, has said that removing the ban "would be prejudicial to good order and discipline." The military has dismissed more than 15,000 homosexuals in the last decade to enforce the policy.


Integrated Waste Services reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Berlitz International reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Review/Pop; Freddie Jackson and Other Crooning Lovers
When Freddie Jackson sings, all that matters is the woman he's with and the night ahead.
The past is to be forgotten; the future, hours of private bliss.
With million-selling albums and adoring concert audiences, Mr.
Jackson clearly sets a mood that people want to share.
On Tuesday night at the Paramount, where he headlined a quadruple bill of romantic pop, the audience was a mixture of couples and groups of women, who squealed and shouted their approval when Mr.
Jackson crooned, "I could use a little love tonight."
In the songs written for him, Mr.
Jackson is the strong, sensitive type, promising "tasty love." He invited a woman on stage for close dancing, and told her, "I want you to take full advantage of me tonight." Carnal passion inevitably overrides caution, even if the woman he's wooing is married (in a remake of the Billy Paul hit "Me and Mrs. Jones").
Naturally, Mr.
Jackson concentrates on ballads, updating Marvin Gaye and Al Green with more opulent keyboard sounds.
But with his current album, "Time for Love" (Capitol), he takes note of pushier, hip-hop driven new jack swing with "Can I Touch You," which makes him sound like a smoother Bobby Brown.


Fear in the Mail -- A special report.; Alarmed by Fund-Raiser, The Elderly Give Millions
"All the Social Security Trust Fund Money Is Gone!" screamed the official-looking envelope received by millions of elderly Americans earlier this year.
The letter inside called for emergency action to halt "the enormous fraud that has taken place at your expense" and asked for $5 in membership dues, and an extra $5 or $10 or $15, so the United Seniors Association could keep on "fighting hard in the nation's capital to insure the rights and benefits of America's seniors are protected."


A Matisse Sells for $14.5 Million
The art market got a stunning shot in the arm last night at Christie's sale of Impressionist and modern paintings, drawings and sculpture.
Much to even the experts' surprise, Matisse's "Harmony in Yellow," from 1927-28, which was being sold by Dr.
Philip Sandbloom, a Swedish collector, set a record price of $14.5 million.
The previous record for the artist, in 1989 at the height of the market, was $12.4 million when "Woman With a Red Umbrella Seated in Profile" (1919-21) sold at Sotheby's in New York.
But it wasn't just the Matisse that made the evening a success for Christie's.
Another important work, Monet's "Waterlily Basin," from 1919, sold for $12.1 million, soaring way above the auction house's estimate of $7 million to $8 million.
It was being sold from the estate of Ralph Friedman, a Manhattan philanthropist and former director of Bank Leumi Le Israel's North American operations.


Mapping Out the Wireless-Phone Future
A multibillion-dollar telephone revolution that caught almost everyone by surprise is occurring in the United States, with a potential as great as that of the telegraph and transistor radio for changing communications.
Vigorous debate over how to apportion the benefits and costs appears likely to delay pending Government approval of the system and bring the issue before the Clinton Administration.


Uno Restaurant Corp.  reports earnings for Year Sept 27


Student Chamber Concert
The cellist Leslie Parnas and students from the Mannes College of Music will perform Schubert's Cello Quintet in C in the second concert of the Chamber Music Society of Lincoln Center's Young Artists series today at 12:30 P.M. at the Celeste Bartos Forum, New York Public Library, Fifth Avenue at 42d Street.
The series offers students from New York City music schools the opportunity to be coached by and to perform with artists of the society.
The concerts, sponsored by The New York Times Company Foundation, are free.
Information: (212) 875-5775.


Peoples Telephone Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Scurry-Rainbow Oil reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Consolidated Fibres Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 27


Nine Bombs Explode in Colombia
Nine bombs exploded near police stations in Medellin and Cali, wounding at least 35 people and killing one, the police said today.
The explosions were part of a wave of violence that has killed some 40 people since Saturday and that the authorities attribute to both leftist rebels and drug traffickers.


Executive Changes
AMERICAN GENERAL CORP., Houston, a consumer financial services organization, named Peter V. Tuters senior vice president of investments.
BANTAM DOUBLEDAY DELL PUBLISHING GROUP INC., New York, a unit of Bertelsmann Publishing Group International, appointed Peter Olson executive vice president and chief administrative officer.
Erik Engstrom was named senior vice president and chief financial officer and Stephen Atamanchuk senior vice president of human resources.


Rolland Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Tartabull Twist: He May Be Available
The Yankees were hoping their 15-man protected list would remain secret.
They wanted only the Colorado Rockies and the Florida Marlins to know which players were left unprotected and available to be snatched in the National League expansion draft next Tuesday.
But the secrets apparently are seeping out.
One involves the fate of Danny Tartabull.
Although Dennis Gilbert, Tartabull's agent, said on Monday that General Manager Gene Michael told him last Friday that the Yankees would protect his client, the club has apparently left the $25.5 million man exposed while opting to protect younger and less expensive players.


Italians Defying Shakedowns Pay With Lives
Gaetano Giordano had got as far as his front door on the way home from his perfume store on Tuesday night when the killers struck.
Of the nine bullets fired at close range, five hit their target, two struck and wounded his 22-year-old son and two went wild, the police said today.


Unilab Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Regis Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


School Choice Lets Parents Make Decisions; Premature Conclusions
To the Editor:
School choice, an effort to empower parents to pick the schools their children attend, drew criticism from the Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching.
But the report's conclusions are flawed, at least as reported in your Oct. 26 article.


Canadiens on a Roll And Hardly a Contest
A large segment of the crowd of 11,962 at Byrne Meadowlands Arena headed for the exits with more than 10 minutes left in the third period tonight.
Who could blame the fans?
The Montreal Canadiens had scored their sixth goal and made it abundantly clear they were determined to extend their undefeated streak to 12 games (11-0-1).
The Canadiens did just that, posting their eighth victory in a row with an 8-3 triumph over the listless and embarrassed Devils.


When Medicine Errs -- A special report.; At Roosevelt Hospital, 3 Deaths Lead to 3 Different Responses
During the first six months of this year, at least three separate mistakes were made in the operating rooms of a New York City hospital, and three patients died.
A student required surgery for a skin abscess, but when an oxygen alarm rang during the procedure it was dismissed as a malfunction.
A healthy man was admitted for routine foot surgery, but a doctor did not wait for a broken monitoring device to be fixed.
A woman needed a biopsy of a lung tumor, but the anesthesiologist did not take proper precautions against a rare complication of the anesthesia.


Solemn Celebration Where Custer Fell
In a solemn yet jubilant ceremony under slate-gray skies, American Indians honored warriors past and present this afternoon: the ones who defeated George Armstrong Custer here in 1876, and the ones who persuaded Congress last year to erase his name from that of the battlefield.
As 3,000 people watched, Indians danced and drummed and chanted to honor their war dead and the dead of all wars.
They celebrated their victory in changing the name of the battlefield and in winning Congressional approval to raise a monument to the 100 or so Indian warriors who died even as they were killing Custer and 264 soldiers of the Seventh Cavalry in the Battle of the Little Bighorn on June 25, 1876.


BACK ON THE STREET WITH: Curtis Sliwa; Not Invincible, but Standing Fast
CURTIS SLIWA doesn't walk alone anymore.
At the West 46th Street headquarters of the Guardian Angels, the citizens' patrol group Mr.
Sliwa founded in 1979, two Angels are mopping the floors, silently smoking cigarettes, and listening to their walkie-talkies for their leader's whereabouts.
He is in the company of two bodyguards, en route from WABC Radio near Penn Station, where he and his wife, Lisa Sliwa, are hosts of a morning talk show.
Outside the front door, "Wanted" signs offer a $25,000 reward for the man who shot Mr.
Sliwa five times after he got into a taxi at the corner of Avenue A and St.
Marks Place at 5 A.M. on June 19.
He had just left his apartment and was heading for WABC.
John Miller, a reporter at WNBC-TV, first reported that the suspect was allegedly connected to John Gotti Jr., the son of the head of the Gambino crime family.
Mr.
Sliwa had attacked Mr.
Gotti Sr. on his radio show and called him "Public Enemy No. 1" on "The Jackie Mason Show."


Bolsa Chica Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Dibrell Brothers reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Ivaco Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Corrections
An article on Tuesday about the Congressional Black Caucus referred imprecisely to blacks in the new House of Representatives.
There are 38 representatives, not 39.
The delegate from the District of Columbia, Eleanor Holmes Norton, is black but does not vote.


Energy Service Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Supercuts Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Cause Unknown for Fatal Pipe Rupture
Consolidated Edison officials said yesterday that they did not know how a pipe burst on Tuesday night, letting loose a blast of 500-degree steam that killed a utility mechanic and gravely injured two other men at a Manhattan power station on the East River.
A thorough examination of the 40-year-old steel pipe will be delayed while contractors clean up asbestos that the steam spread over a courtyard and driveway opening onto First Avenue at the end of East 39th Street.
A preliminary examination showed that the half-inch-thick steel of the pipe had been peeled back by the rush of steam to create a four-foot oval gash.
No one was working on the pipe at the time, Con Ed officials said.


Reduced Tennis Center Land Grab Won't Do
To the Editor:
It is reassuring to note, as you report Oct. 22, that the United States Tennis Association and New York City, faced with strong community opposition to the association's proposed expansion in Flushing Meadows-Corona Park, have agreed to leave the golf pitch-and-putt course in place and not remove it to the Flushing Kissena corridor.


Essex County Gas Co. reports earnings for Year to Aug 31


Infodata Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Sports of The Times; Challenging The N.B.A.'s New Order
SHORTLY after New Jersey's three-point loss to the Knicks on Tuesday, Paul Silas stood in the team's near-empty locker room reflecting on a new season.
It was still a bit startling to think, he said, that for the first time in 13 years, a National Basketball Association season was beginning without Larry Bird and Earvin Johnson.
Bird retired in August; Johnson, after retiring last year and then coming back, apparently retired for good last week.


Jeffrey S. Tanaka, 34, Psychology Professor
Jeffrey S. Tanaka, a professor of educational psychology at the University of Illinois at Urbana, died in an automobile accident on Nov. 3 near Bondville, Ill.
He was 34 years old.
The university reported his death yesterday and said the authorities had been looking for him since he was reported missing last week.
His body and car were found on Tuesday submerged in a pond in a rural area just west of Urbana in east-central Illinois.
An autopsy was to be performed.


N.Y.R.A. Confronts a Political Forum
The people who run racing in New York State must believe in long shots.
At least, they seem to be betting on a long shot or two when they propose a blueprint for horse racing in the 21st century and ignore the political hurdles facing them in the 20th century.
They sent half a dozen of their heavy hitters to testify for two hours Tuesday before the Governor's Commission on Racing in the 21st Century.
They also submitted a 140-page report with 31 appendixes that portray racing as a $1.4 billion resource in the state's economy.
They even proposed that it be run in the next century by the same organization running it now, the New York Racing Association, which they described as "both business and sport." And, they might have added, political hot potato.


ADAC Laboratories reports earnings for Year to Sept 27


THE TRANSITION: The President-Elect; CLINTON TO OPEN MILITARY'S RANKS TO HOMOSEXUALS
Addressing a specific policy decision for the first time since he was elected President, Bill Clinton said today that he would rescind the Defense Department's ban on homosexuals in the military after he takes office in January.
Mr.
Clinton disclosed his plans after a Veterans Day speech in the Arkansas State House.


Fast Start by Knicks Could Be a Mirage
If the National Basketball Association playoffs were to begin tomorrow, the Knicks would be the third-best team in the Eastern Conference bracket.
That is just one man's opinion, but someone's got to lower the Knick championship fever that seems to be gripping New York after a perfect opening week of imperfect victories.
"They are a vastly improved regular-season team, but I'm not too sure they are as improved a playoff team," said Evan Pickman, who scouts the N.B.A.'s Eastern corridor for the Los Angeles Clippers.
"When it comes to the playoffs, I still see the Bulls and the Cavaliers as better four-win series teams, and those are the teams the Knicks will have to beat."


H&amp;H Oil Tool Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Allied Waste Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Fibronics International Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Classical Music in Review
Chamber Music Society of Lincoln Center Alice Tully Hall
Nestled between two somber-toned readings of Mozart and Brahms, the world premiere of Richard Danielpour's "Sonnets to Orpheus" on Friday night did not make as strong an impact as advance word led one to expect.
This setting of six poems from Rilke's august lyric sequence flowed comfortably, in diluted translations by Stephen Mitchell; the deeper complexities of the poet's vision, evident in Hindemith's and Shostakovich's settings of other poems, seldom came to the surface.


Circo Craft reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 27


Leaves Clinging Like Lint
Jim Castagno's lawn vanished on Sunday, just as it has every weekend for the last month.
The fescue, ryegrass and Kentucky bluegrass that turned his yard into a fuzzy green blanket all summer has come under siege from a half-dozen century-old oaks and a neighbor's Norway maple -- the one with bright yellow leaves the size of catchers' mitts.


Esiason Prefers a Trade Over a Role as Teacher
Boomer Esiason's situation this season is in stark contrast to that of the Jets' Browning Nagle.
Nagle is the quarterback babe in the woods, learning on the job in his first year as a starter.
Esiason is a seasoned nine-year veteran with the Cincinnati Bengals who is surrounded by neophytes at key positions on offense.


Classical Music in Review
Barbara Hess  Mezzo-soprano Weill Recital Hall
Barbara Hess's evening of Kurt Weill songs on Saturday night summoned most of the elements of this dark and deceptively simple repertory.
Her mezzo-soprano is true if a little frail, the air of vulnerability becoming, on the other hand, a valuable selling tool.
The German diction had a clarity that in Weill is an absolute necessity, given the nasty, two-edged texts by Brecht, Feuchtwanger, Kastner, Gasbarra, Mehring and the composer himself.


No Junk for These Mailboxes, Please
TURN mailboxes into works of art?
More than 100 artists, architects and designers received plain mailboxes from the Archives of American Art, with a request that they turn them into works of art.
The results, on view at 300 Galleria Officentre in Southfield, Mich., are to be auctioned on Nov. 19 to benefit the art archives, a bureau of the Smithsonian Institution that preserves documents and interviews that record the history of art in America.


Sterling's New Aspirin Line
At a time when aspirin seems outdated, Sterling Health U.S.A. in New York is trying to follow consumers' changing attitudes by introducing Bayer Select, a line of aspirin-free pain relief products meant to offer alternatives to the company's familiar Bayer aspirin.
In a $70 million multimedia campaign created by Ayer in New York, the five Bayer Select formulas are presented as designed to relieve specific aches like arthritis, nighttime pain and sinus pain.
Two television commercials, scheduled to begin running today, assert, "All pain is not the same," and carry the theme "Put the help where it hurts."


Sarajevo Evacuation Effort Fails After Airport Attack
The first attempt in months to evacuate large numbers of people from Sarajevo collapsed in chaos today.
After two days waiting in the chilly weather for a bus convoy that never departed, nearly 1,000 embittered Serbs tramped home with their bags after dusk.
Among them were pensioners in their 80's, men and women suffering from cancer and other diseases, pregnant women and mothers with small children, and dozens of people with disabling wounds sustained in the seven-month siege, including several who lost limbs in mortar and artillery explosions.


Boy, 4, Waiting to Go to Church Is Killed by Random Shot
A 4-year-old boy, sitting in his family car while waiting to go into a church, was shot in the head and killed Tuesday night, apparently by a teen-ager firing randomly about a Queens street to impress his friends, the police said.
A suspect in the shooting surrendered to the police yesterday morning.


Lawsuit Asks End of the Ban On Guantanamo Interviews
The Nation magazine, QW Magazine and Accuracy in Media, a group that analyzes news coverage, have filed a lawsuit to end the Government's ban on interviewing Haitian refugees at Guantanamo Bay Naval Base in Cuba.
The suit, filed Monday in the United States District Court in Manhattan, asserts that since May 24 journalists "have been systematically excluded from the base" and denied permission to interview H.I.V. positive refugees who have been detained there.
The suit says the restrictions violate the First Amendment rights of journalists.


CHRONICLE
Two events are conspiring to keep New Yorkers who usually flee the city in town this weekend.
But apart from some gentle grumbling from party goers who would rather be in the Hamptons or Connecticut, few complaints have been heard.
On Saturday, 600 people are expected to put on black tie and go to the Waldorf-Astoria for the 20th-anniversary Promise Ball of the New York chapter of the Juvenile Diabetes Foundation.
At the event, BARBARA DAVIS is to receive the foundation's 1992 Humanitarian Award from MARY TYLER MOORE for her work with another diabetes group.


ILC Technology Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 3


We Need Consistency On Hazard Lights
To the Editor:
Bill Hartford suggests flashing hazard lights for driving in fog (letter, Oct. 26), raising a matter for a national driving code.
When hazard lights became standard equipment, I understood drivers were to use them only when stopped, never while moving: they were to signal a disabled or stopped car on the shoulder of the road.
Some states mandate this; others do not.
Slow-moving drivers on interstates often use them.


The Shape of British Pottery
POTS that are translucent, resemble antelopes or mushrooms found in a primeval forest, are among the more than 40 pieces by 11 artists in "Contemporary British Ceramics," which opens today at Graham Modern, an East Side gallery.
"The pottery is an amazingly intimate form of sculpture, like sculpture for the hands that is very pleasing, very private," said Rags Watkins, the gallery's director.


COMPANY NEWS&gt;
HOSPITAL CORP.
OF AMERICA sold all 10.3 million shares of Healthtrust Inc.-Hospital Co. at $15.625 each through Goldman, Sachs.
Hospital Corp. expects a pretax gain of $93 million for the fourth quarter.


Funeral Held For Mother From Edison
Robert Shollar, limp and sobbing, dragged himself out of his wife's funeral today supported by their 10-year-old daughter and 8-year-old son.
"What is that poor man going to do now?" said Janet Krauthammer of neighboring Edison, wiping away tears as she watched Mr.
Shollar stumble into a black limousine.


Company Confident on Heart Valve Costs
Pfizer Inc. said Tuesday that its responsibility for finding and replacing faulty heart valves would not affect the company's financial health.
The valves, made by Shiley Inc. of Irvine, Calif., a Pfizer subsidiary, have been implanted in 55,000 people around the world.
But the valves have a tendency to break apart suddenly, a failure that can kill patients within minutes to hours.


Microcom Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Astrosystems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Topics of The Times; No Campaign Jobs at City Hall
Mayor David Dinkins of New York says he will name another high-level deputy to replace Randy Daniels, who stepped down as Deputy Mayor for Public and Community Affairs after it became known that a former subordinate had accused him of sexual harassment.
But why appoint anyone to a blatantly political position that belongs on the campaign payroll, not the city payroll?


Topics of The Times; The Penn Station Scramble
A New Yorker who recently visited Washington D.C. was reminded of how much better the capital treats people who travel by train.
The difference is in the two cities' stations.
Washington's Union Station is now a model train-station-as-mall, with shops, eateries and movies.
New York's remodeled Penn Station is relatively clean, the ticket lines well organized.
But it's far from passenger-friendly.


Trimedyne Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Software Toolworks reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Passionately, Dinkins Reviews Crown Heights
Intensifying his efforts to ease tensions heightened by the acquittal in the Crown Heights case, Mayor David N. Dinkins went before a Jewish group last night to deliver an impassioned plea for justice in the killing of Yankel Rosenbaum.
In an address prepared for the Council of Jewish Federations last night, as he had at Monday's premiere of "Liberators," a WNET-TV documentary about black soldiers who freed Jews from Nazi concentration camps, Mr.
Dinkins said:


Hollywood Is Testing Family Values' Value
Studio executives, producers and agents, who overwhelmingly supported President-elect Bill Clinton and deplored Republican attacks on the town, are developing an array of movies with a trendy theme.
It's called family values.
Not that Hollywood is suddenly rejecting violent or sexually explicit movies.
Or that it is embracing precisely those family values espoused by the G.O.P. during the party's nominating convention last summer.
But there is a new wave of films, having to do far less with politics than profits, that are family-oriented, generally happy or tearful (or both), and rated PG or PG-13.


Lobbying Group That Is Like a Family Store
On the face of it the Seniors Coalition, attacked by critics as little more than a scare-letter shop, is making progress toward becoming what it claims to be: a new voice and watchdog on Capitol Hill for the elderly.
Started in 1989 with Richard Viguerie as fund-raising consultant, the group in Fairfax, Va., has received donations from 800,000 people in two years, raising more than $6 million in the first half of 1992 alone.
But behind the facade is a history of secret manipulations and lax financial controls that the group has struggled to conceal.
While an examination of the coalition found no evidence of illegal conduct, it did reveal potential conflicts of interest and irregular practices that might be of concern to donors.
Behind the Scenes
In January the coalition cut its ties to Mr.
Viguerie but it continued to be dominated behind the scenes by Dan C. Alexander Jr., out on parole after serving time for extortion, and his wife, Fay S. Alexander.
They have run Seniors Coalition like a family store, without the public accountability expected of nonprofit, tax-exempt organizations, according to coalition documents and interviews with a wide range of current and former employees and contractors.
The following are among the questionable management and financial practices:


Koch Assails His Own Ad
When he was criticized in July for narrating a tire commercial that depicted the streets of New York City as plagued by crater-like potholes, broken bottles, menacing windshield washers and hubcap thieves, former Mayor Edward I. Koch staunchly defended the advertisement as a "hilarious satire."
But Mr.
Koch no longer finds the commercial so amusing.
He says critics who have told him that he should not have participated in the disparaging portrait of the city were probably right.
He even contends now that he himself was a victim -- that the General Tire Company used the ad on television without his permission, and not solely in movie theaters as his contract stated.


A Report Cites Custodians For Misconduct on the Job
Several New York City school custodians repeatedly did not show up for work, a report by the special commissioner of investigation for schools has found.
One held a job as a pilot on Board of Education time, one worked on a pleasure boat and a third smoked marijuana as well as used guns for target practice inside school buildings.
The report, which is to be released today, includes a series of case studies of misconduct by custodians.


Books of The Times; A Long, Long Leap From Emerson et al. to Stalin
Making Americans  An Essay on Individualism and Money  By Quentin Anderson  264 pages.
Harcourt Brace Jovanovich. $21.95.
You come away from Quentin Anderson's new book scratching your head.
What he seems to be saying in "Making Americans: An Essay on Individualism and Money" is that we should beware the sort of self-celebrating visions practiced by the likes of Emerson, Thoreau and Whitman, because they can lead to the errors that certain intellectual absolutists made much later when they embraced Stalinism.


Garden Q. &amp; A.
Bulb Planting Now
Q.
Is it too late
to buy and plant bulbs that flower in spring?
And when do the different bulbs bloom? -- Christopher R. Daniels, Pittsburgh
A.
It's hard to say just when late becomes too late.
But while spring bulbs are best planted early, as long as your area has yet to experience a deep frost and the soil is still workable, you can continue planting through November and even into early December.


Federated Department Stores Inc.  reports earnings for 13wks to Oct 31


Barringer Laboratories Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about the future of the Republican Party misstated conservatives' views on President Bush's pledge of "no new taxes." They contend that breaking that pledge by joining a budget agreement in 1990 was bad politics and bad policy, not that the promise itself was.


Lexington Precision reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Classical Music in Review
Stephen Drury  Pianist Roulette TriBeCa
Stephen Drury's strenuous and brilliant recital last Thursday night began with works by John Cage.
"One," from 1990, posed precise harmonies in spacious silence, bringing to mind the early music of Morton Feldman and the final piece of Schoenberg's Opus 19.
During "Music Walk," from 1958, Mr.
Drury spent more time off the piano bench than on, swiping at the strings, blowing up balloons, igniting fireworks.


Appian Technologies reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Home Capital Group reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


A.L. Laboratories reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


4 Are Killed In 2 Car Thefts In Newark
This city's nightly ritual of joy riding by teen-age car thieves left four people dead this morning.
In one collision, a woman was killed when a stolen car that was being followed by the police rammed the car in which she was a passenger.
The second accident involved the fiery crash of a stolen car carrying six teen-agers; it went out of control while traveling at speeds up to 95 miles an hour, killing the driver and two passengers.


For Better Living reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 26


Atmos Energy Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


A Hospital's Errors: 3 Mistakes, 3 Deaths
During the first six months of this year, at least three separate mistakes were made in the operating rooms of a New York City hospital, and three patients died.
Such mistakes do not happen often.
And officials stress they have no evidence that the mistakes happen more often at this hospital, Roosevelt, although they are investigating to make sure the cases do not represent a pattern.


Income Opportunity Realty Trust Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Wainoco Oil Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


INSIDE
Anglicans to Ordain Women
After a bitter debate that divided the clergy and the laity, the Church of England voted narrowly to ordain women as priests.
The decision cheered church liberals.
Page A3.
Environmental Fight at Hand


No Headline
I would look out the window and see my husband walking in circles on the front lawn in pain and frustration. -- ANDREA PICKERING, the wife of an unemployed Utah steelworker.  [ A16:4. ]


Southern Electronics reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Airline Passengers Help Crew Smother A Suspected Bomb
The fax said a bomb had been stowed in the luggage bin above seat 25A on United Airlines Flight 46 from Los Angeles to Kennedy International Airport.
It said the bomb would detonate when the plane descended below 10,000 feet or landed, unless a $600,000 ransom was paid.
Five miles above the Midwest yesterday afternoon, the crew of the Boeing 767 looked in the overhead luggage bin and saw a tool kit.
They wrapped it in blankets, neckties and sweaters they borrowed from passengers and carried it to the back of the plane, where they immersed it in water and covered it with a flotation device to cushion it.


American Film Technologies reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Walshire Assurance Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


CHRONICLE
Mr.
Caine is the other magnet of the weekend.
On Sunday, IRVING (SWIFTY) LAZAR, the Hollywood agent, his wife, MARY, and JONI EVANS, the publisher of Turtle Bay Books, will give a party at Elaine's to celebrate the company's publication of the 59-year-old Mr.
Caine's autobiography, "What's It All About?"
The list of those who have said they will attend ranges from Walter Cronkite to David Bowie and his wife, Iman; from Keith Hernandez to Senator Larry Pressler, the South Dakota Republican.


Classical Music in Review
New York Chamber Symphony  Nadja Salerno-Sonnenberg Violin Soloist 92d Street Y
By now, concertgoers who attend Nadja Salerno-Sonnenberg's performances expect impetuous, driven, colorful readings.
The question, always, is whether her intensely personalized accounts will illuminate the music significantly, or merely rivet the listener's attention to the violinist herself.
Of course, a performance that says something about the music inevitably says something about the player.
But the reverse is often not true, as Ms.
Salerno-Sonnenberg's altercation with a Bach concerto proved on Saturday evening.


Mourning and Hornets Reach Agreement
The Charlotte Hornets have reached a contract agreement with No. 2 draft pick ALONZO MOURNING, but they'll apparently have to make a trade to get him signed, team owner GEORGE SHINN said last night.
"I think it's getting time to bite the bullet," Shinn said.
"I think it's to the point where we're going to have to make a trade. The most logical thing we've got left to do is move somebody to get things done."


Uninspired Rangers Don't Learn Their Lessons
The Rangers have been humiliated by the expansion Tampa Bay Lightning this week.
They have been chastised by their captain, Mark Messier.
They have been drilled mercilessly in practice by their coach, Roger Neilson.
All of this, at the very least, was supposed to shame the Rangers into playing better hockey.
Of course, Messier, who publicly criticized the Rangers' system and called for improved team chemistry after Monday night's 5-1 debacle against the Lightning, said he was not demanding an immediate turnaround.
There was no deadline for change, he said.


Harsha V. Oesman; Architect, 37
Harsha V. Oesman, an architect, died on Oct. 31 in Hong Kong, where he lived.
He was 37 years old.
His family reported his death yesterday and said he had drowned while swimming.


Epigen Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


DeWolfe Cos. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


World Bank War on Pollution Faces Ever Sharper Criticism
The World Bank's request for a special $5 billion grant for environmental projects is running into trouble from donor countries critical of the bank's environmental record.
Twenty donors are to meet Thursday and Friday in Paris to consider the grant, along with the bank's proposed three-year, $18 billion budget.
The bank provides more than $20 billion a year to developing countries.


Cosmetic Center Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Suspect Is Arrested In Fatal Stabbing Lawyer in Bronx
An 18-year-old Bronx man was charged yesterday in the slaying of David L. Schwartz, a prominent New York lawyer who was found stabbed to death on Monday in a Bronx motel room, the police said.
The suspect, Raymond Childs, of 1715 Longfellow Avenue, was tracked down yesterday after he made several purchases with Mr.
Schwartz's credit cards, said Detective Sgt.
William Larkin of the 45th Precinct.
He was charged with second-degree murder, Sergeant Larkin said.


Yeltsin Gives Hungary Soviet Files on Revolt
Proclaiming the beginning of a new era in Russian-Hungarian relations, President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia today turned over to the Hungarian Government a box of documents from K.G.B. archives involving the Hungarian uprising in 1956.
"The citizens of Hungary and Russia, too, must know the whole truth about that tragic time," Mr.
Yeltsin said in an address to the Hungarian Parliament, referring to the 1956 uprising that was crushed by Soviet troops.
"This is not to provoke blind revenge. Without the whole truth, justice cannot be restored, nor can a cleansing be achieved."


Green Isle Environmental Service reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Canadian and British Giants In Telecommunications Deal
The Canadian telecommunications giant BCE Inc. today announced a major alliance with Cable and Wireless P.L.C., a leading British telecommunications company, to expand their global interests and stiffen competition with American giants like the American Telephone and Telegraph Company.
As part of the alliance, BCE will acquire a 20 percent stake in Mercury Communications Ltd. from Cable and Wireless for the equivalent of about $740 million in American funds.


Caldor Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Bowl America Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 29


A.T.&amp; T. Hires Digital Official
David Stone, vice president of software and a key strategist for the Digital Equipment Corporation, has resigned from the struggling computer giant to become president of A.T.&amp; T.'s Operations Systems Business unit within A.T.&amp; T. Network Systems in Morristown, N.J.
The unit of the American Telephone and Telegraph Company develops software for the telecommunications network industry.


US Facilities Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


An Artist's World Makes a House A Magical Studio
THE bright yellow and red leaves dance merrily to the ground on the approach to the gingerbread-trimmed house, where Bruno Pasquier-Desvignes and his wife, Gwen Reed, live in this town in upstate New York.
Two brightly colored sculptures -- Rube Goldberg-like constructions in which a bicycle wheel is the starring and most recognizable element -- stand on the porch of the pristine white house.


Norma K. Regan, 95, Teacher and Sculptor
Norma K. Regan, a high school teacher and sculptor, died on Tuesday in a convalescent home in West Hartford, Conn.
She was 95 years old and had been a longtime resident of Hartford.
She died of pneumonia, said a spokesman for the DellaVeccia Funeral Home in Southington, Conn.


Friends Mourn a Youth They Say Was Reforming
Outside the world of Newark's Central Ward, the description of Qsan Williams given by his friends today, hours after he died, might be considered a contradiction.
He was a good-natured teen-ager who never did anyone harm, they say, but he happened to enjoy stealing cars.
The police say that Qsan Williams was driving the stolen car that this morning plowed into a telephone pole on 12th Street at 95 miles per hour, then burst into flames.
Mr.
Williams -- who police said was 18 years old, but whose friends insisted that he was 16 -- and two passengers died in the fire.
Three other youths were pulled from the car by neighborhood residents.


A Family Buries the Victim of a $1.90 Robbery


Magadan Says 4 Clubs Are Set to Make Offers
Dave Magadan, the free-agent infielder, said yesterday that four teams would follow up on preliminary negotiations and extend offers to him in the immediate aftermath of next Tuesday's expansion draft.
"There are some real good situations for me," the longtime first and third baseman for the Mets said of the clubs that have contacted him.


Vernon Jordan's Ethics
When Warren Christopher was named director of Bill Clinton's transition team, he said the incoming Administration would have "the most stringent set of ethics rules that have ever been promulgated for our country." That was just six days ago, not nearly enough time for those rules to be put in place.
But the seriousness with which this transition team handles its own ethical dilemmas could shed light on how stringent the Clinton Administration intends to be.
The business connections of the transition committee's chairman, Vernon Jordan, present one such dilemma.
Mr.
Jordan sits on the board of RJR Nabisco Holdings Corporation, which manufactures, among other things, cigarettes.
R.J.
Reynolds Tobacco, a Nabisco subsidiary that makes Camel cigarettes, has come under heavy attack for an ad campaign that medical researchers believe holds special appeal to children.


Swift Energy reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Advanced Telecommunications Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Israeli Planes Hit Back at Muslim Guerrillas
Israeli jets attacked a building used by the Party of God militia in southern Lebanon today, hitting back at the pro-Iranian guerrillas who had fired rockets into northern Israel.
Israeli ground forces were on a high state of alert after columns of tanks, artillery and armored personnel carriers rolled into the Israeli buffer zone in southern Lebanon.
Brig.
Gen.
Yitzhak Mordechai, the military commander in the north, said the army was "ready to act at any moment."


Todd-AO Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


A Designer Coppers The Lily
COPPER seems to be the metal of the moment for home furnishings.
In the last year, copper tubing or mesh has been seen in everything from beds to votive-candle holders.
Now David Bergman, a Manhattan architect, has designed copper lamps that look like glowing calla lilies.
"Copper has a warmth that is lacking in chrome or black-painted lighting fixtures," Mr.
Bergman said.
"It's an underutilized material."


Baker (J.) Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


THE TRANSITION: The New Team; Clinton Forming Tight Ethics Guides for Transition and Staff Aides
President-elect Bill Clinton plans to announce within the week a set of ethical guidelines that will prevent transition aides from representing clients with Government ties, Clinton aides said today.
The guidelines, the aides said, would also more tightly limit lobbying by any officials who resign from his Administration.


State Protection in Insurance Failures Put to Test
Although 47 states have now approved a plan to resolve the biggest American life insurance company failure in history, New York State officials are threatening to reject it, saying it treats consumers unfairly.
The dispute raises a host of questions not only about the savings and insurance of 700,000 customers of the Mutual Benefit Life Insurance Company of Newark, but also about the promise of a state-run system designed to protect consumers when life insurers fail.


School Choice Lets Parents Make Decisions
To the Editor:
To the question posed in the headline "What About the Children Left Behind?" (editorial, Oct. 27), which discusses the Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching report on school choice, the obvious answer is to expand, not curtail, school choice.


Turner Broadcasting System Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
New York State is threatening to block a plan to resolve the failure of Mutual Benefit Life, saying it treats consumers unfairly.
The dispute raises questions about the coverage of 700,000 customers nationwide and about the effectiveness of the state system intended to guarantee the safety of insurance funds.  [ Page A1. ]
Personal communications services could outshine cellular phones.
But this depends on important decisions in Washington about how new markets will be organized.  [ A1. ]


Two L.S.U. Guards Suspended by Coach
Louisiana State Coach DALE BROWN yesterday suspended guards MAURICE WILLIAMSON and JAMIE BRANDON for the fall semester because of a "lack of academic responsibility" by the players.
Both have practiced since drills began Nov. 1 and have been academically eligible to play, Brown said.
Brandon and Williamson were the starting backcourt for most of last season when the Tigers went 21-10 and reached the second round of the National Collegiate Athletic Association tournament.
Brandon averaged 10.4 points and 3.6 assists last season, and Williamson, the son of the former N.B.A. guard JOHN WILLIAMSON, averaged 8.2 points.


NS Group Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 26


Reduced Tennis Center Land Grab Won't Do
To the Editor:
It is reassuring to note, as you report Oct. 22, that the United States Tennis Association and New York City, faced with strong community opposition to the association's proposed expansion in Flushing Meadows-Corona Park, have agreed to leave the golf pitch-and-putt course in place and not remove it to the Flushing Kissena corridor.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Randy Newman  Town Hall
Randy Newman has not released a new record in more than four years.
But as he explained from the stage of Town Hall, where he gave a solo concert on Tuesday evening, he has been toiling on a musical modernization of the Faust legend that he hopes to turn into a concept album sometime next year.
The record, he said, will feature Don Henley as Faust, Linda Ronstadt as Marguerite, James Taylor as the Lord and Mr.
Newman himself as the devil.
There will be cameo appearances by Bonnie Raitt and Elton John.


Reduced Tennis Center Land Grab Won't Do
To the Editor:
It is reassuring to note, as you report Oct. 22, that the United States Tennis Association and New York City, faced with strong community opposition to the association's proposed expansion in Flushing Meadows-Corona Park, have agreed to leave the golf pitch-and-putt course in place and not remove it to the Flushing Kissena corridor.


Merline Foster; Medical Accident Victim, 46
Merline Foster, a health care worker and advocate for AIDS patients, died on Tuesday at her home in Boston.
She was 46 years old.
She died of complications from hepatitis and AIDS, her family said.


Power Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Friends Say Wachtler Is Emotional and Apologetic
Friends who have spoken with Sol Wachtler in recent days describe the same conversation.
After the former Chief Judge of New York State comes to the telephone, he always says the same thing first: "I'm sorry. I'm sorry." Then, within a minute or two, he is crying.
"He's very emotional, incredibly apologetic," a friend said.
"He apologizes for hurting the court, for letting his colleagues down."


Review/Dance; Rage and Affirmation in 'Creole Dreams'
In "Urban Scenes/Creole Dreams" the experimental choreographer David Rousseve has a more than interesting story to tell about his Creole grandmother from Lafayette, La., and his own feelings as a black child being bused to white schools in Houston: He was scared stiff, but stayed the course and went on to graduate from Princeton in 1981.
Stay the course with Mr.
Rousseve in this initially exasperating but ultimately shattering dance-theater piece, and the rewards will run deep.
Most of the audience on Tuesday night at the Next Wave Festival in Brooklyn, where the work had its local premiere, stood up and cheered.


Review/Film; The Not-So-Nice Secrets of the Not So Nice
"Traces of Red" is a contemporary film noir that begins on such a clunky note that it doesn't begin to find its footing until about a third of the way through.
That note is sounded by James Belushi as Jack Dobson, a shambling police detective in Palm Beach, Fla., who in the film's opening scene is shot.
In a monotonous voice-over narration, Jack announces that he will recount the events that led to his shooting.
He starts off by observing that in Palm Beach everyone has three lives: "public, private and secret."
The film, which was directed by Andy Wolk and written by Jim Piddock, goes to extravagant, ultimately ludicrous extremes to create a complex and unpredictable web of lust, deception and murder that involves five major characters and any number of subsidiary figures.
It has a satisfying double-trick ending.


New Airline In Houston Announced
Two entrepreneurs, Barney F. Kogen and Gordon A. Cain, announced today that they would start a small Houston-based airline early next year in an attempt to lure business travelers from Continental Airlines.
Mr.
Kogen, a former accountant who amassed a fortune while building a large travel agency in the 1980's, thinks the timing is right for a business-class, no-discount airline ferrying passengers between Houston and three destinations: Los Angeles, New York and Washington.


Moscow Says Some G.I.'s Held in Camps Are Alive
A high-ranking Russian official said today that some American P.O.W.'s interned in the Soviet Union after World War II are still alive in Russia.
The official, Dmitri Volkogonov, said that the Americans who live in Russia are doing so voluntarily.


As Islamic Militants Thunder, Egypt Grows More Nervous
As dusk settled over Luxor Street, a rutted dirt track that cuts past smoldering heaps of garbage, mud-brick hovels, bakeries and vegetable carts, white-robed Islamic militants gathered in defiance of a Government ban to call for revolution.
"Islam is at war on many fronts!" one speaker shouted, seated under a banner urging his followers to kill all non-believers.
"We must rid ourselves of the infidels who rule this country, the Jews, the Christians and the Communists! All are different, but all are united in their determination to exterminate Muslims!"


Alpha 1 Biomedicals reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Markel Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Bridgeport's Plan to Burn Mountain of Trash Draws Threat of a Lawsuit
Last month, city officials thought they had finally solved the problem of Mount Trashmore, Connecticut's most notorious illegal dump.
Rather than move the tons of construction debris to an out-of-state landfill, they would burn it at an incinerator right here in Bridgeport.
But today, a coalition of local groups put Bridgeport officials on notice that if the burning was not halted, they would take the city to court.


Quality Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Toon Is Unlikely for Bengals
Although the Jets say his situation will be evaluated on a daily basis, don't count on Al Toon playing against Cincinnati on Sunday.
The Jets have listed the wide receiver as out for this week with post-concussion syndrome, and Chris Burkett will start in his place.
Toon was knocked out of last week's game at Denver with a concussion after getting hit in the first quarter by linebacker Michael Brooks.
It was the fourth time that Toon has suffered a concussion in a game during his eight-year career with the Jets.


Royal Dutch/Shell Group of Companies reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Our History vs. Clinton's Covenant
It has taken two centuries of struggle for America to remedy the egregious compromises that made its Constitution possible.
The election of Bill Clinton, along with his running mate, another young Southerner, may mark a watershed in this historic remedy, one that holds special hope for African-Americans, for women and for all who now feel insecure and alienated from the American dream.
One powerful theme ran through his speeches at the Democratic convention and on election night: the Puritan ideal of America as a covenanted society.


Gay Sailor, Blazing Path for Others, Returns to Base After Court Order
Keith Meinhold returned to work here this morning at the Moffett Field Naval Air Station, reinstated by a court order and determined to be a pathfinder for uncounted thousands of military personnel who are secretly gay.
"I don't know if I see myself as a hero," said Mr.
Meinhold, a 30-year-old petty officer discharged by the Navy in August after he declared his homosexuality on national television.
"But it's important to me to do this right. I will be a test case, if you will, and hopefully I won't make any mistakes that will jeopardize my position or the position of other gays and lesbians."


Sounds Around Town
Big Band in Town
Illinois Jacquet, Village Vanguard, 178 Seventh Avenue South, at Perry Street, Greenwich Village, (212) 255-4037.
One of the world's great big bands settles into a weekend at the best-sounding club in New York.
It'll be a sensual delight, an example of how jazz imagined a previously unimagined aural lushness.
As a bonus, Illinois Jacquet is one of jazz's great entertainers, one of the last musicians who figured out that musical ability was never demeaned by entertaining an audience.
Shows tonight and tomorrow are at 9:30 and 11:30 P.M. and 1 A.M.; there is no third set on Sunday.
The cover is $15, and there is a $10 drink minimum.
Saxophone Man
Gary Bartz, Bradley's, 70 University Place, Greenwich Village, (212) 228-6440.
Mr.
Bartz is an explosive alto saxophonist who is as adept at Charlie Parker as he is at John Coltrane.
His lines, complex and dense, sum up modern jazz harmony, and he has a traditionalist's driving swing to make it all work.
He's a little-known master, falling in jazz's commercially dead area between the older survivors and the younger new faces.
Sets through Sunday are at 10 P.M., midnight and 2 A.M.; there is a $12 cover.


Sating the Eyes And Satisfying The Appetite
YOU'VE seen the lines around the block at the Museum of Modern Art and snaking out the door at the Guggenheim; the throng taking over the steps of the Metropolitan Museum of Art, and the busloads of children disembarking at the American Museum of Natural History.
Let's face it, unless you count Cezanne's bowls of fruit, these people are not coming for the food.


THE TRANSITION: News Analysis; In Command Of Language
Words are George Bush's enemies; President-elect Bill Clinton showed today that they can be his friends.
That was the dominant impression of a Presidential style in embryo as it emerged from Mr.
Clinton's first full-dress news conference since his victory 10 days ago.
Whatever one thought of the substance of what he said -- and there was plenty of room for argument, because he stated his view bluntly in some cases -- the man from Little Rock left not the slightest doubt that the White House will get its syntax tightened when he moves in on Jan. 20.


Canada Malting reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


PHLCorp Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Abroad at Home; Humanity Won't Wait
At his first press conference since the election Bill Clinton was asked what his priorities would be in foreign policy.
He listed a multi-year defense budget plan, nuclear weapons reduction, continuation of the Middle East peace process and global economic arrangements.
Those are matters of profound long-term importance.
But there are some immediate crises that will clamor for his attention.
As it happens, they will test one of his campaign promises: to make American foreign policy focus more on humane values and democracy.


Blackman to Test Leg Today
Rolando Blackman, who has a strained left calf muscle, did not practice today, but he will travel with the Knicks for their game Friday night against the Washington Bullets in Landover, Md.
Blackman will test his left leg Friday before deciding whether to play.
Greg Anthony, who has a sprained right ankle, practiced today and plans to play Friday.
"If I can put some pressure on it Friday," Blackman said, "I'll get out there and try to play a few minutes. Right now, that's all I can play, really, a couple of minutes."


On Stage, and Off
'Angels,' Downtown or on Broadway?
With the premiere of the two-part marathon "Angels in America" at the Mark Taper Forum in Los Angeles on Sunday, the scramble is on to secure a home for it in New York.
A longstanding agreement among the New York Shakespeare Festival, the New York Theater Workshop and the Center Theater Group in Los Angeles has the show arriving for an eight-week run at the Public Theater on Feb. 9, but the principals now say that a move directly to Broadway is very possible, if not likely.


Conservatives Set for Fight on Judicial Nominees
For more than a decade the combat roles in judicial nomination fights were clear and unvarying.
A conservative White House under either Ronald Reagan or George Bush would nominate a conservative candidate, and liberal groups would scrutinize, criticize and mobilize to try to stop Senate confirmation.
Conservatives outside the Administration were little more than cheerleaders on the sidelines for the Administration.


Interest Rates Cut in Europe
Italy's central bank cut interest rates by one full percentage point today, to 13 percent, as the Government forced harsh austerity measures through Parliament.
Interest rate cuts were also taken in Britain and France.


'Foxfire Book' Teacher Admits Child Molestation
Eliot Wigginton, the Georgia school teacher whose students produced "The Foxfire Book," an acclaimed series of journals about their surroundings and local culture, surrendered to the authorities today, one day after pleading guilty to child molestation.
Mr.
Wigginton, 49 years old, was indicted on Sept. 15 but had vigorously maintained his innocence until now.
Since the indictment, however, local prosecutors have made known their intention to produce more than 20 people to testify that Mr.
Wigginton molested them as children from 1969 to 1982.
On Wednesday, Mr.
Wigginton appeared in a nearly empty courtroom in Clayton, Ga., 100 miles north of here, and entered a guilty plea to a single count of molestation.


Lands' End reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 30


Bosnia Struggles to Preserve Tenuous Cease-Fire


Review/Art; Coexistence in Medieval Spain, at Least Until 1492
The year 1492 was busy for Ferdinand and Isabella.
On Jan. 2 they took the keys to the city of Granada from the last Muslim ruler on the Iberian Peninsula.
On March 31 they set in motion a nationwide expulsion of the Jews.
Thus, only months before Columbus's arrival in America, the multi-cultural fabric that had been Spain for nearly 800 years was officially unraveled.
That ancient fabric is the subject of a stimulating show at the Jewish Museum, organized by Jerrilynn Dodds and Vivian B. Mann, titled "Convivencia." The word means "living together" or "coexistence" and traditionally refers to the medieval period in Spain from the 8th to the 15th centuries.
During this time, Jews, Muslims and Christians alike filled the great Spanish cities and created something like a miniature version of the global culture so often spoken of today.


I.C.H. Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Guns Don't Hate
To the Editor:
The Oct. 17 killing of a Japanese exchange student in Baton Rouge, La., described in "Another Magnum, Another Victim" (Op-Ed, Oct. 31) could not have been prevented by restricting the Second Amendment rights of Americans to ownership of hunting weapons alone, as the authors recommend.
Hunting arms are intended to kill with a single shot, and the .44 Magnum round used in this killing is widely used in low-power hunting rifles.
It is unproductive to blame American attitudes about guns for a problem that is rooted in white American attitudes toward members of other races.


Furor on Exhibit at Law School Splits Feminists
The closing of an art exhibit on prostitution two weeks ago has plunged the University of Michigan law school in Ann Arbor into an angry debate about free speech, feminism, pornography and censorship.
Legally, the issue is whether students at the school violated the First Amendment guarantee of free speech by removing from the exhibit a two-hour videotape featuring works about prostitution by five artists, including two former prostitutes.


Mexico's Little Airline That Could
When Alberto Abed was 14 years old his father died.
The teen-ager dropped out of school and learned to fly planes to help support his family.
Though he was under age, he persuaded instructors at a flying school at Benito Juarez International Airport in Mexico City to give him lessons; he paid for the instruction by cleaning planes, putting air in tires and helping with engine repairs.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Woodforde Beats Lendl  Ivan Lendl, a five-time winner of the tournament, was soundly beaten by Mark Woodforde of Australia, 6-4, 6-2, yesterday in the biggest upset at the European Community Championship in Antwerp, Belgium.
John McEnroe, a three-time winner, also lost, beaten in straight sets by Petr Korda of Czechoslovakia, 6-4, 6-4.
Top-seeded Jim Courier cruised along, getting past Javier Sanchez of Spain, 6-3, 6-3, to join Woodforde and Korda in the quarterfinals of the $1.11 million event. (AP) Cherkasov Stops Wheaton: Andrei Cherkasov of Russia kept alive his hopes for winning a third straight Kremlin Cup in Moscow by beating David Wheaton of the United States, 6-4, 7-6 (7-2), yesterday to move into the quarterfinals.
Wheaton was the last American in the singles draw. (AP) Graf Coasts in Philadelphia: Top-seeded Steffi Graf of Germany easily beat fifth-seeded Conchita Martinez of Spain, 6-1, 6-1, yesterday in the quarterfinals of the $350,000 Virginia Slims of Philadelphia tournament.
Second-seeded Gabriela Sabatini of Argentina was to face a wild-card entry, Lisa Raymond of Wayne, Pa., the 1992 National Collegiate Athletic Association singles champion, in a quarterfinal last night.
In second-round matches, Natalya Zvereva of Belarus upset sixth-seeded Mary Pierce of France, 7-6 (7-4), 6-2.
Eighth-seeded Lori McNeil survived a strong comeback by Gigi Fernandez to win, 6-2, 7-5.
McNeil will play fourth-seeded Jennifer Capriati and Zvereva will play third-seeded Arantxa Sanchez Vicario in today's quarterfinals. (AP) HORSE RACING  Deputation Is Winner  Deputation disposed of an early challenge from Wiggles Law and went on to a six-length victory yesterday in the $47,000 Expressive Dance Handicap for fillies and mares at Aqueduct.
Low Tolerance was second in the six-horse field with Maxamount one-half length further back.
The victory was the third in eight starts this year for Deputation, who covered a mile and an eighth in 1:511/5 and paid $2.60, $2.40 and $2.10 for $2 across the board. (AP)


Was Chambers Then the Victim of a Spy Sting?; Orthodox Party Hack
To the Editor:
In your effort to shore up the credibility of the would-be exonerator of Alger Hiss in "After 40 Years, a Postscript on Hiss: Russian Official Calls Him Innocent" (news article, Oct. 29), you describe Gen.
Dmitri A. Volkogonov as "a respected historian and close adviser to President Boris Yeltsin," thereby suggesting that the man in charge of the former Soviet archives is both a Russian democrat and an objective scholar.
But the general is neither a Yeltsin supporter nor a reputable historian, but rather an orthodox party hack, who is using his position to preserve what he can of the old regime's good name.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
Bank lending to businesses has edged upward at a 1 percent annual rate in the last two months after a two-year decline.
Bankers say that loan demand, though still anemic, is improving, and corporate borrowers say banks are more eager to lend.  [ Page A1. ]
President-elect Bill Clinton outlined his priorities at a news conference.
He said he would take steps to create new jobs and to reduce the Federal deficit over four years.  [ A1. ]


St. Patrick's Day Parade Ruling Saw Through Bigotry's Ruses
To the Editor:
"A Parade of Wrongs" (editorial, Oct. 31), concerning a decision by the New York City Commission on Human Rights that effectively orders that the Irish Lesbian and Gay Organization be allowed to participate in the St.
Patrick's Day parade, misses the point of that organization's desire to be part of the parade and also misinterprets the decision.


Federal Loans to Aid Nonprofit Theaters
More than 140 Off and Off Off Broadway nonprofit theaters may be able to renovate their theaters or purchase larger quarters with their shares of a $1.5 million low-interest loan program of the Federal Department of Housing and Urban Development.


Review/Dance; Four-Way Quest For Inner Truths
The program that the Barbara Chang Arts Ensemble presented on Sunday night at the Merce Cunningham Studio may have been called "Heart Matters," yet its choreographers sometimes failed to scratch beneath the surface of the themes they chose.
"Blue Sapphire" at least commanded attention because its surface was disquieting.
Choreographed and performed by Estelle Eichenberger and three members of her company, Koo Dance (Carla Barragan, Amy Koerber and Sophia Wong) this excerpt from an evening-length production was a study in ferociously compulsive activity.
Live music for it was provided by Robin Burdulis, a percussionist, and Rohini Ramanathan, a singer.
They were joined by Wadada Leo Smith, a trumpeter, in pieces by two other choreographers.


Media-Only Services Focus of Grey Unit
Grey Advertising in New York said yesterday that it had formed a unit, called Media Connection, specializing in media-only services like consulting, research, and planning and buying.
Jim Bell, formerly executive vice president at Grey Entertainment and Media in Burbank, Calif., was named Media Connection's president.
He said the unit, with 10 employees, had been developed as "a reaction to what was going on in the marketplace," referring to the trend toward large agencies offering media-only services for clients that obtain creative services elsewhere.


Cable Expectations Are High
While advance pay-per-view purchases of TVKO's Evander Holyfield-Riddick Bowe might not presage a blockbuster, the fight's distributor indicates that tonight's heavyweight title bout will probably exceed the estimated 735,000 purchases for Holyfield's June defense against the former champion Larry Holmes.
Dantia Gould, publisher of Pay-Per-View Update, an industry newsletter, said national surveys of cable systems point to a buy rate of 4 percent to 5 percent.
"Everyone wants this fight to do well, and we think it will come in a shade under one million buys," she said.
At one million, the fight would not match the boxing pay-per-view sales record of 1.45 million for last year's Holyfield-George Foreman fight.


Arbitrator Puts Howe Back in Major Leagues
The troubled career of Steve Howe took another twist yesterday when George Nicolau, baseball's arbitrator, overturned the lifetime ban that was imposed against Howe last summer for repeated problems with drugs.
Howe, the talented relief pitcher who was the Yankees' left-handed closer, was banned on June 8 by Fay Vincent, then the commissioner, marking the seventh time that Howe had been suspended from the major leagues for substance abuse.
Howe, who was reinstated immediately, filed for free agency last week, but his agent, Dick Moss, said last night that the Yankees are keenly interested in signing the pitcher again.


A Matisse Painting Sells For a Record $14.5 Million
The art market got a stunning shot in the arm on Wednesday night at Christie's sale of Impressionist and modern paintings, drawings and sculpture.
Much to even the experts' surprise, Matisse's "Harmony in Yellow," from 1927-28, which was being sold by Dr.
Philip Sandbloom, a Swedish collector, set a record price of $14.5 million.
The previous record for the artist, in 1989 at the height of the market, was $12.4 million when "Woman With a Red Umbrella Seated in Profile" (1919-21) sold at Sotheby's in New York.
But it wasn't just the Matisse that made the evening a success for Christie's.
Another important work, Monet's "Waterlily Basin," from 1919, sold for $12.1 million, soaring way above the auction house's estimate of $7 million to $8 million.
It was being sold from the estate of Ralph Friedman, a Manhattan philanthropist and former director of Bank Leumi Le Israel's North American operations.


Charles (Honi) Coles, 81, Dancer; Known for Elegance and Speed
Charles (Honi) Coles, a virtuosic tap dancer who won a Tony Award for his performance in the Broadway musical "My One and Only" and whom Lena Horne once described as making "butterflies look clumsy," died yesterday at his home in East Elmhurst, Queens.
He was 81 years old.
He died of cancer, said his wife, Marian.


U.N. SOMALIA ENVOY DISMAYED OVER AID
The new United Nations special representative to Somalia made his first visit into the famine zone today and immediately expressed dissatisfaction with United Nations efforts to relieve the suffering in this bush town.
"I went to see what they call the Unicef hospital," Ismat Kittani said, voicing dismay at the derelict, dirty building that is without staff, drugs, or beds.
"I saw the Oxfam purification system. It's functioning. It's the first bright sign I've seen here, especially when you compare it to that hospital."


Chambliss Is With Cards
Former Yankees first baseman CHRIS CHAMBLISS was hired yesterday as the Cardinals' hitting instructor.
He replaces DON BAYLOR, who was named manager of the Colorado Rockies.


Gap Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Which Way to the Manger?


MacPherson to Have Surgery
New England Patriots Coach DICK MacPHERSON was scheduled to have surgery today because of a serious intestinal condition that has caused him to be hospitalized since last week.
The team said yesterday that MacPherson, 62 years old, will be operated on at Massachusetts General Hospital in Boston.
He has been hospitalized since Nov. 4 with acute diverticulitis.


Funeral Held for South African Family Killed Last Week


Filene's Basement reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Trying to Revive the Waning Business of Interment
There are no ashes.
This is a fact of life to the people who work in cemeteries and crematories.
All that remains of a person, after cremation, is fragments of bone.
How those become "ashes" in an urn is, well, their business.
A melancholy business, cemeteries can be.
The national turning away from the grave over the last 30 years, the cemetery's falling out of use as a public place, today consumes the thoughts of the caretakers.
In their business, society's reluctance to face death is bad for morale.
Still, as business people, they take up the challenge.
They, of all people, must look to the future. 'Always Part of Life'
"My philosophy is 'death is always part of life,' and we have to deal with it," said Armand A. Chevrette, president of Mountain Grove Cemetery, founded here in 1848 by P. T. Barnum and other Bridgeport entrepreneurs.
When people come to him to discuss gravesites or mausoleums, urn gardens or columbariums, "They leave here very comfortable, knowing as much about death as we can tell them while still being alive."


Leucadia National Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
7.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
4.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.00
2.93
4.87
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.05
3.05
4.57
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.26
3.26
4.60
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.35
6.45
6.93
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.59
7.66
7.81
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.55
8.65
8.81
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.46
6.50
6.81
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Howe's Endless Game of Chance
The last chance Steve Howe received when he was permitted to return to baseball in 1990 now turns out to have been his next-to-last chance.
On the other hand, if he can keep producing medical or psychological reasons for the problems he has had with cocaine, his chances may be unlimited.
Acting on Howe's application for reinstatement in 1990, Fay Vincent, then the commissioner, said he thought that the relief pitcher's record "warranted a lifetime suspension from baseball" but that he had decided to give him one more chance.


Review/Film; Coppola's Dizzying Vision Of Dracula
LITTLE did you suspect that the world has been dying for yet another film variation on "Dracula," Bram Stoker's classic of 19th-century gothic fiction.
Yet Francis Ford Coppola's new extravaganza, suitably titled "Bram Stoker's 'Dracula' " to separate it from all others, is such a dizzy tour of movie-making forces that it comes close to overwhelming all reasonable doubts.
Taking James V. Hart's unusually faithful screen adaptation of the novel, Mr.
Coppola has created his own wild dream of a movie, which looks as if it required a special pact with the Treasury Department to finance.
With its gorgeous sets and costumes, its hallucinogenic special effects and mad montages that recall the original grandeur of Abel Gance's "Napoleon," this "Dracula" transcends camp to become a testimonial to the glories of film making as an end in itself.


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Wednesday about the takeover strategist behind the proposed merger of Air Canada and Continental Airlines misstated part of the terms under which an investment group led by the Texas billionaire Robert M. Bass acquired the American Savings and Loan Association of California.
A $1.5 billion credit line was proposed as part of the deal, but later dropped.


Funeral Held for Victim of Police Beating in Detroit


Review/Theater; Destroying Its People, A Nation Loses Its Soul
The horrors of Cambodia's killing fields are evoked with deep conviction in the musical "Cambodia Agonistes." With music by Louis Stewart and book and lyrics by Ernest Abuba, this is a collaborative undertaking of the Pan Asian Repertory Theater.
The polarities of the musical drama are set by two words that appear in a glossary in the program: angkor, the golden age of Cambodian civilization, and angka, the ruling organization of the Khmer Rouge.
From one to the other is a leap from classical beauty to a reign of terror, both of which are tellingly captured on stage.


'Some Relief' In U.S. Plan On Air Noise
The Federal Aviation Administration today published a long-awaited study of options for reducing air traffic noise over New Jersey, calling it a step toward providing "some relief" to residents who have complained about noise since air routes were shifted five years ago.
The agency has scheduled six public hearings in early January on the study, which was immediately criticized by a spokesman for a coalition of groups seeking a cut in noise.


hHED,35p9Rich in the 90's on Ideas Hatched in the 50's
It would be hard to find someone who looks more like a struggling garage-shop inventor than Jerome H. Lemelson, or to find someone who looks more out of place in this sun-and-ski resort for the chic and the rich.
At age 69, Mr.
Lemelson wears a face pale and gaunt, a zippered gray sweater snarled with woolly balls.
The pocket of his pale blue work shirt bulges with his eyeglass case, his notebook and his many pens.
He is clearly a man more at ease flipping through technical journals than indulging in a round of golf.


Art in Review
Frederick Sommer
Pace/MacGill Gallery  32 East 57th Street  Through Nov. 28
Now 87 years old, Frederick Sommer is renowned for his meticulously crafted Surrealist photographs of such gruesome subjects as chicken entrails or a hobo's severed leg.
In addition, he has made memorable collages that, in their depiction of fantastic and horrible creatures, reflect the influence of his friend Max Ernst.


Banks Increase Loans to Business In a Reversal of 2-Year Downturn
Bank lending to businesses has edged upward in recent weeks after a two-year decline that was widely blamed as a cause of the economy's downturn and weak recovery.
Although the increase is still anemic by the standards of the 1980's, bankers say that loan demand is improving in many parts of the country, and corporate borrowers say banks are more eager to lend than in the last few years.
Because banks accumulated more deposits and capital while loans were falling, they now have ample room to increase lending more rapidly if the economy grows faster.
A Marked Improvement
Loans to businesses held by the country's largest banks increased at a 1 percent annual rate in the last two months, according to the Federal Reserve Bank of St.
Louis, a marked improvement from the 7 percent decline of the last year.


COMPANY NEWS
CEPHALON INC., Horsham, Pa., has entered into an agreement to acquire the manufacturing operations of Bio Science Contract Production Corp., Beltsville, Md., for approximately $14 million.
COGNEX CORP., Needham, Mass., a supplier of machine vision systems, has entered into a purchasing agreement with Adstar Tape Products , San Jose, Calif., a subsidiary of I.B.M.
Corp.


THE TRANSITION: The President-Elect; CLINTON, SKETCHING PLAN FOR ECONOMY, COUNSELS PATIENCE
Echoing a campaign rich in promises, President-elect Bill Clinton sketched out a plan today for his Administration's first months, incorporating elements ranging from the creation of investment tax credits for job growth to the loosening of immigration policies barring most Haitian refugees.
Mr.
Clinton said he would repeal an executive order banning abortion counseling at federally financed health clinics and would introduce an ethics policy to guard against conflicts of interest by members of his Administration.


Alba-Waldensian reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Executive Changes
ARTISTIC GREETINGS INC., Elmira, N.Y., which sells personalized products like address labels and greeting cards, appointed David C. Lee executive vice president and chief operating officer.
KEMPER SECURITIES INC., Chicago, named Mark Luftig senior vice president and senior analyst for the electric utilities industry.


Art in Review
'The Room'
Joan T. Washburn Gallery  20 West 57th Street  Through Dec. 5
This gallery has taken advantage of its compact new quarters to create a historical group show of unusual interest.
The theme is Alfred Stieglitz's Intimate Gallery, the second of his three New York salons and the one he called "an American Room" and "the Artist's Room." In it, between 1925 and 1929, he mounted exhibitions by some of the most radical artists of the day.


Harry Cunningham, 85, Pioneer And Developer of Kmart, Is Dead
Harry B. Cunningham, who pioneered discount mass-merchandising in transforming Kmart Corporation into a retailing giant, died Wednesday night at his home in North Palm Beach, Fla.
He was 85 years old.
He died in his sleep, the company said.


Now Let's Put Limits On Campaign Spending
To the Editor:
Re "In an Odd Mood, People Tolerate Perot Spending" (news article, Nov. 2): Contrary to the opinions you quote, I am appalled by the vast sums of money Ross Perot poured into his television blitz of self-promotion.


Federal Loans to Aid Nonprofit Theaters
More than 140 Off and Off Off Broadway nonprofit theaters may be able to renovate their theaters or purchase larger quarters with their shares of a $1.5 million low-interest loan program of the Federal Department of Housing and Urban Development.


Entergy Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Packing Up the Picnic Season


EASTERN COLLEGE REPORT
Army
In its 68 years, Michie Stadium has had many a memorable running back scamper over its turf, and another one will be there tomorrow: LeShon Johnson of Northern Illinois, who has advanced from 33d to third in Division I-A rushing totals over the last eight games.
Johnson, a junior from Haskell, Okla., whose nickname is Cowboy, has gained 1,194 yards in nine games -- averaging 132 per game -- and only Marshall Faulk of San Diego State and Garrison Hearst of Georgia have larger totals.


Tallahassee, Fla., Prices Bonds
The city of Tallahassee, Fla., has tentatively priced for offering to the public $117.8 million in tax-exempt electric revenue and refunding bonds with a maximum yield of 6.30 percent for a bond due in 2012 through underwriters led by Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company.
Yields on the serial portion of the financing range from 3.60 percent in 1994 to 4.70 percent in 1997, 5.65 percent in 2002, 6.15 percent in 2007 and 6.25 percent in 2009.


Grim Lifeline for 700,000 Bosnians: 60 Miles of Mud
"This must be the longest horror film in history," said Mohammed Avdagic, a 26-year-old medical technician here.
"There is almost nothing in the regular stores except salt and, at times, canned food."
Caught at the far end of a path that climbs over three mountains and skirts three war fronts, this industrial region's 725,000 people are by far the largest group under siege from Serbian nationalist forces in Bosnia.


Maybe Knick on Ice Could Spur Rangers
This season, they called me in early.
Come up to Playland; tell us what to do: Team lost two in a row at home, booed in the Garden, maybe a power struggle between the Captain and the Coach.
I hustled up I-95 and delivered the word -- Ice, baby.
Let it melt.
No big deal.
Nada prob.
In fact, this could be the signifier we've been waiting for.
The Rangers looked great all last regular season but then blew it in the playoffs.
This time, they'll have a regular-season record just good enough to squeak into the playoffs, but they'll win the Stanley Cup.
The idea, my friends, is not to be the best, but to be the last.
They rolled their eyes at this, gave me those "We need this?" smirks, so I did a 180 and offered my three-point plan.


Associations Form Brand-Equity Group
The American Association of Advertising Agencies and the Association of National Advertisers have joined nine media associations to form an organization to help make the case for building strong name-brand products.
The Coalition for Brand Equity is headed by Larry Light, who will continue as president at the Arcature Corporation, a marketing consulting company in Stamford, Conn.
Others involved include the Magazine Publishers of America, the Network Television Association and the Newspaper Association of America.


Small-Change Donations Going to Vendors, Not Charities, Abrams Charges
The New York Attorney General charged yesterday that hundreds of honor boxes and candy-gum vending machines found near cash registers in businesses across the state, with messages seemingly soliciting small-change donations for national charities, are part of a fraudulent and deceptive marketing scheme.
In a civil suit in State Supreme Court in Manhattan, Attorney General Robert Abrams said that merchants were deceived by dozens of private vendors who wore caps and T-shirts with a charity's distinctive trademark, implying falsely that they worked for the charity, and that the public was deceived by messages on slotboxes and machines implying falsely that donations benefited a charity.


For Filipino New Dealer, a Hard Road to Recovery
Newspapers have begun referring to President Fidel V. Ramos in headlines by his initials -- F.V.R. -- and when Mr.
Ramos gave a televised speech to the nation shortly after marking his 100th day in office last month, his aides described it as a "fireside chat without the fireside."
President Ramos insists that comparisons to Franklin D. Roosevelt were never his idea.
"Really, our initials are the only comparison between us," he said in an interview, smiling as he twisted his trademark cigar between his fingers.


Hughes Supply reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Market Place; At Time Warner, Stock Is Stuck
BY a number of key measures, Time Warner's stock should be thriving.
Since Time and Warner merged in January 1990, the company has managed to pay down about 27 percent of its $11 billion in debt, attracted foreign equity investors and has seen its core businesses do well.
Wall Street has hardly turned a cold shoulder.
The merger was touted as creating the world's largest media company, with all the leverage and synergistic mystique that such a combination would provide.
And a number of veteran media analysts have aggressively recommended Time Warner, arguing that it is cheap relative to the value and earning potential of its wide array of assets: cable TV, films, records and pay TV.


'Foxfire Book' Teacher Admits Child Molestation
Eliot Wigginton, the Georgia school teacher whose students produced "The Foxfire Book," an acclaimed series of journals about their surroundings and local culture, surrendered to the authorities today, one day after pleading guilty to child molestation.
Mr.
Wigginton, 49 years old, was indicted on Sept. 15 but had vigorously maintained his innocence until now.
Since the indictment, however, local prosecutors have made known their intention to produce more than 20 people to testify that Mr.
Wigginton molested them as children from 1969 to 1982.
On Wednesday, Mr.
Wigginton appeared in a nearly empty courtroom in Clayton, Ga., 100 miles north of here, and entered a guilty plea to a single count of molestation.


Sounds Around Town
The Romantic
Andrea Marcovicci, Oak Room of the Algonquin Hotel, 59 West 44th Street, Manhattan, (212) 840-6800.
An avowed "hopeless romantic" in thrall to 1930's and 40's Hollywood dreams, Ms.
Marcovicci also personifies a contemporary ideal of womanly glamour and self-determination.
The chemistry between her nostalgic and modern sides is frequently compelling, as she sings popular standards with an intensity that makes it seem as though she is reliving the lyrics moment by moment.
This weekend she is performing two shows at the Oak Room.
"Marcovicci Sings Movies and Other Love Songs" plays at 9:30 P.M. tonight and tomorrow, and her newest show, "Just Kern" (music of Jerome Kern, plays both nights at 11:30 P.M. The 9:30 shows are dinner shows, with a a $25 music charge; there is a $25 music charge and $10 food and beverage minimum for the later shows. Gentler Jelly Roll
Vernel Bagneris, Michael's Pub, 211 East 55th Street, Manhattan, (212) 758-2272.
The portrait of Jelly Roll Morton created by Vernal Bagneris, the New Orleans-based author, director and star of the shows "One Mo' Time." "Staggerlee" and "Further Mo" is much gentler than that offered on Broadway by Gregory Hines in the hit musical "Jelly's Last Jam." The text, taken from 1938 Library of Congress tapes of Morton, suggests a sly, funny commentator who exudes a certain nonchalance even when recalling unhappiness and disappointment.
Mr.
Bagneris, who narrates, sings and dances, is assisted on piano by the Norwegian Morten Gunnar Larsen.
A superb interpreter of Morton's music, Mr.
Larsen is especially dazzling in his performance of Morton's technically formidable exercise, "Fingerbuster." Shows are at 9:15 and 11:15 P.M. tonight and tomorrow.
There is a $20 cover charge and a two-drink minimum.
From Egypt
Hamza El Din, Merkin Concert Hall, 129 West 67th Street, Manhattan, (212) 362-8719.
Hamza El Din, from Egypt, has been a pioneer in bringing non-Western music to American and European audiences.
He has played with the Grateful Dead and recently toured and recorded with the Kronos Quartet.
In the 1960's, he introduced the oud, an ancient Arab instrument that is the precursor of the European lute, and other melodic instruments to the music of his native Nubia.
His music blends the complex structure of Arab music with the ancient rhythmic and vocal music of the Upper Nile.
In this program, he will sing Nubian folk songs as well as original compositions and adaptations of popular Egyptian songs.
Show time is tomorrow at 8 P.M.
Tickets are $15.


TV Weekend; Portrait of Michael Jackson's Family
First, earlier this week, CBS's "Sinatra"; now ABC's "Jacksons." November, a month when advertising rates are adjusted to reflect ratings, has taken a fancy to five-hour mini-series about pop-music icons.
Both, as it happens, are family affairs carefully built from the inside for maximum image control.
Nevertheless, as executive producer, Mr.
Sinatra's daughter Tina Sinatra skillfully managed to skewer several aspects of the man while celebrating all of the performer.
In "The Jacksons," the producers Jermaine Jackson, one of the Jackson Five group, and his wife, Margaret Maldonado Jackson, are clearly more constrained and less effective as they grapple with a family portrait that is subtitled, perhaps with irony, "An American Dream." It is being broadcast in two parts, on Sunday at 8 P.M. and on Wednesday at 9 P.M.


Rangers Have Four Lines And Several Wavelengths
For almost a year, Mark Messier and Roger Neilson have danced around each other, and around the big power question:
Who's in charge?
Today, the Ranger captain and his coach again fielded questions on that thorny issue, and on Messier's recent complaints about Neilson's predicament, which has 24 teammates elbowing one another for 20 spots in the lineup.


Money Fund Assets Down
The total assets of the nation's 616 retail money market mutual funds decreased $1.61 billion, to $388.26 billion, for the week ended Wednesday, the Investment Company Institute said yesterday.
The assets of the 384 taxable retail money market funds were down $1.31 billion, to $309.76 billion, while the assets of the 232 retail tax-exempt funds decreased $299.1 million, to $78.50 billion.


THE TRANSITION: News Analysis; In Command Of Language
Words are George Bush's enemies; President-elect Bill Clinton showed today that they can be his friends.
That was the dominant impression of a Presidential style in embryo as it emerged from Mr.
Clinton's first full-dress news conference since his victory 10 days ago.
Whatever one thought of the substance of what he said -- and there was plenty of room for argument, because he stated his view bluntly in some cases -- the man from Little Rock left not the slightest doubt that the White House will get its syntax tightened when he moves in on Jan. 20.


Review/Film; Delving Into the Mysticism of Music
Taking his cue from his subject -- a Baroque composer and violist da gamba known only for his reticence and the mournful beauty of his music -- the French film maker Alain Corneau has fashioned a reserved and elegant portrait colored by dark, romantic longing.
Where the film embroiders the sketchy biography of the 17th-century musician called Monsieur de Sainte Colombe (even his first name is unknown, as are the dates of his birth and death), it remains utterly true to the spirit of his work.
Music is so effectively used, and so central to the film, that "Tous les Matins du Monde," a big hit in France and a winner of seven French Cesars last year, has since prompted its own Baroque music revival.
That his film creates such interest without pedantry is a credit to Mr.
Corneau's measured, thoughtful approach to his unusual subject.
Not truly a biography of Sainte Colombe, "Tous les Matins du Monde" is a series of vignettes framed with painterly precision, combined to create some sense of the man's mysticism and his utter dedication to art.


Power Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


The Real Tragedy of Judge Wachtler
The reaction to the criminal charges against Sol Wachtler, former chief judge of New York's judicial system, puts into bleak perspective the anniversary reviews of the lessons of Anita Hill.
The unmistakable conclusion is that established institutions of our society, most dismayingly the judiciary, still do not get it.
The case has been treated by the press, public opinion and the legal system as a "tragedy," as if what Mr.
Wachtler is accused of -- a months-long criminal campaign against his former lover, Joy Silverman, involving extortion, blackmail, a kidnapping threat and, yes, sexual harassment -- were a fatal but victimless error.


Qual-Med Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


On My Mind; The Secrecy Game
Lucky Bill Clinton.
He wants change.
All right -- all by himself he can bring about one historic change that touches on war and peace.
As President, Mr.
Clinton can end the diplomatic con game that led this country to war in the Mideast and is likely to do so again.


Gay Sailor, Blazing Path for Others, Returns to Base After Court Order
Keith Meinhold returned to work here this morning at the Moffett Field Naval Air Station, reinstated by a court order and determined to be a pathfinder for uncounted thousands of military personnel who are secretly gay.
"I don't know if I see myself as a hero," said Mr.
Meinhold, a 30-year-old petty officer discharged by the Navy in August after he declared his homosexuality on national television.
"But it's important to me to do this right. I will be a test case, if you will, and hopefully I won't make any mistakes that will jeopardize my position or the position of other gays and lesbians."


Corrections
Because of an editing error, a front-page article on Wednesday about the Matsushita Electric Indusrial Company's agreement on its American taxes described other companies that owe taxes incorrectly in some copies.
The Internal Revenue Service's contention that $32 billion in taxes is owed by companies that have shifted profits offshore includes American multinational corporations as well as foreign corporations.


Babbage's reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


LGS Group reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


KISSINGER ISSUES WIRETAP APOLOGY
After more than two decades, Henry A. Kissinger has apologized for his role in wiretapping the home telephone of Morton H. Halperin, was was then a White House aide.
As a result, Mr.
Halperin today dropped his 19-year-old lawsuit seeking damages for the 1969 telephone tap, ending one of the longest-running feuds in Washington.


Islanders Lose Fifth Straight
The steam coming from the Islanders' locker room at the Spectrum tonight wasn't from the shower.
For 30 minutes after the game, the players kept their skates and uniforms on their sweaty, beaten bodies.
The door was guarded by a security man.
The hot vapor came from a players-only meeting, called by team captain Patrick Flatley after the Islanders dropped their fifth consecutive game, this one by 8-5 to the Philadelphia Flyers.
"We gave the players a chance to speak their feelings of what has happened of late," Flatley said.
"A lot of guys got some things off their chests. Communication is important. We cleared the air. Come Saturday, we'll be determined to end this thing."


Art in Review
Robert Bechtle  O. K. Harris Gallery 383 West Broadway (near Broome Street) SoHo Through Nov. 28
If Robert Bechtle were an abstract painter, he would probably be Brice Marden.
His exacting images of San Francisco Bay Area streets and houses have always been distinguished from the Photo Realist pack by their unusual restraint and stillness.
They are generally devoid of people, and full of the bright, clean light of a sunny San Francisco day; their slightly muted colors -- pinkish tans, grays and whites -- are organized in clear-cut crystalline planes.


BRIEFS
Debt  *
Georgia Housing and Finance Authority is tentatively offering $80 million of home-ownership opportunity-program bonds with a maximum yield of 6.60 percent for an issue due in 2023 through Goldman, Sachs &amp; Co.
Serials yield from 2.95 percent in 1993 to 5.85 percent in 2003, with another long maturity due in 2011 priced to yield 6.50 percent.
A bond due in 2010 featuring sinking-fund payments that give it an average life of 3.75 years is priced to yield 5.75 percent.
Underwriters expect the financing to be rated AA by both Moody's and S.&amp; P.


Harry Cunningham, 85, Pioneer And Developer of Kmart, Is Dead
Harry B. Cunningham, who pioneered discount mass-merchandising in transforming Kmart Corporation into a retailing giant, died Wednesday night at his home in North Palm Beach, Fla.
He was 85 years old.
He died in his sleep, the company said.


American Science &amp; Engineering Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Mirage Resorts Offers Plan for Gambling on the Bridgeport Waterfront
Mirage Resorts today presented a plan for a casino and gaming center on this city's waterfront that, at first sight, looked no more implausible than the dolphins and rain forest at the Mirage desert resort on the Las Vegas Strip.
The center, called the Bridgeport Sporting Club, would be designed to look like a huge New England yacht club or oceanfront home, with clapboards and shutters, and would include attractions from a casino, dog track and parimutuel simulcast theater to an ice rink and an amusement area for children.


hHED,35p9Rich in the 90's on Ideas Hatched in the 50's
It would be hard to find someone who looks more like a struggling garage-shop inventor than Jerome H. Lemelson, or to find someone who looks more out of place in this sun-and-ski resort for the chic and the rich.
At age 69, Mr.
Lemelson wears a face pale and gaunt, a zippered gray sweater snarled with woolly balls.
The pocket of his pale blue work shirt bulges with his eyeglass case, his notebook and his many pens.
He is clearly a man more at ease flipping through technical journals than indulging in a round of golf.


Orchestra From Ottawa
The National Arts Center Orchestra of Ottawa is to present a concert at 8 P.M. on Sunday at Carnegie Hall.
Trevor Pinnock, the orchestra's artistic director, is to conduct the program, which features the American premiere of Linda Bouchard's "Ressac for Orchestra" and Bruch's Violin Concerto No. 1 with the violinist Dmitri Sitkovetsky.
Also on the program are Prokofiev's First Symphony ("Classical") and Mendelssohn's Third Symphony ("Scottish").
Tickets are $12 to $50.
Information: (212) 247-7800.


Without Dire Steps, New York Finds Air Is Cleaner
To meet clean air requirements, New York City officials have, over the years, considered banning trucks from midtown Manhattan, placing tolls on East River bridges and insisting on "no drive days," when commuters would be barred from driving into the city more than four days a week.
But in an unexpected turnaround, city officials now say they they won't have to do any of these things to meet carbon-monoxide standards.
In fact, they say, they probably won't have to do anything at all, because the city's air is becoming cleaner without new restrictions.


Art in Review
Sonia Delaunay and Charmion von Wiegand  Marilyn Pearl Gallery 420 West Broadway (at Spring Street) SoHo Through Dec. 19
This modest but delightful show, mostly of works on paper, suggests that both Sonia Delaunay (1885-1979) and Charmion von Wiegand (1896-1983) did their bit to divert modernism's drive toward purity.
Delaunay, the better artist of the two, mastered a freewheeling brand of color abstraction that she applied to clothing design and converted into a subtle self-portrait intended for the cover of an exhibition catalogue.
Especially notable is a watercolor rendition of pajamas, with abstract lightning rods on the sleeves, designed for the Dadaist Tristan Tzara.


Corrections
An obituary yesterday about Wallace Hoggson, a retired businessman and a decorated World War I pilot, misidentified his wife, to whom he had been married for 42 years at her death in 1974.
She was the former Cornelia Van Siclen.


Inquiry Is Planned on Fund-Raising Groups
New York State is opening an inquiry into the fund-raising practices of the United Seniors Association and other groups that solicit money from the elderly and have connections with Richard A. Viguerie, the conservative direct-mail expert, Attorney General Robert Abrams said yesterday.
He said the inquiry was prompted by a report of Mr.
Viguerie's activities in The New York Times yesterday and seeks to determine whether Viguerie &amp; Associates of Falls Church, Va., "conducts misleading solicitations and exercises improper control" of nonprofit and for-profit groups, including the United Seniors Association, Taxpayers Education Lobby, Seniors Coalition and Retired Americans Legislative Lobby.


At the Bar; For those who knew him, a different Wachtler legacy for New York's top court.
There is a sad symmetry to Sol Wachtler's long tenure on the New York Court of Appeals.
It ended just as it began: with an apology.
Twenty years ago, in his first season on the court, this most gregarious of men remained, uncharacteristically, conspicuously subdued.
It was, another judge later theorized, his way of doing penance for the unorthodox, and what some considered unbecoming, route that he had traveled to attain a seat on the state's highest and most illustrious court -- a route that included television campaign commercials featuring the sight and sound of a jail door clanging shut.


New Talks On Europe Trade Set
The top American and European trade and agriculture officials will meet here next week in yet another effort to tiptoe back from the brink of trade war, American officials said today.
But both sides stressed today that they had not changed their basic positions in the dispute on farm subsidies.
The United States contends that Europe unfairly subsidizes its grain farmers, which has the effect of denying billions of dollars of export sales to American farmers.


Today's TV Listings
Television and radio news, listings and advertising, normally found in Weekend, appear today on pages B14-15.


Howe's Endless Game of Chance
The last chance Steve Howe received when he was permitted to return to baseball in 1990 now turns out to have been his next-to-last chance.
On the other hand, if he can keep producing medical or psychological reasons for the problems he has had with cocaine, his chances may be unlimited.
Acting on Howe's application for reinstatement in 1990, Fay Vincent, then the commissioner, said he thought that the relief pitcher's record "warranted a lifetime suspension from baseball" but that he had decided to give him one more chance.


METRO DIGEST
METRO DIGES RULING MAY FORCE THOUSANDS OF RETRIALS
New York State's highest court ordered a new trial for a defendant in a minor drug case last week, throwing thousands of convictions in criminal cases into doubt.
Many, including the cases of the Central Park jogger, the tourist who was stabbed to death on a subway platform and the Happy Land Social Club fire, may have to be retried, lawyers and prosecutors said.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY  UNEXPECTEDLY, CLEANER AIR APPARENT


First Central Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Sports of The Times; Champ Diet: Sandwiches Or Seaweed?
IF you are what you eat, the survivor of tonight's world heavyweight championship fight will have been nourished either by sandwiches or seaweed.
In the hours before Evander Holyfield defends the title against Riddick Bowe, their eating habits have come under as much scrutiny as their undefeated, but uncompelling, records.
The champion, a trim 205 pounds at Wednesday's weigh-in, has been munching turkey-on-whole-wheat sandwiches.
The challenger, meanwhile, slimmed to 235 pounds by gulping the concoctions of Dick Gregory, once a comedian and now a nutritional guru.


30-Year Bond Auction Sets Off Rally
In what some traders called a short squeeze, a few dealers bidding cleverly at the Treasury auction yesterday forced a lot of other dealers to pay dearly after the auction.
The byplay sent the 30-year bond price sharply higher, and it gave a lift to the rest of the Treasury market.
The outstanding 7.25 percent 30-year bond due in August 2002 was up 26/32 to yield 7.59 percent, down sharply from 7.66 percent on Tuesday.
But even more drastically, the new 7.625 percent 30-year bond due in November 2022 was trading at a yield late yesterday of 7.57 percent, well below the average rate of 7.66 percent in the auction just hours earlier.


Indians Sign Plunk
ERIC PLUNK yesterday became the first of the 153 free agents to sign a new contract, deciding to return to the Cleveland Indians for two years and $1.25 million.
Plunk, who had a 9-6 record and a 3.64 earned run average in 71 innings while earning $357,500 last season, will receive a $100,000 signing bonus and a salary of $575,000 each year.
The Indians also have two option years at salaries of $725,000 and $750,000 for the 29-year-old right-hander.


Columbia Gas System reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Charles (Honi) Coles, 81, Dancer; Known for Elegance and Speed
Charles (Honi) Coles, a virtuosic tap dancer who won a Tony Award for his performance in the Broadway musical "My One and Only" and whom Lena Horne once described as making "butterflies look clumsy," died yesterday at his home in East Elmhurst, Queens.
He was 81 years old.
He died of cancer, said his wife, Marian.


Inaugural Platform Going Up


Oceaneering International reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Burger King Selects Agency for Europe
The Burger King Corporation has named D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles in London as the fast-food chain's first multinational agency for Continental Europe.
The account, with billings estimated to exceed $10 million, had been divided among various local European agencies.
Michael Evans, a Burger King spokesman in Miami, said Wednesday that the company wanted "a more consistent Continental strategy" because it was committed to expansion in Europe.


Hornets Sign Mourning Without Making Any Trades
One week into the National Basketball Association season, ALONZO MOURNING ended his holdout yesterday and agreed to a six-year contract with the Charlotte Hornets reportedly worth $26.25 million.
The club would not confirm reports that Mourning had agreed to $2.5 million for his rookie season.
GEORGE SHINN, the team owner, did say Mourning has an escape clause after the fourth year.


Arbitrator Puts Howe Back in Major Leagues
The troubled career of Steve Howe took another twist yesterday when George Nicolau, baseball's arbitrator, overturned the lifetime ban that was imposed against Howe last summer for repeated problems with drugs.
Howe, the talented relief pitcher who was the Yankees' left-handed closer, was banned on June 8 by Fay Vincent, then the commissioner, marking the seventh time that Howe had been suspended from the major leagues for substance abuse.
Howe, who was reinstated immediately, filed for free agency last week, but his agent, Dick Moss, said last night that the Yankees are keenly interested in signing the pitcher again.


Alfin Inc. reports earnings for Year to July 31


Expo for Pets and Their Companions
HERE'S the ideal weather report for this weekend by Rick Stuts: A 100 percent chance of overcast with a perpetual mist escalating to steady drizzle (but
not
a downpour), continuing without pause until 6:01 Sunday evening, give or take a minute.
What does Rick care, he's not raking leaves.
He's cozy inside the Nassau Veterans Memorial Coliseum, and he wants 80,000-odd others to pay $7 each to join him there over the next 60 hours.


Two Faces of Exxon Chief's Kidnapper
Two starkly different portraits emerged today of Arthur D. Seale, the man who admitted kidnapping and killing the Exxon executive Sidney J. Reso last spring.
As portrayed by the Federal prosecutor here, Mr.
Seale is more than just the greedy, desperate and arrogant man previously described in court papers and at news conferences.
He is also a driven and manipulative criminal, compelled to pursue an $18.5 million ransom for six weeks after his victim died inside a locked coffin-like box, and even to contemplate another kidnapping because he had botched the first one.


Art in Review
Miquel Barcelo  Leo Castelli Gallery 420 West Broadway (near Spring Street) SoHo  Through tomorrow
The Spanish Neo-Expressionist Miquel Barcelo paints as if the 1980's were still in full swing.
His latest images are like Mannerist ceilings, filled to the brim with tumbling, twisting forms and superficial graphic pizazz.
But instead of putti ascending to an infinite heaven, these paintings portray an encyclopedic array of creatures -- horses, zebras, steer and sheep, herds of rabbits and eel, crowds of oysters and clams -- that seem caught in a spinning vortex, as if swirling down the drain.
In case we miss the suggestion that their destruction emanates from human hands, other paintings depict beast and fowl hanging by their heels, as if in a butcher shop.


Caldron of Hate -- A special report.; East Europe's Frustration Finds Target: Immigrants
All over Eastern Europe, the Communists left bleak places like the south side of Greifswald: row after row of instant slums, six-story prefabricated concrete housing with hardly a shop or a cafe to break the monotony.
Communism has gone in eastern Germany and the industries it built have collapsed.
In these neighborhoods of workers with no work, brooding resentment and anxiety have exploded in hundreds of attacks against foreign asylum-seekers, most of whom are fleeing even worse conditions in the other former Communist countries of Eastern Europe.


Pay Toilets, an Unqualified Success
New York City's four-month experiment to test a French company's street toilets worked beautifully.
But there will be no permanent program unless the Dinkins administration pushes it aggressively through red tape and political barbed wire thrown up by groups representing the disabled.
The three elegant kiosks installed by JCDecaux International left New Yorkers agreeably astonished -- and wondering whatever happened to American ingenuity.
The kiosks are attractive and comfortable to use, and were rigorously cleaned after each use with sprays of disinfectant that scrubbed the bowl and floor.
The company's maintenance crew visited the units daily to restock supplies and check for malfunctions.


Publisher Plans To Step Down
After 43 years in the newspaper business, The Kansas City Star's publisher, James H. Hale, will retire Dec. 31.
Mr.
Hale, 65 years old, has headed the Kansas City Star Company for almost 16 years.
He will remain chairman but will relinquish day-to-day control.
Capital Cities/ABC Inc., which owns the paper, is expected to name his successor by Dec. 1.


Corrections
A brief article yesterday about a lawsuit seeking to end the Government's ban on interviewing Haitian refugees at Guantanamo Bay Naval Base in Cuba misidentified a plaintiff.
It is Fairness and Accuracy in Media, a group that monitors news coverage, not Accuracy in Media, another such group.


Review/Music; Connecting Diverse Styles
The American Composers Orchestra can usually be counted on to remind its listeners of the diversity of styles and goals that continue to evolve within the American compositional world.
Of the four pieces that Dennis Russell Davies and his orchestra presented at Carnegie Hall on Sunday afternoon, three -- works by Andrew Imbrie, Richard Wernick and Robert Beaser -- had points of confluence, yet mostly went their own ways.
The fourth, one of John Cage's last works, stood resolutely apart.
The filament connecting the works by Mr.
Imbrie, Mr.
Wernick and Mr.
Beaser was a concern for traditional forms.
Mr.
Imbrie's three-movement Symphony No.3 (1970) opened the concert with a burst of modernist anxiety, expressed and eventually resolved through alternating stretches of cloudy, harmonic ambiguity, acidic aggressiveness and striving lyricism.


Stock Offering By McDonald's
The McDonald's Corporation announced yesterday that it had filed a registration statement with the Securities and Exchange Commission for the sale of as much as $500 million in preferred stock.l
The fast-food chain, which has about $3.7 billion in long-term debt, said it planned to sell the fixed-rate shares to repurchase up to $500 million worth of common stock in the next 12 months.
Some of the proceeds may be used to retire debt, the company said.


Charles W. Charny, 90, Urologist Who Led Study of Male Infertility
Dr.
Charles W. Charny, a urologist who helped his peers become aware of the existence and nature of male infertility, died Tuesday at the Graduate Hospital in Philadelphia.
He was 90 years old.
His family said he died of complications from a stroke.


It's the Bully Pulpit Again; America, and White Bread
Why did George Bush lose?
An intimate of the President gave one answer last week talking to Maureen Dowd of The Times: "He was only comfortable with a damn white-bread crowd, a bunch of white male Protestant number-crunchers and bean counters."
Warren Christopher, Bill Clinton's transition director, meanwhile spoke from a very different perspective.
The new Administration, he said, would "look like America." The President-elect made a similar promise yesterday; his Cabinet "will look more like America."


Ukraine Asks Aid for Its Arms Curb
Ukrainian leaders have threatened to hold up approval of the treaty sharply reducing intercontinental nuclear missiles unless their new nation receives a substantial boost in Western aid.
With Ukraine's economy faltering badly, leaders of the Ukrainian Government and Parliament have declared with growing determination in recent days that they will not part with their strategic missiles "for free."


At Time Inc.'s Magazines, Speculation on Top Changes
The Time Inc. magazine empire was engulfed in speculation yesterday that major executive changes involving several top executives were imminent.
Editorial employees huddled in the halls and traded reports over the telephone all day.
Peter Costiglio, a spokesman for Time Inc., declined to comment on the reports.
"We do not comment on rumors or speculation," he said.


A Philip Glass Premiere
The composer and keyboardist Philip Glass is to join the Brooklyn Philharmonic Orchestra and the New York Choral Society in a performance of his music entitled "Glass Reflections," at 8 tonight and tomorrow night at the Brooklyn Academy of Music, 30 Lafayette Avenue, at Ashland Place, Fort Greene.
Dennis Russell Davies is to conduct the orchestra and play keyboards in a program featuring the premiere of Glass's "Low Symphony," based on music by David Bowie and Brian Eno; the New York premiere of "Itaipu, a Symphonic Portrait for Chorus and Orchestra" and "Music in Similar Motion." Tickets are $12 to $25.
Information: (718) 636-4117.


Corrections
An article yesterday about President-elect Bill Clinton's statements on the military misidentified the law firm in which a Clinton adviser, Samuel R. Berger, is a partner.
It is Hogan &amp; Hartson, in Washington.


Teheran Journal; Dress Code by Mullahs, Head Scarves by Chanel
"Down With the U.S.A.," a fading sign still says.
But the waiters at the Azadi hardly pay attention now, nor does the musician in the lobby playing Iranian tunes that haven't been heard for a decade, as the patrons have their afternoon tea and cakes.
After a stretch of revolutionary orthodoxy that began soon after the Islamic revolution of 1979, Iran appears a little more relaxed about asserting its militancy.
Middle-class women are managing to cope with the rigorous dress code, spicing it up with colored veils, makeup and fashionably designed conservative clothing.


Charles Fraser-Smith, Mr. Gadget For James Bond Tales, Dies at 88
Charles Fraser-Smith, the gadget-designing genius on whom the character "Q" in the James Bond novels and movies was modeled, died on Monday at his home in Bratton Fleming, in southwest England.
He was 88 years old.
His family announced his death yesterday. The cause was not disclosed.


Greyvest Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


G.M. Expects End to Losses By Next Year
The General Motors Corporation's new management team told financial analysts and reporters in New York yesterday that cost-cutting in G.M.'s troubled North American operations was running ahead of schedule, prompting a forecast that losses would be plugged next year.
The financial forecast, which is unusual for G.M. or any auto maker, is significant because it suggests that new management, led by John F. (Jack) Smith Jr., is willing to put its credibility and performance on the line.


Militant Killed in Lebanon Zone
One Muslim fundamentalist guerrilla was reported killed, another wounded and captured, and three Israeli soldiers wounded in a guerrilla attack today in the Israeli "security zone" in southern Lebanon.
Though clashes erupted within the buffer zone, the Israeli military buildup in the area appeared to have halted rocket attacks across the border by the pro-Iranian fundamentalist guerrillas.
At least 30 rockets were fired from Lebanon into Israel from Sunday to Tuesday.


John L. Bainbridge, Author, Is Dead at 78
John Lakin Bainbridge, an author and longtime staff writer for The New Yorker magazine, died yesterday at the Albany Memorial Hospital.
He was 78 years old and lived in Schoharie, N.Y.
He died of heart failure after a long illness, said his wife, Dorothy Hazlewood.


Critic's Choice; An Opera In Chinese, With Titles
Probably every New Yorker has at some time, somewhere in the city, felt like a stranger in a foreign land.
At the Chinese opera, for example.
For years, any Westerner who attended its infrequent presentations and who did not understand the language and conventions of the genre was decidedly an outsider, not necessarily welcomed.
The Taipei Theater, administered by the Chinese Information and Culture Center, has changed all that with its regular presentations of opera.
It supplies not only supertitles but also superbly informative program booklets and occasional demonstrations.
This weekend and next, the theater is offering one of its most appealing productions to date, "The Monkey King Raids the Heavens," performed by Li Bao-chun and His Peking Opera Troupe.


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows, performances and art exhibitions in the New York metropolitan region that are to close soon.
Closing This Weekend
"110 IN THE SHADE," New York City Opera, New York State Theater.
Through Sunday.
Performances: Tomorrow at 1:30 and 8 P.M.; Sunday at 1:30 P.M.
Tickets: $10 to $60.
Information: (212) 870-5570.


Accounts
*
Bacardi Imports Inc., Miami, to Ahern New York, to handle a creative assignment for unspecified new products.
Billings were not disclosed. *
Carnival's Crystal Palace Resort and Casino, Nassau, the Bahamas, to Robinson, Yesawich &amp; Pepperdine, Orlando, Fla., to handle its account, with billings estimated to exceed $3 million, previously at McFarland &amp; Drier, Miami.


CHRONICLE
Forty-three years ago, KIRK BROWNING was perfectly content to be a chicken farmer in Ridgefield, Conn. -- or so he thought.
Then he was routed into television by a favorite egg client.
On Monday evening Mr.
Browning, director of the "Live From Lincoln Center" broadcasts, will add to the list of accolades that have been showered on him over the years.
Mr.
Browning, a five-time Emmy Award winner, will receive the Silver Circle Award, for 25 years' service, from the New York chapter of the National Academy of Television Arts and Sciences, along with seven other people.


Owners Predict Chaos; Players Call for Justice
After hearing arguments today on the potential merits and disasters of granting free agency to more than 600 National Football League players when their current contracts expire on Feb. 1, United States District Judge David Doty took the case under advisement.
He was expected to offer a ruling next week.
Lawyers for the players and the owners presented their views to Doty on two free-agent cases against the league: a class-action suit led by Philadelphia Eagles defensive end Reggie White and a request by the eight plaintiffs in the Freeman McNeil case.
Both groups are seeking to be declared unrestricted free agents on the basis of the Sept. 10 verdict in the McNeil case.
In that trial, a Federal jury struck down the league's Plan B system of free agency, saying it violated antitrust laws.
The owners have appealed.


Frederic Warriner, 76, an Actor Who Specialized in Shakespeare
Frederic Warriner, a versatile character actor on the New York stage who specialized in Shakespeare and Shaw, died on Tuesday at Middlesex Memorial Hospital in Middletown, Conn.
He was 76 years old and lived in Old Saybrook, Conn.
He died of a brain hemorrhage, said a friend, Tom Martin.


Diner's Journal
Thanksgiving Out
Here is a selection of restaurants around the city that plan to serve Thanksgiving dinner.
AMBASSADOR GRILL, United Nations Plaza Park Hyatt Hotel, 44th Street at First Avenue, (212) 702-5014.
Prix fixe, $42, children 12 and under, $22.
Noon to 9:30 P.M.


Bowe's Task Is to Prove His Heart Is in Ring
When Riddick Bowe was an amateur heavyweight, headed for the 1988 Summer Olympics in Seoul, South Korea, Butch Lewis was one of several promoters who were considering signing Bowe to a professional contract.
Lewis sent out an aide of his, Rock Newman, as an advance man to assess whether Bowe was worth the pursuit.


Review/Film; Not Living Happily Ever After, After All
In Barcelona in the early 1940's, adolescents whose parents were too poor to buy them toys used to entertain themselves by sitting around in groups and telling stories, explains the prologue for Vicente Aranda's film "Aventis" ("Stories").
Their tales typically interwove current events, neighborhood gossip and fantasy into surreal little scenarios, infused with sex and high adventure, in which the line between real and imagined events often blurred.
In "Aventis," the Spanish film maker has pieced together some of those stories to create a complex and haunting portrait of his country's psyche during the harsh early years of the Franco regime.
Although the film is set mostly in 1940, it jumps forward to 1970 when two of the characters turn up in a mortuary.
It has a final scene, set in the present, that suggests how events of 50 years earlier can still cast long, if pale, shadows.


Wilson to Fill Big Shoes
RICK WILSON, a 39-year-old driver from Bartow, Fla., was named yesterday as the replacement for RICHARD PETTY, who is retiring after 35 years of racing.
Wilson will take over the Petty Enterprises Pontiac on the Winston Cup tour next season, while Petty, 55, will concentrate on rebuilding the team to competitiveness.
Petty Enterprises hasn't won a race in more than eight years.


Pop/Jazz; Broken Barriers And Disk Generosity
Imagine a sweaty July Saturday in MacArthur Park in Los Angeles, sun burning the shoulders of a hundred neighbors cruising the strip, blurry heat rising from the hoods of slick custom cars.
On a stage at the park's edge, a band builds a funk groove.
The crowd sways and smiles, loving the familiar tunes.
The band for this prototypal inner-city summer scene could only be War, which has been perfecting its translations of the Los Angeles street vibes for 23 years.
But this is a new version of a classic scene, and the rapper Rocky Padilla of Hispanic M.C.'s grabs the mike and pumps the classic tune in a new direction.


Ford Official Is Put in Line For Top Job
The Ford Motor Company promoted Alexander J. Trotman yesterday to president and chief operating officer of Ford's worldwide automotive group, putting him in line to succeed Harold A. (Red) Poling next year as chief executive.
But Ford's directors passed on the chance to give Mr.
Trotman the company's No. 2 job as corporate president and chief operating officer, which would have more strongly formalized his designation as heir-apparent.


Dekalb Energy reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Was Chambers Then the Victim of a Spy Sting?; Only the Truth to Gain
To the Editor:
"The Hiss Case Isn't Over Yet," according to Sam Tanenhaus (Oct. 31), who claims that the statement of Gen.
Dmitri A. Volkogonov clearing Alger Hiss of the charge of spying for the Soviet Union in the 1930's "raises more questions than it answers."


CHRONICLE
It was not enough to appear before the nation at the Democratic National Convention talking about her personal odyssey with AIDS, ELIZABETH GLASER said yesterday.
The effort must be ongoing.
"If you don't keep the issue in people's minds, they tend to forget, to go back to their lives, not to feel that they are in a crisis," she said.
At the convention, Ms.
Glaser, a founder of the Pediatric AIDS Foundation, told of how she had contracted H.I.V. through a blood transfusion during childbirth.
She lost her daughter, Ariel, to AIDS in 1988 and transmitted the virus to her son, Jake, who is now 7 years old.


Review/Art; A Tragic Harbinger of the New
ONE of the first paintings to be seen in the fine retrospective of Frederic Bazille opening today at the Brooklyn Museum is not especially fine.
The stiffness of the figures in a copy of Veronese's "Mystic Marriage of St. Catherine" betrays the gropings of a young painter.
Still, as Bazille's only significant depiction of a religious subject, the work became an obvious gift when the artist's father wanted to thank the parish priest who had helped him recover his son's body from the battlefield at Beaune-la-Rolande.
After the Franco-Prussian war began, and even though his father had arranged for him to avoid military service, Bazille enlisted with the notoriously dangerous Zouaves.
"I'm sure not to get killed; I have too many things to do in this life," the artist wrote shortly before he was felled by two bullets in the stomach.
He was 28 years old.


Espey Manufacturing &amp; Electronics reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Police Questioning 3 in Officer's Killing
Investigators were questioning three men early this morning who had been seen with an off-duty police officer before she was shot to death on Wednesday and her body dumped in a marshy lot near Kennedy International Airport, law-enforcement officials said.
The men were being questioned as suspects in her killing, the officials said.


Review/Film; All You Need Is Love, Plus a Good Antidote
Dale Launer, the man who wrote the hilarious "Ruthless People," "Dirty Rotten Scoundrels" and "My Cousin Vinny," makes his debut as what Hollywood calls a "hyphenate" (writer and director) with "Love Potion No. 9," the kind of comedy you can outrun at a walk.
Given the premise, which is said to be inspired by the song by Jerry Leiber and Mike Stoller, virtually everything that happens can be predicted from the opening frame.
The situation is this: Paul (Tate Donovan), a shy biochemist, and Diane (Sandra Bullock), an animal psychologist who is also shy, find themselves in possession of a love potion that works on chimpanzees.
They agree to test it out on themselves, though not together.
Would you believe that Paul becomes an exhausted Lothario?
Would you believe that Prince Geoffrey of England (Dylan Baker), who looks like a somewhat taller, handsomer Prince Charles, proposes to Diane?
Would you believe that true love is elsewhere, but not too far away?


Fabri-Centers of America Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Review/Photography; Physical Disabilities And Courage Facing Them
In his current exhibition of photographs at the Zabriskie Gallery, Nicholas Nixon continues his investigation of people with severe physical problems.
In earlier projects, Mr.
Nixon studied people facing the deterioration of old age or AIDS; this time he deals with blind children.
All of this might have been treated sensationalistically or bathetically, but his dispassionate black-and-white images are so unlike most journalistic approaches that they seem shockingly honest and fresh.
Blindness is such a powerful metaphor that people with sight often have difficulty treating it objectively; it tends to be regarded with the kind of sentimental uplift that soft-news television shows specialize in.
The strength of Mr.
Nixon's pictures, photographed at the Perkins School for the Blind near Boston, lies in their steadfast refusal to treat blindness as anything more or less than what it is, a fact of the children's lives.
His real interest is in how the children come to terms with their lack of sight.


Cuomo Submits List Of Choices for Judgeship
Emphasizing that he wants to appoint a new chief judge of the New York State Court of Appeals as soon as possible, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo today gave the commission that nominates judges a list of seven or eight potential candidates for the job.
Included on the list, according to people who had seen it, were two judges from the Federal District Court in Manhattan: Leonard B. Sand, who is best known for imposing a housing desegregation plan on the city of Yonkers, and Pierre N. Leval, who presided over Gen.
William Westmoreland's libel suit against CBS and over several celebrated organized-crime trials, including the Pizza Connection case.


Crown Heights Resolution Splits Council
New York City Council members traded heated words yesterday after a Jewish lawmaker passionately introduced a resolution condemning the jury that acquitted a black youth in the killing of a Jewish scholar in Crown Heights, Brooklyn, last year.
The emotional debate over the symbolic measure reflected the passions remaining after the verdict, which cleared 17-year-old Lemrick Nelson Jr. in the stabbing of Yankel Rosenbaum despite what prosecutors thought was a very strong case.


Nagle to Appeal N.F.L. Fine
Quarterback Browning Nagle of the Jets says he will appeal the $2,000 fine imposed on him by the National Football League for his involvement in a fight with defensive end Bruce Smith of the Buffalo Bills near the Jets' bench during a game at Giants Stadium on Oct. 26.
Nagle said he was trying to get Smith off his legs when Irv Eatman, a Jets offensive tackle, dived and hit Smith.
Eatman believes the $3,000 fine for his involvement was excessive, but does not plan an appeal.
In all, 18 Jets and 10 Bills players were fined for the fight.


Mercantile Exchange to Stay in New York City
Ending years of indecision over whether the New York Mercantile Exchange would leave lower Manhattan for Jersey City, the exchange's board of directors voted late Wednesday night to remain in New York, exchange officials said.
Just last January, in the latest reversal in a long perils-of-Pauline melodrama, the Mercantile Exchange withdrew from a plan to build a joint headquarters on city-owned land in TriBeCa with the four other futures exchanges with which it has shared space for years in the World Trade Center.


Report Details School Fraud By Custodians
The Board of Education has permitted its school custodians to operate under so few controls that they have managed second careers on school time, fabricated ghost employees on their payrolls and hired helpers with criminal records, according to an investigative report.
"More than individual wrongdoing, this investigation is about a system that leaves the door wide open to abuse," said Edward F. Stancik, Special Commissioner of Investigation for New York City schools, who yesterday released the stinging 108-page critique of the board's custodial system.
Controls established in 1988 to combat ingrained abuses in the system have largely failed, the report said.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-11  SKINHEAD VIOLENCE IN EUROPE  All over Eastern Europe the Communists left bleak places that are breeding grounds for unrest in which skinheads attack immigrants, who have become scapegoats for all the troubles in the region.
A1  IRAQ INQUIRY GAINS FORCE  The Justice Department moved closer to naming an independent counsel to investigate the Government's handling of a bank fraud case involving Iraq.
It is a move that has been resisted by the Administration.
A1


Metall Mining reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


ISM Information reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


INSIDE
An Apology From Kissinger
Henry Kissinger apologized for the 1969 wiretapping of the home phone of a White House aide, who in return has dropped his lawsuit.
Page A12.
Ukraine Links Missiles to Aid
Ukrainian leaders are threatening to delay a treaty to reduce intercontinental nuclear missiles unless they receive more Western aid.
Page A10.
The Custodian Is Out
Abuses by New York City school custodians are so unchecked that they spend school time on boats or at other jobs, a report says.
Page B1.
Howe Is Back in Baseball
Steve Howe, who was permanently banned from baseball last year for the repeated use of drugs, was reinstated by an arbitrator.
Page B7.


The Magic of a Circus Is There for Everyone


Was Chambers Then the Victim of a Spy Sting?
To the Editor:
It's good news that Sam Tanenhaus, working on a biography of Whittaker Chambers, finds that the news from Moscow that Soviet intelligence archives contain no reference to Alger Hiss means "The Hiss Case Isn't Over Yet" (Op-Ed, Oct. 31); and Allen Weinstein, author of an earlier study of Chambers's career as a Communist, commented a few days earlier that this new evidence means reopening the case.
But now it isn't the "Hiss case" that concerns us, but the "Chambers case."


Washington Memo; Insider Paving Way for an Outsider
Still playing the outsider, President-elect Bill Clinton asked the other day whether there was a McDonald's near the White House.
He pointedly did not, however, put the question to the man he named to answer most of his queries about Washington: Vernon E. Jordan, the lawyer-lobbyist here who is chairman of the Clinton transition.


For Children
'Dame of the Narrows'
The Brooklyn Museum  200 Eastern Parkway  At Prospect Park  (718) 638-5000  Recommended for all ages  Through November 1993
Who can resist Red Grooms?
Not many children can.
The artist's "Dame of the Narrows," a 1976 walk-on sculpture surrounded by brightly colored new murals (he calls the work a "sculpto-picto-rama"), is on exhibit at the Brooklyn Museum.
It is part of his "Ruckus Manhattan" series, made in collaboration with Mimi Gross, depicting Manhattan from Bowling Green to 57th Street.


Senior East Germans Go On Trial; Critics Ask if Such a Case Is Just
The most sensational political trial in Germany since the Nuremberg war crimes trialsopened today, but doubts lingered whether the manslaughter case against Erich Honecker, the former East German leader, and five close aides would be able to proceed.
The six men were specifically charged in the deaths of 13 East Germans who were killed as they attempted to flee to West Germany.
Although more than a dozen former East German border guards have been brought to trial in similar cases, the proceedings that opened today marked the first trial of top Communist leaders.
More than 200 East Germans were killed trying to cross the wall.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball
MLB -- Announced that Steve Howe, pitcher, has been reinstated from a drug suspension by arbitrator George Nicolau.
American League
CALIFORNIA ANGELS -- Named Chuck Hernandez pitching coach.


Oneita Industries reports earnings for Year Sept 30


Lowe's Cos.  reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Clinical Data reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Bowe's Task Is to Prove His Heart Is in Ring
When Riddick Bowe was an amateur heavyweight, headed for the 1988 Summer Olympics in Seoul, South Korea, Butch Lewis was one of several promoters who were considering signing Bowe to a professional contract.
Lewis sent out an aide of his, Rock Newman, as an advance man to assess whether Bowe was worth the pursuit.


The Art Market
A Cezanne Moves West
The Los Angeles County Museum of Art has just acquired a major work by Cezanne.
"Under the Trees" is estimated to be worth about $13 million, which would make it the museum's most expensive acquisition.
But the painting, done between 1882 and 1894, will not be put on public view until February, when its unveiling will coincide with the opening of two special exhibitions, "Degas to Matisse: The Maurice Wertheim Collection," which opens on Feb. 14 and runs through April 25, and "The William S. Paley Collection," from the Museum of Modern Art in New York, which will run from Feb. 25 through May 16.


Out of the Race
Forty runners have been disqualified from the New York City Marathon for various infractions, according to the race director, FRED LEBOW.


People
*
Howard Mandel was named to the new position of senior vice president and management supervisor of new business development at Goldberg Fossa Seid Advertising, New York.
He previously held the corresponding position at MacNamara, Klein &amp; Solin, New York. *
Jayne Jamison, advertising sales director at American Health magazine, New York, was promoted to publisher, succeeding Susan Baron, who continues as group publisher at the parent Reader's Digest Special Interest Magazines, New York.


O'Neal Is Mightier Than Bullets
Magic 127, Bullets 100
ORLANDO, Fla., Nov. 12 (AP) -- Shaquille O'Neal scored 31 points and grabbed 21 rebounds tonight as Orlando outrebounded Washington by 69-34 in a 127-100 victory.
Magic guard Scott Skiles pitched in with 14 points, 12 rebounds and 11 assists to record his second career triple-double.


Consumer's Gas reports earnings for Year to Sept 30


Frederic Warriner, 76, an Actor Who Specialized in Shakespeare
Frederic Warriner, a versatile character actor on the New York stage who specialized in Shakespeare and Shaw, died on Tuesday at Middlesex Memorial Hospital in Middletown, Conn.
He was 76 years old and lived in Old Saybrook, Conn.
He died of a brain hemorrhage, said a friend, Tom Martin.


Caldor Wins Bidding to Buy 6 of 11 Alexander's Stores
The Caldor Corporation, a major discount retailer, bid successfully yesterday to acquire and reopen 6 of 11 department stores in the New York area that Alexander's closed in bankruptcy last spring.
Caldor's offer of almost $120 million was approved by the Federal Bankruptcy Court in Manhattan during a session late yesterday.
Caldor executives said the stores -- two in the Bronx, two in Queens, and one each in Yonkers and Valley Stream, L.I. -- will bear the name of their new owner, which already has two stores in the New York City area.


Too Late, if Not Too Little, for the Nets
It was hard to tell the fourth-year expansion team from the supposedly rising power tonight at the Byrne Meadowlands Arena, where Chuck Daly's home debut as coach of the Nets began in celebration of a dreamlike summer and ended with visions of a nightmarish winter.
Daly received a facsimile of an Olympic gold medal in a pre-game ceremony before the Minnesota Timberwolves ruined the Nets' home opener, 88-84.
He deserved a second medal, one for martyrdom, for having to watch his Nets remind him of another group he used to lead.





Farm Credit System reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Charles Fraser-Smith, Mr. Gadget For James Bond Tales, Dies at 88
Charles Fraser-Smith, the gadget-designing genius on whom the character "Q" in the James Bond novels and movies was modeled, died on Monday at his home in Bratton Fleming, in southwest England.
He was 88 years old.
His family announced his death yesterday. The cause was not disclosed.


Restaurants
The brisk, spontaneous nature of French brasseries seems so well suited to the Manhattan life style that one can't help wonder why dozens do not already exist.
This notion is underscored by the rousing success of Brasserie des Theatres in the Paramount Hotel, which is the most authentic example of the genre to date.
The brasserie formula has been credibly executed by Max Bernard, Jean-Michel Diot and Philippe Lajaunie, the owners of Park Bistro and Les Halles on Park Avenue, two unremittingly popular places.


Militants Press Attacks on Tourists in Egypt
Continuing their drive to cripple the tourist industry, Islamic militants fired on a bus in southern Egypt today, wounding at least five Germans and two Egyptians, officials said.
A suspect captured at the scene, Bastawi Abdel-Maguid, was described by the police as an 18-year-old student and member of the Islamic Group, the main militant organization in Egypt.
The Islamic Group has taken responsibility for three previous attacks on tourists, including the killing of a Briton last month.


Corrections
Because of a mechanical error, an article yesterday about a failed evacuation effort in Sarajevo gave an incomplete account of an action by Maj.
Sefer Halilovic, the Bosnian Army commander.
The last sentence should have said, "On Monday night, Major Halilovic issued an order forbidding the Red Cross to continue the evacuation effort, which was to have carried 6,000 people, 4,000 Muslims and Croats and 2,000 Serbs, across the siege lines."


Ex-Retail Executives Are Charged in Fraud
Until its collapse almost a year ago, Cascade International Inc. in Boca Raton, Fla., was viewed on Wall Street as a nationwide women's apparel chain -- a bright prospect to its fans, a wildly inflated speculation to its critics, but a business, in any case.
Yesterday, an indictment announced by Robert M. Morgenthau, the District Attorney for Manhattan, offered another view: that since June 1985 Cascade was not a business at all but rather a "criminal enterprise" engaged in defrauding investors and creditors of millions of dollars.
Also Charged With Larceny
Two former top officers of Cascade -- its chairman, Victor G. Incendy, who disappeared a year ago and is still missing, and its president, John T. Sirmans, a Boca Raton resident -- were indicted on charges that they violated the Organized Crime Control Act, New York State's anti-racketeering law.
They were further charged with grand larceny in the possible defrauding of the Bank of Scotland of at least $10 million.
The charges carry mandatory jail terms of up to 25 years and stiff financial penalties.


It's the Bully Pulpit Again; Vernon Jordan's Integrity
An editorial yesterday about Vernon Jordan, chairman of Bill Clinton's transition organization, came out subject to a harsher reading than was intended.
In the editorial, we expressed dismay over Mr.
Jordan's apparent indifference to concerns about the appearance of a conflict of interest.
Beyond his interim service to Mr.
Clinton, Mr.
Jordan sits on the board of RJR Nabisco, the large cigarette manufacturer.


Legislators Form Panel On Car Theft In Newark
A day after four more Newark residents were killed as a result of the rising tide of car thefts in the city, New Jersey lawmakers announced a six-member task force to produce legislation intended to curb the problem.
"The crime is spreading at an epidemic proportion, and we will not stand for it," said Assemblyman Paul Digaetano, Republican of Rutherford, a member of the Assembly Task Force on Auto Theft.
It is a bipartisan group appointed to sift through pending bills on car theft and carjacking and draft other bills within 90 days.


In NATO, Only U.S. and British Ban Gay Soldiers
If President-elect Bill Clinton goes ahead with his promise to lift the ban on homosexuals in the military, Britain will become the only member of NATO still maintaining a strict policy of excluding gay men and lesbians from its armed forces.
Elsewhere in the 16-nation alliance, most governments either have laws protecting homosexuals from discrimination, including any in the military, or follow policies that make no distinction between homosexuals and non-homosexuals, even for military duties requiring special security clearance.


Lee Enterprises Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Loewen Group reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


THE TRANSITION: The New Team 1; Clinton Selects Diverse Team of Advisers
President-elect Bill Clinton today named a transition team notable for its diversity in age, sex and ethnic background that will help Mr.
Clinton shape the initial economic, foreign and social policies of his Administration.
The 48-person team includes a rich mix of white, black, Hispanic and Asian-American advisers, men and women, the youthful and the experienced, Gentiles and Jews, academics and business executives, politicians who worked with Mr.
Clinton during the campaign and old friends.


Miscellany
*
Publishers Information Bureau, New York, said magazine advertising pages in October rose two-tenths of 1 percent from October 1991, to 16,237.5.
For the year to date, pages rose 2.85 percent, to 132,270.9.


Huskies Escape Punishment
A Pacific-10 Conference subcommittee recommended today that the University of Washington football team not be stripped of its eight victories this season even though quarterback Billy Joe Hobert accepted a $50,000 loan last spring.
But one of the three subcommittee members said afterward that if Hobert had been more "dominant" this year, Washington would very likely have been ordered to forfeit its victories.
The subcommittee, during a four-hour meeting here today, reviewed Hobert's passing and rushing statistics -- he had not thrown for more than 200 yards in a game this year -- and wondered aloud if Washington would still be 8-1 had Hobert not participated.


Art in Review
Ken Buhler  Michael Walls Gallery 156 Wooster Street SoHo Through tomorrow
Ken Buhler's paintings, seen in his one-man show, are beautifully made and distinguished by an ambition to reduce nature to a state of luminous abstraction.
Mr.
Buhler specializes in fields of glowing color punctuated by gentle patterns of repeating spheres, ellipses, stripes and zigzags -- works that seem to occupy a midpoint between Milton Avery and Bill Jensen.
His pulsating color and caked, scarred textures can also make you think of the paintings of Ralph Humphrey.


Buckle Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Post Owner Nears Deal With Private Investor
Peter S. Kalikow, the owner of The New York Post, is nearing a multimillion-dollar deal with a private investor that would give new life to The Post, New York newspaper industry officials said yesterday.
Under the agreement being worked out, Leon Black, a former top executive of the defunct Wall Street firm Drexel Burnham Lambert, would become a partner in the ownership of the newspaper, whose death has been predicted for decades.


Insituform Mid-America reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Nymagic Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Harsha V. Oesman; Architect, 37
Harsha V. Oesman, an architect, died on Oct. 31 in Hong Kong, where he lived.
He was 37 years old.
His family said he had drowned while swimming.


It's the Bully Pulpit Again; The President-Elect: Leading by Explaining
Listening to Bill Clinton's news conference yesterday brought a surprising sense of relief and respect.
For 12 years, Presidential news conferences have often driven English teachers to slap their foreheads in despair.
Yesterday Mr.
Clinton not only spoke cogently and in complete sentences; he became a teacher.
The bully pulpit has become a pulpit again.


Ruling in Minor Trial Imperils Some Big New York Verdicts
When New York State's highest court ordered a new trial for a defendant in a minor drug case last week, the judges threw into doubt convictions in thousands of criminal cases, including some of the most notorious trials of recent years, legal experts said yesterday.
The cases of the Central Park jogger, the tourist from Utah who was stabbed to death on a subway platform and the Happy Land Social Club fire that killed 87 people all may have to be retried, lawyers and prosecutors said.


Note to Readers
The Op-Ed page welcomes unsolicited manuscripts.
Because of the volume of submissions, however, we regret that we cannot acknowledge an article or return it unless it is accompanied by a self-addressed, stamped envelope.
If manuscripts are accepted for publication, authors will be notified within two weeks.


Ford Official Is Put in Line For Top Job
The Ford Motor Company promoted Alexander J. Trotman yesterday to president and chief operating officer of Ford's worldwide automotive group, putting him in line to succeed Harold A. (Red) Poling next year as chief executive.
But Ford's directors passed on the chance to give Mr.
Trotman the company's No. 2 job as corporate president and chief operating officer, which would have more strongly formalized his designation as heir-apparent.


Milgray Electronics reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Review/Art; A Tragic Harbinger of the New
ONE of the first paintings to be seen in the fine retrospective of Frederic Bazille opening today at the Brooklyn Museum is not especially fine.
The stiffness of the figures in a copy of Veronese's "Mystic Marriage of St. Catherine" betrays the gropings of a young painter.
Still, as Bazille's only significant depiction of a religious subject, the work became an obvious gift when the artist's father wanted to thank the parish priest who had helped him recover his son's body from the battlefield at Beaune-la-Rolande.
After the Franco-Prussian war began, and even though his father had arranged for him to avoid military service, Bazille enlisted with the notoriously dangerous Zouaves.
"I'm sure not to get killed; I have too many things to do in this life," the artist wrote shortly before he was felled by two bullets in the stomach.
He was 28 years old.


Newark Jazz Festival
Tony Bennett, Nancy Wilson, Billy Taylor and Jimmy McGriff are among the artists set to take part in the second Newark Jazz Festival, which opens tomorrow and continues through Nov. 22 at various Newark sites.
Concerts, a symposium on jazz history, films and daily live broadcasts on WBGO-FM are scheduled.
Some events are free.
Mr.
Bennett, Ms.
Wilson and the Gail Allen Quartet are to appear next Friday at 8 P.M. at Symphony Hall; tickets are $25 to $35.
Information: (201) 643-3605.


The Spoken Word
SYMPOSIUM ON INDIA, Columbia University, Kellogg Conference Center, School of International and Public Affairs, 420 West 118th Street, 15th floor.
"Looking for India, 1492," a weekend series of lectures focusing on the history, religion and culture of India; with scholars from the United States and Portugal, Italy and Australia.
Today's topics are "India in the European Imagination" from 9 A.M. to noon and "The Northern Indian Reality" from 2 to 4 P.M.
Tomorrow the lectures will be on "European Experiences of India" from 9 A.M. to noon and "The Southern Indian Reality" from 2 to 4 P.M.
Sponsored by the Southern Asian Institute at Columbia University.
Free.
Information: (212) 854-3616.
STEINEM LECTURE, New York Open Center, 83 Spring Street, SoHo.
Gloria Steinem, whose most recent book is "Revolution From Within: A Book of Self-Esteem," will speak about self-esteem.
Today at 8 P.M.
Admission: $12.
Information: (212) 219-2527.


Gap Profits Down by 12.4% in 3d Quarter
Gap Inc. announced yesterday a 12.4 percent drop in its third-quarter profits, shrinking gross margins and the failure of its latest television advertising campaign.
Wall Street reacted predictably: It bid the stock up.


Charles W. Charny, 90, Urologist Who Led Study of Male Infertility
Dr.
Charles W. Charny, a urologist who helped his peers become aware of the existence and nature of male infertility, died Tuesday at the Graduate Hospital in Philadelphia.
He was 90 years old.
His family said he died of complications from a stroke.


Senior East Germans Go On Trial; Critics Ask if Such a Case Is Just
The most sensational political trial in Germany since the Nuremberg war crimes trialsopened today, but doubts lingered whether the manslaughter case against Erich Honecker, the former East German leader, and five close aides would be able to proceed.
The six men were specifically charged in the deaths of 13 East Germans who were killed as they attempted to flee to West Germany.
Although more than a dozen former East German border guards have been brought to trial in similar cases, the proceedings that opened today marked the first trial of top Communist leaders.
More than 200 East Germans were killed trying to cross the wall.


Sears to Test Use of Other Credit Cards
Giving a long overdue nod to nearly four decades of consumer finance, Sears, Roebuck &amp; Company said yesterday that it would begin accepting Visa, Mastercard and American Express credit cards in 140 stores in six markets on a test basis.
"In today's competitive credit climate, we need to be as responsive and accommodating to our customers as possible," said Peter Fisher, executive vice president at Sears Credit.
A Break With Tradition
The test is tantamount to heresy at the nation's third-largest retailer, which introduced store credit to America in 1911 when it offered installment payment plans to farmers who could not obtain bank loans to pay for big-ticket items in its catalogues.
That payment system evolved into a revolving charge account program in 1953.


Instrument Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Quaker Oats Spotlights Vigorous Elderly
For the last five years, Wilford Brimley has served as a phlegmatic, even lethargic, spokesman for Quaker Oats.
"It's the right thing to do," the veteran character actor declared earnestly in low-key ads aimed at older consumers.
No more.


The Giants' Plan: Don't Let Elway Disappear in Thin Air
He's probably the most dangerous quarterback in the National Football League.
He has Randall Cunningham's ability and willingness to scramble, but he's a better passer.
In his 10 pro seasons, he has steered 31 game-saving drives in the fourth quarter, resulting in 30 victories and a tie.
On Sunday night, in the thin air and cold at Mile High Stadium in Denver, John Elway of the Broncos will try to work his magic against the Giants.
And he will do it in the first game for the Giants since Lawrence Taylor, their stalwart defensive star, saw his season, and probably his career, come to an end because of a torn Achilles' tendon.


Books of The Times; Assigning Blame and Taking No Responsibility
A Nation of Victims
The Decay of the American Character
By Charles J. Sykes
289 pages. St. Martin's Press. $22.95.
A Massachusetts man steals a car from a parking lot and is killed while driving it; his family subsequently sues the parking-lot owner for failing to take steps to prevent such thefts.


Two Faces of Exxon Chief's Kidnapper
Two starkly different portraits emerged today of Arthur D. Seale, the man who admitted kidnapping and killing the Exxon executive Sidney J. Reso last spring.
As portrayed by the Federal prosecutor here, Mr.
Seale is more than just the greedy, desperate and arrogant man previously described in court papers and at news conferences.
He is also a driven and manipulative criminal, compelled to pursue an $18.5 million ransom for six weeks after his victim died inside a locked coffin-like box, and even to contemplate another kidnapping because he had botched the first one.


Mexico's Little Airline That Could
When Alberto Abed was 14 years old his father died.
The teen-ager dropped out of school and learned to fly planes to help support his family.
Though he was under age, he persuaded instructors at a flying school at Benito Juarez International Airport in Mexico City to give him lessons; he paid for the instruction by cleaning planes, putting air in tires and helping with engine repairs.


Perrigo Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Washington Memo; Insider Paving Way for an Outsider
Still playing the outsider, President-elect Bill Clinton asked the other day whether there was a McDonald's near the White House.
He pointedly did not, however, put the question to the man he named to answer most of his queries about Washington: Vernon E. Jordan, the lawyer-lobbyist here who is chairman of the Clinton transition.


Review/Rock; Where Kindness Constitutes a Sin
Bonds can be formed in blood, by the word or in ritual.
Heavy-metal fans form family ties by piling in front of a stage where their heroes make a roar.
They push and sweat themselves into a state of ravishment, letting go of the anger they feel about their daily circumstances and finding a crazy strength in violent communion.
The bands that got the pit moving at the Ritz on Wednesday night are expert in making use of the audience's hunger for kinship.
Suicidal Tendencies, the hard-core band that emerged from the Southern California skateboarder scene in the mid-1980's with a feisty sound and a witty streak, articulate the alienation felt by their predominantly young male fans, who hate their high schools or service-industry jobs but see dreaming of better days as useless.


Step Toward Independent Counsel Is Taken in the Iraq Bank Inquiry
The Justice Department has taken the first step toward appointing an independent counsel to investigate the Government's handling of a politically sensitive bank-fraud case involving Iraq, the official leading the department's internal inquiry said today.
The official, Frederick B. Lacey, a former Federal judge who was appointed by Attorney General William P. Barr last month to help him decide whether to appoint an independent counsel, said in an interview that allegations of wrongdoing by American officials were serious enough to move on to the next phase of the investigation.
A Significant Hurdle
Mr.
Barr accepted that recommendation, Judge Lacey said, and directed him to complete his inquiry by Dec. 8 and give him a final recommendation on whether Mr.
Barr should seek the appointment of an independent counsel.
Such an appointment would be made by a panel of Federal appeals court judges.


What Mothers and Babies Decide to Do
To the Editor:
In "Staying Home" (letter, Oct. 21), Joyce Cohen writes that she searched the literature for any child development expert to tell her that it is not only natural, but immeasurably better for baby, if mommy stays home to do the childrearing herself: "Not one expert put on record the opinion that a mother raising her own children was a good thing."


Study Cites Role of Biological and Genetic Factors in Violence
In a sharp departure from traditional criminology, the National Research Council has found that biological and genetic factors should be considered along with environmental problems like poverty in efforts to understand the causes of violence.
The findings of the council, the research arm of the National Academy of Sciences, are contained in a report, "Understanding and Preventing Violence," which was released today.
The four-volume report, a compilation of research that has been done in many fields, is cloaked in cautious scholarly language and shows an important change in the study of criminal behavior, which has heavily focused on the social and economic underpinnings of violence.


Review/Film; If Only the Helpless Wanted to Be Helped
"The Giving," Eames Demetrios's aggressively earnest film about a Los Angeles yuppie who changes his life to help the homeless, is literally and figuratively in black and white.
Shot in the stagy, soliloquy-filled style of a student film, it presents the tremulous white banker Jeremiah Pollock (Kevin Kildow) and the caustic black firebrand named Gregor (Lee Hampton), who regards Jeremiah's charitable efforts with suspicion.
The arguments between Jeremiah and Gregor's radicalized band of street people have a stubbornly polemical flavor.
Watching Jeremiah being forced to rethink his notions of generosity suggests what it might have been like to spend an hour and a half being browbeaten by the Symbionese Liberation Army.
When Jeremiah donates $10,000 to a mission house at a black-tie auction, his gesture is greeted with disbelief by his fellow bankers and with scorn by the homeless themselves.
"Anyone can write a check, but it takes a brave man to see us as human," Gregor eventually announces, dripping contempt. (A female friend of Gregor's actually spits at Jeremiah rather than take his money.) Gregor, an idealist who keeps bees in a car engine and dreams of creating an urban farming project with a community of friends, eventually so overpowers Jeremiah that Jeremiah's car is filled with hay and turned into a chicken coop.


Review/Film; About Arts, Reporters And Censors
"Damned in the U.S.A," opening today at the Quad Cinema in Greenwich Village, was originally made as a television documentary for England's Channel 4, being a report on the state of the arts in this country with special emphasis on pornography and censorship.
The news peg was the Cincinnati obscenity trial involving the exhibition of explicity sexual photographs, taken by Robert Mapplethorpe, at the Contemporary Arts Center there.
Having completed their film and shown it here at the Margaret Mead Film Festival in September 1991, Paul Yule, the director, and Jonathan Stack, his co-producer, were sued by the Rev.
Donald Wildmon, of the American Family Association, who sought to enjoin the film's release in this country.
In this way the film makers became a part of the story they set out to cover.
In this way, too, it seems, the film gained a notoriety that led to a theatrical release it might not otherwise have obtained.


Review/Art; One Brief and Shining Cubist Moment
Truncated achievements and traveling exhibitions don't always mix, as is demonstrated by the disappointing survey of Max Weber's 10-year Cubist career at the Brooklyn Museum.
Weber, who was born in Russia in 1881 and emigrated to New York City with his family at the age of 10, was fleetingly considered one of the leading modern artists in America.
He was, for example, among the first Americans to exhibit at the Museum of Modern Art, in 1930.
The Brooklyn show, which consists of 62 paintings and drawings and one small, graceful sculpture, covers the decade from 1910 to 1920, when the artist, fresh from three years in Paris, grappled with the heady influences of European modernism: Futurism and Expressionism as well as Cubism. (It wisely ignores the remainder of his career: from the late 1920's until his death in 1961, Weber pursued an increasingly conservative and sentimental brand of figuration, often mired in religious piety.)


No Headline
I'm having a wonderful time. -- PRESIDENT-ELECT CLINTON.  [ A18:3. ]


Dell to Offer 4 Million New Shares
The Dell Computer Corporation said today that it planned to offer approximately four million new shares of its common stock for sale to the public in early December.
The price of Dell's shares finished the day at $36.125, down $1.50, but above the low mark of the day, when the price dropped $2.
Nearly two million shares changed hands in over-the-counter trading.


First AmFed Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Alpine Lace Brands reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Oregon G.O.P. Faces Schism Over Agenda of Christian Right
In a political civil war that presages a battle for the soul of the national Republican Party, the chairman of the Republican Party of Oregon has threatened to form an independent state branch free of the religious right.
The chairman, Craig L. Berkman, has proposed joining supporters of Ross Perot to form a new group that would shake the anti-abortion and anti-homosexual forces that dominate the ranks of Republicans here and in many other states.


All For A Dollar Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 26


Mercantile Stores Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  PAROLEE CHARGED  IN OFFICER'S DEATH
A 24-year-old Queens man on parole for a drug conviction was charged with murdering an off-duty police officer whose naked body was found on Wednesday in a marshy lot near Kennedy International Airport.
The police said that the man met the officer early that morning, had consensual sex with her at a friend's house, and then shot her three times in the head -- apparently to rob her of money, credit cards and her revolver.
Page 23.
MAYOR URGES TOLERANCE OVER VERDICT
Mayor Dinkins said that Jewish New Yorkers who feel aggrieved by the acquittal of a black teen-ager in the killing of a Hasidic scholar should not make condemnation of the verdict a test of other people's commitment to justice.
His comments represent yet another effort to calm the debate and superheated emotions since the verdict two weeks ago.
"If we take it to its logical conclusion," Mr.
Dinkins said, "especially those who seem to equate concern for civil rights and fairness with whether or not one is willing to condemn this verdict, I say where does it take us? Page 23.  BREAKING OUT OF A STATE-JAIL LEASE
Overcrowding has eased in New York City jails, so the city has announced that it will stop using two prisons near the Canadian border by the end of the year.
At issue is a dispute involving the city, the state and a prisoners' rights group over who has to pay for running the two upstate prisons, at Ogdensburg and Cape Vincent.
Page 22.
NEW YORK CITY HELD IN CONTEMPT OF COURT
A judge held New York City in contempt of court for leaving hundreds of homeless families to spend the night in city offices and said she was "seriously considering" requiring Mayor David N. Dinkins and other high-ranking officials to stay overnight in the offices until they insure that families are promptly placed in shelters.
Until now, the judge has penalized the city modestly for improperly sheltering homeless families.
Page 22.
Man is sought in Brooklyn sex assaults.
Page 22.
A flamboyant lawyer is sentenced for defrauding clients and filing a false tax return.
Page 25.
REGION
THE TAX  IS IN THE MAIL
Connecticut, which estimates that it loses as much as $60 million a year because mail-order houses are unwilling to collect sales tax from their customers in the state, is tucking a new form into its 1992 income-tax booklet asking people to pay a 6 percent sales tax on out-of-state purchases.
Page 25.
SURPRISE TESTIMONY IN SEX-ASSAULT CASE
A woman testified that the mildly retarded woman in the Glen Ridge sex-assault case described the 1989 incident in a schoolmate's basement to her as a "terrible thing" that physically "hurt" her.
The testimony was elicited by the defense in a seeming tactical blunder and appeared to contradict the defense's depiction of the woman as a sexual aggressor.
Page 24.
Students disrupt a board of governors meeting at Rutgers University. Page 24.
Gov.
Florio and Republican legislators play beat-the-clock with health care.
Page 24.
About New York by Michael T. Kaufman 22


BT Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Elcotel Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Dime Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


THE TRANSITION: Ethics; Experts Find Loopholes In Clinton's Ethics Rule
With one terse paragraph, Warren M. Christopher, director of the Democratic transition team, seemed to move the group's ethics standards far beyond past practice into a new and stricter realm.
All transition staff members, he said, will be disqualified from "any transition matter that conflicts or appears to conflict" with personal financial interests or those of their families, clients and businesses.


Farmstead Telephone reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Corrections
An article on Thursday about the change of name of the Custer battlefield to the Little Bighorn National Battlefield referred incorrectly in some copies to the rank that George Armstrong Custer held at his death at the Battle of the Little Bighorn.
Custer attained the rank of major general of volunteers in the Civil War.
In the reorganization of the Army after the war, he was assigned the rank of lieutenant colonel in the Seventh Cavalry.


Sonesta International reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Workers Support Riverside South Development


Walking the Beat in the Subway's Nether World
YOU step off the subway platform at the Second Avenue station heading on to the tracks with five Transit Authority police officers.
They are on one of their daily missions to search for people living in the tunnels next to the tracks.
You cross over the third rail into a 10-foot wide corridor between the tracks.
The beams from the officers' flashlights pick up the first proofs of human habitation.
There are newspapers, bottles, syringes, empty bedrolls, plastic hospital identification cards, ashes from old campfires, crack vials.
A Brooklyn-bound F train passes four feet away.
From track level, trains look much bigger and seem more menacing than they do at stations.


SpectraScience Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


No Headline
Harvesting in November is like what a commuter faces driving to work through the first snowstorm of the year.
You get it done but it's more dangerous because no one's really prepared and you end up grumpy and less productive. -- BOB JOHNSON of DeKalb, Ill., on this year's late crop.  [ 46:5. ]


Crown Heights Stabbing Verdict Is a Travesty
To the Editor:
The acquittal of Lemrick Nelson Jr. for the murder of Yankel Rosenbaum is a travesty of justice.
There was compelling evidence linking Mr.
Nelson to the crime.
He was in the mob that attacked the young Hasidic scholar.
He was captured by the police minutes after the attack with a knife stained with what could have been Mr.
Rosenbaum's blood, but could not have been his own.
He was identified by Mr.
Rosenbaum and confessed to the stabbing in the presence of police officers.
No witness contradicted this version of events.


Endevco Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Audit Reveals Extravagances
New York Racing Association executives were given cash bonuses and luxury cars even though the association's year-end profits for the state shrank to zero, according to a state audit of spending practices during 1988 and 1989.
EDWARD REGAN, the state comptroller, spoke about the audit yesterday in Albany, calling the N.Y.R.A. spending practices "unreasonable, excessive and inconsistent" with state laws that require it to operate economically.
N.Y.R.A. officials defended their spending and suggested that auditors "failed to understand the nature of N.Y.R.A.'s business."
N.Y.R.A., a nonprofit corporation, operates the Aqueduct track in Queens, Belmont Park in Elmont, L.I., and the Saratoga track in upstate Saratoga Springs under a state franchise that requires it to turn over its year-end profits to the state.


Starbucks Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 27


Chesapeake Utilities reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


70 Months For Lawyer In Tax Fraud
Harvey Myerson, a flamboyant lawyer known for his expensive tastes and bitter controversies, was sentenced last night to almost six years in prison for defrauding clients and filing a false tax return.
Judge Edward R. Korman imposed a prison term of 70 months for Mr.
Myerson's convictions in two trials in Federal District Court in Brooklyn.


Younkers Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 24


THE TRANSITION: Packaging the Candidate; The Making of a First Family: a Blueprint
In late April, the political professionals working to make Bill Clinton President realized they had a potentially fatal problem: at least 40 percent ofthe voters did not much like Mr.
Clinton.
They saw him as a "wishy-washy," fast-talking career politician who did not "talk straight."
They liked Hillary Clinton even less, regarding her as "being in the race for herself," as "going for the power," and as a wife intent on "running the show."


Cellular Communications reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Run It Up the Flagpole And See if Anyone Buys
CONSIDERING all the fuss about trade wars, an investment strategy with a long dash of jingoism doesn't sound like a bad idea.
Buy American with your investment stash and do your bit to further the flag-waving cause.
And wouldn't you know that a player in the marketing-savvy mutual fund industry has already come up with a way for you to act on your love of country.
The Made In the U.S.A.
Fund, touted in a brochure that depicts Mount Rushmore and a Little League team, looks like the answer to every patriotic investor's dream.
Who could resist a stock fund that puts an apple pie and the American flag on the brochure cover?


Reflectone Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


More Counterclaims Filed by Players
Four more present or former Cincinnati Bengals players have countersued a woman who contends that she was gang-raped by several Bengals players two years ago in Seattle.
Altogether, 11 of the 20 men accused of rape or witnessing the rape have filed counterclaims.
Safeties DAVID FULCHER and RICKEY DIXON and a former cornerback, LEWIS BILLUPS, jointly filed their countersuit Thursday in Seattle, The Cincinnati Enquirer reported yesterday.
The former running back ICKEY WOODS filed a separate counterclaim.


Hughes Names 2 for New Ventures Abroad
The Hughes Aircraft Company said today that it had appointed two longtime executives to head two new overseas ventures charged with developing more foreign business.
Like efforts by other military contractors, Hughes's move represents a strategic bid to broaden the compan y's customer list as military budgets decline and to begin applying military technology to civilian products.


Trans Financial Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Andrew Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Helmerich &amp; Payne reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Dr. Salam Shahidi, 59, A Research Scientist
Dr.
Syed Abdus Salam Shahidi, a Pakistani-American leader and researcher in New York City's Department of Health, died on Oct. 28 at University Hospital in New Brunswick, N.J.
He was 59 years old and lived in North Brunswick.
He died of a heart attack, said his wife, Dr. Azra Shahidi.


CHRONICLE
Tomorrow evening, a party in Washington will celebrate the 20th anniversary of the opening of the Palm Restaurant.
TOMMY JACOMO, the general manager, who has been there from the start, said yesterday that he was expecting more than 700 people, including a slew of political figures, among them, he said, the chairman of the Clinton transition team, VERNON E. JORDAN.
The timing for the party could not be more fortuitous, Mr.
Jacomo said, noting that the steakhouse, off Dupont Circle, had opened in the waning days of the Nixon Administration and survived five Presidencies.


Whole Foods Market reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 27


Muslims From Abroad Join in War Against Serbs
Television images of bombed-out mosques and dead Muslims convinced Abo Abdulaziz to leave his home in the Middle East five months ago and take up arms here in central Bosnia and Herzegovina against the Serbs.
"I saw pictures of Muslims being killed like sheep," said Mr.
Abdulaziz, who identified himself as a 50-year-old businessman and father of nine children.
"Muslims should take care of other Muslims no matter where they are, East or West."


Unilab Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Tristate Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Carlisle Plastics reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Thomson Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Black Woman In Race to Be Mayor of Rio
In Rio, where Afro-Brazilian success stories are usually confined to soccer and samba, a black woman is rattling Latin dominance of politics by campaigning strongly in Rio de Janeiro's mayoral elections on Sunday.
The candidate, Benedita Souza da Silva, a 50-year-old congresswoman, has broken four centuries of racial tradition in Brazilian politics by bidding to lead Rio, the cultural and social bellwether for Latin America's largest country.


G.O.P. Health Plan Dips Into Unemployment Fund
With a Nov. 30 deadline bearing down on them, Republican legislators and Gov.
Jim Florio have been unable to agree on how to restore New Jersey's system for financing health care for indigent patients.
If the Legislature and the Governor fail to act this month, hospital care for about 800,000 people will be jeopardized and millions of dollars in bad debts will create huge problems for hospitals across the state, threatening the survival of some.


Your Money; A Will Is Not Enough


COMPANY BRIEFS
APPLE COMPUTER INC., Cupertino, Calif., has installed Telecommunications Device for the Deaf software to provide its deaf and hearing-impaired customers with access to the company's Customer Assistance Center through a special toll-free line.
CAROLCO PICTURES CO., Los Angeles, paid interest on $14.6 million of $49.6 million in principal amount of its 10 percent debentures due 2006.
The company also has outstanding $16.1 million in principal amount of 13 percent notes due 1996 and $33.8 million of 14 percent notes due 1993.


Sequa Corp.(X) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Home Intensive Care reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Starrett Housing reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Control Resources Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Who Got Stung? Not Iraq
New evidence suggests that the Bush Administration's effort to arm Iraq months before the invasion of Kuwait was part of an elaborate sting operation aimed at Saddam Hussein.
In the end, however, the real victims were the U.S.
Constitution and the American taxpayer.
A trial that ended abruptly in London this week suggests that the U.S. and its allies may have covertly armed Iraq in a dubious attempt to domesticate the Iraqi dictator and gather intelligence on his nuclear, chemical and other weapons programs.
If so, the Administration did not get what it bargained for.
But Baghdad did.


Verdix Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


US Facilities Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


U.S. Drops a Criminal Investigation of F.B.I. Director
The Justice Department has dropped its preliminary criminal inquiry into the travel and administrative practices of William S. Sessions, the Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, the bureau announced today.
The Justice Department's decision has no bearing on a continuing administrative inquiry by the department's internal ethics unit, which is examining whether Mr.
Sessions violated internal procedures and regulations.


Flagship Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


A Sugar Bowl for No. 1? Don't Count On It Yet
As soon as the final seconds disappeared in Tucson, Ariz., last Saturday, the focus of the college football season switched from another Washington-Miami debate to the possibility of a championship game in the Sugar Bowl.
Washington's loss at Arizona created the possibility of a Miami-Alabama matchup, which could satisfy everyone outside of College Station, Tex., home of the undefeated, untied and unappreciated Texas A&amp;M Aggies.


Orbit International Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Wainoco Oil Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Dianon Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Howe's History May Not Cut Price
The agent for Steve Howe said yesterday that the Yankees would be given the first chance to sign the reinstated free-agent pitcher, but there are indications that they may have to offer him a lucrative contract to bring him back to New York.
Dick Moss, the pitcher's agent, refused to discuss what Howe would seek in a contract, but the left-hander was one of the premier relievers in the American League before he was permanently suspended last June for repeated drug violations.
That suspension was lifted on Thursday by George Nicolau, baseball's arbitrator, who heard Howe's grievance.


Interfirst Bankcorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Advantage Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Bryson B. Rash, 79, Radio-TV Journalist
Bryson Brennan Rash, an award-winning radio and television broadcaster whose career spanned more than half a century, died Tuesday at his home in Washington.
He was 79 years old.
He died of emphysema, his family said.


West Coast Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Trans-Atlantic Sailor Missing After Tracking System Fails
One of the world's most experienced long-distance sailors, Mike Plant, is missing at sea, and the American's inexplicable failure to register his boat's emergency tracking equipment appears to have seriously jeopardized his chances of being rescued in the Atlantic Ocean.
The mystery of his whereabouts has underscored the absence of a fail-safe system to protect sailors on oceanic crossings.
For Plant, a 41-year-old yachtsman from Jamestown, R.I., who has circumnavigated the globe alone three times before, his voyage across the Atlantic, to Les Sables d'Olonne, France, should have been little more than a skip across a pond.
But as of yesterday, he was late by 13 days.
Plant, who left New York Harbor in the 60-foot sailboat Coyote on Oct. 16, sent off a distress signal Oct. 27.
He was sailing to Les Sables d'Olonne for the Nov. 22 start of the Vendee Globe Challenge, a nonstop solo race around the world.
It wasn't until this Thursday that the United States Coast Guard at Governors Island in New York received word about the signal.


Jako Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


New York In Contempt On Shelters For Homeless
A judge yesterday held New York City in contempt of court for leaving hundreds of homeless families to spend the night in city offices and said she was "seriously considering" requiring Mayor David N. Dinkins and other high-ranking officials to stay overnight in the offices until they insure that families are promptly placed in shelters.
Justice Helen E. Freedman of State Supreme Court in Manhattan said she would hold some city officials individually in contempt next week, though she has not yet decided which ones.
The list of candidates for contempt includes Mr.
Dinkins, First Deputy Mayor Norman Steisel, Deputy Mayor Cesar A. Perales, Human Resources Administrator Barbara J. Sabol and Felice L. Michetti, Commissioner of Housing Preservation and Development. 'A Very Distressing Situation'
The judge, who held the city in contempt last year for violating court orders on the treatment of homeless families, said yesterday that she was frustrated that the problems in the city's shelter system have dramatically worsened in recent months.


Classical Music in Review
Guarneri Quartet Alice Tully Hall


Bowe Pounds Title Away From Holyfield
Riddick Bowe, the 25-year-old challenger from Brooklyn, outgunned Evander Holyfield through 12 gritty rounds tonight to win the undisputed world heavyweight title on a unanimous decision at the Thomas and Mack Center.
Bowe pounded the 30-year-old champion with a display of superior firepower, but Holyfield refused to give in against the bigger and better man.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 2-5  TOKYO MAY RETREAT ON PLUTONIUM
Because of world protests over a shipment of plutonium from Europe, Japan hinted that it might scale back plans for 30 more shipments of the nuclear fuel in the next decade.  1  SHIITE GROUP GAINS IN LEBANON
Backed by guns and money from Iran and by Syria's support and troops, the Shiite Muslim Party of God has emerged as the most powerful force in Lebanon.  1  UNIVERSITY AS AN EXAMPLE
Students at the West Bank's elite university have held a politically charged but peaceful campus election that is being cited as proof that the occupied territories are ready for democracy.  2  COUP ATTEMPT FAILS IN PERU
Peru's Government said it had crushed a coup attempt by a group of army officers who tried to seize army headquarters and the national palace and kill the President.  3  A BLACK RUNS FOR RIO MAYOR
A 50-year-old black congresswoman is rattling Latin dominance of politics by campaigning strongly in Rio de Janeiro's mayoral elections.  3  EUROPEAN UNITY UNDER THREAT
The goal of economic and political unity in the European Community has been hurt by the political leadership in France, Britain and Germany and by economic problems in the major European countries.  3  A MURDER IN WARSAW
The Polish authorities say they are nowhere near solving the brutal slaying of Piotr Jaroszewicz, Poland's hard-line Communist Prime Minister from 1970 to 1980, and his wife in September in Warsaw.  4  MIDEAST MUSLIMS FIGHT IN BOSNIA
Images of bombed-out mosques and dead Muslims have persuaded fighters to leave the Mideast and take up arms against the Serbs in Bosnia and Herzegovina.  5  DEATH TOLL PUT AT 100,000
The Foreign Minister of Bosnia and Herzegovnia, in Germany to establish diplomatic relations, said 100,000 people, most of them Muslims, had been killed in Serbian attacks on his country since the spring.  5  A truce brought people out into the streets of Sarajevo.  5  National 6-9  NEW SIGNS OF RECOVERY
The Government reported that retail sales rose 0.9 percent in October, and researchers at the University of Michigan found consumer confidence soaring in the first half of November.  1  The head of Bush's economic council defended his fiscal policies.  8  PASSPORT-FILE CASE TAKES A TURN
The State Department official dismissed this week for authorizing a search of Bill Clinton's passport files has told investigators that the search was approved by the Under Secretary of State for Management, one of the highest-ranking political appointees in the department.  1  A criminal inquiry on the F.B.I.
Director was dropped.  6  CLINTON ISSUES ETHICS GUIDELINES
For six months after the inauguration, members of the President-elect's transition team will be barred from lobbying Federal agencies with which they have dealt.
In addition, they must have no involvement in transition decisions that could affect their financial interests.  1  The ethics rules drew praise, and then some criticism.  8  Clinton and the military remain at odds on gay rights.  9  THE REMAKING OF THE CLINTONS
A confidential Democratic campaign memo written in April launched one of the most ambitious efforts at political rehabilitation ever undertaken: casting Bill and Hillary Clinton, whom many voters did not care for, as an honest, plain-folks idealist and his warm and loving wife.  1  PRISON OF TERRORS
In one of the most severe cases of sexual abuse in the history of women's prisons in America, 14 former employees of a Georgia corrections center were indicted on rape and other charges.
Investigators said at least 119 women had been identified as victims.  1  OFFICERS IN BEATING CASE GAIN
A judge dealt a setback to Federal prosecutors by ruling out a critical line of evidence in the civil rights trial stemming from the police beating of Rodney G. King.  6  BAD SPLIT IN OREGON G.O.P.
In a political civil war that presages a battle for the soul of the national Republican Party, the Republican state chairman in Oregon has threatened to form an independent branch of the party that would be free of the religious right.  6  NEW FINDING ON ALCOHOLISM
Researchers said a prescription drug that reduces a recovering alcoholic's craving appeared to show great promise of preventing alcoholism relapses.  7  Beliefs: A new statistic prompts a second look at a Catholic era.  7  Sports 28-32  YACHTSMAN MISSING AT SEA
Arpad E. Elo; inventor of chess ratings system.
Stanley V. Margolis, professor of geology and geochemist.
William Hillcourt, author of the "Official Boy Scout Handbook."  Editorials/Op-Ed 18-19  Editorials  A smart start on ethics.
Who got stung?
Not Iraq.
Prejudice on parade.
Public school choice, perfected.
Letters  Russell Baker: Outbreak of wonkery.
Henry J. Aaron: What's the rush on health care?
Tanya L. Domi: Let women prove they can fight.
Charles Rembar: Jeeves unmasked.
Finally.
Maybe.
Craig Whitaker: Slow down, Mr.
Trump.


Now May Be the Time To Pay Insurance Loans
THERE was a time, not long ago, when the cheapest place for Americans to borrow money was from their own life insurance policies.
In the late 1970's and early 80's, insurance companies found that millions of people were borrowing against the cash values of their policies at what were then the bargain basement rates of 5 or 6 percent.


Ranger Oil Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


THE TRANSITION: Packaging the Candidate; The Making of a First Family: a Blueprint
In late April, the political professionals working to make Bill Clinton President realized they had a potentially fatal problem: at least 40 percent ofthe voters did not much like Mr.
Clinton.
They saw him as a "wishy-washy," fast-talking career politician who did not "talk straight."
They liked Hillary Clinton even less, regarding her as "being in the race for herself," as "going for the power," and as a wife intent on "running the show."


Sports of The Times; Bowe's Heart Turns Tin To Platinum
DURING the 1988 Olympics, the stigma was branded on Riddick Bowe as if he were the Tin Man in the "Wizard of Oz."
"No heart," the skeptics sneered.


THE TRANSITION: The President-Elect; Clinton Issues Ethics Policies for Transition Team
President-elect Bill Clinton issued ethics guidelines today for his transition team, for the first time barring officials for six months after Inauguration Day from lobbying Federal agencies they deal with and prohibiting involvement in decisions that could affect their financial or business interests.
The guidelines go further than an ethics code established for President Bush's 1988 transition team, which required financial disclosure and a pledge not to use inside information for profit.


Dance in Review
Rebecca Kelly Dance Gould Hall


Prof. Arpad E. Elo Is Dead at 89; Inventor of Chess Ratings System
Prof.
Arpad E. Elo, a physicist and astronomer who devised the system that ranks the world's chess players, and a founder of the United States Chess Federation, died on Nov. 5 at his home in Milwaukee.
He was 89 years old.
The Milwaukee Journal said the cause of death was a heart attack.


Mount at Aqueduct Throws Antley
CHRIS ANTLEY, one of New York's leading jockeys, suffered four fractured ribs yesterday when he was spilled from his mount in the sixth race at Aqueduct.
The 26-year-old rider was thrown by the 2-year-old gelding Koluctoo Jimmy Al, who swerved to the inside on leaving the gate and clipped heels with another horse.
Antley's mount fell down but got up and ran around the track until caught by an outrider.
The jockey, second to MIKE SMITH in the rankings at Aqueduct's autumn meeting, was taken to Long Island Jewish Hospital, where he was still being evaluated last night for other possible injuries.
It was his second spill in a month's time.
He also was thrown by the filly Deputation during the Spinster Stakes at Keeneland in Kentucky last month, but was not injured.


Bit of West Bank's Future in Smooth Campus Vote
At a time when Palestinians are being challenged to show they are ready for self-rule, students at the West Bank's elite university have held a politically charged but peaceful campus election that is being cited as proof that the occupied territories are ready for democracy.
To some Palestinians, the student council vote at Bir Zeit University on Thursday was a model for general elections and evidence that rival factions can compete without violence.
Others saw the vote as a political barometer, a victory for nationalism over religious fundamentalism.


Corrections
An obituary yesterday about Charles Fraser-Smith, who was the model for a James Bond character, misidentified the writer of "The Man Who Never Was" in some copies.
He was Ewen Montagu, not Ian Fleming.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
7.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
4.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
2.81
3.04
4.87
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.05
3.05
4.57
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.33
3.26
4.60
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.44
6.35
6.93
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.57
7.59
7.81
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.50
8.55
8.81
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.46
6.46
6.81
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Birmingham Mayor Is Cleared


Sbarro Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 4


CrossLand Federal reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Islamic Guerrilla Attacks on Israel Cause Rising Tensions in Lebanon
Backed by guns and money from Iran and operating at Syria's sufferance, the Party of God has emerged as the most powerful Lebanese force in this country.
The importance of the Party of God in the Middle East today has been underscored by the rising tensions this week with Israel.
Bolstered by a militia force of several thousands, the Shiite Muslim fundamentalist guerrillas have stirred tensions similar to those that prevailed here a decade ago before Israel invaded to drive out the P.L.O.


Cathay Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


2 Airline Workers Arrested in Threat
A former airline worker and a passenger service employee have been charged with trying to extort $600,000 from United Air Lines by threatening to blow up one of its planes, the F.B.I. announced yesterday.
One suspect, Paul Stoos, 20 years old, of Los Angeles, was arrested Thursday evening as he prepared to leave Kennedy International Airport for Los Angeles, the F.B.I. said.
It said an informant had called the bureau to identify Mr.
Stoos as the person who sent the bomb threat.


Allelix Biopharm reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Bank Shut By Federal Regulators
The First New York Bank for Business, founded in 1975 as First Women's Bank, was closed late yesterday by banking regulators, and its federally insured deposits were sold to First Merchants Bank.
While insured depositors will not suffer any loss from the closing, about 550 accounts with $7.9 million of uninsured deposits could lose as much as 50 cents on every dollar above the $100,000 insurance limit.
The Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation has agreed to pay 50 cents and said additional payments would depend on what it receives from the sale of assets of the failed bank in the next two or three years.


Judge Limits Evidence In Police Beating Case
Ruling out a critical line of evidence, a Federal judge has set strict limits on the prosecution as this still-shaken city moves toward a second trial of four police officers in the beating of Rodney G. King in March 1991.
The judge, John G. Davies of United States District Court, ruled Thursday that he would not admit evidence showing that the officers had been guilty of prior misconduct or that one of them had apparently made racial comments before the beating.


Fairfield First Bank &amp; Trust reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Weston (George) Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Man on Parole Is Charged in Killing of Off-Duty Officer
A 24-year-old Queens man serving parole on a drug conviction was charged yesterday with murdering an off-duty police officer whose naked body was found on Wednesday in a marshy lot near Kennedy International Airport.
The police said that the man, Kwane Jackson, met the officer on a street corner in Queens early that morning, had consensual sex with her at a friend's house, and then shot her three times in the head in her car -- apparently to rob her of money, credit cards and her revolver.


Observer; Outbreak Of Wonkery
If The Washington Post uses the word "wonk" one more time it's all over between us.
I wouldn't go out with a girl who said "wonk" every time she opened her mouth, so why should I be seen with a newspaper who thinks it's cute to say "wonk" until I beg for mercy?
"Wonk" is a terrible, ugly word.
It makes a terrible sound and, what's more, a sound that doesn't even suggest a meaning as the sound of, say, "klutz" suggests a meaning.
It just makes that terrible braying noise.
The simple act of writing "wonk" right here makes me wince.
Only somebody with a tin ear could possibly say it without feeling embarrassed.


Vons Companies reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 4


Oglebay Norton reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Western Capital Investment reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


PMC Capital Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Ventura County National Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Nervously, Gratefully, Sarajevo Takes a Stroll
Encouraged by the first cease-fire to show any sign of lasting, thousands of people in this capital went for a stroll today in neighborhoods that have been virtually off limits since the war began seven months ago.
On the third day of a truce aimed at bringing peace to this former Yugoslav republic, Sarajevo seemed to return to some semblance of its old self.
Streets in the central part of the city were filled, and cafes that had been closed for months reopened to standing-room-only crowds.


BFS Bankorp Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Universal Foods Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


THE TRANSITION: Gay Rights; Top Military Officers Object To Lifting Homosexual Ban
President-elect Bill Clinton's commitment this week to lift the ban on homosexuals in the military has drawn strenuous objections from Gen.
Colin L. Powell, the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, and other top military officers.
Moreover, their public and private responses to the President-elect's statements suggest that a major confrontation is brewing between Mr.
Clinton and the military leadership, one that could sour the new Commander in Chief's relationship with his top officers.


First National-California Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Despite Retirement and Injury, Taylor May Not Be Through
In his first public statement since Tuesday's surgery to repair a torn right Achilles' tendon, Lawrence Taylor said last night that he had not decided if he would play again.
"At this time," said the Giants' celebrated outside linebacker, "I couldn't tell you what I'm going to do. I don't want to tie myself into a corner. The main thing on my mind is to get this bad boy ready."


Continential Mortgage &amp; Equity Trust reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


A Smart Start on Ethics
"The era is over when too many in Washington sought to gain in some way from their access to power," Warren Christopher, President-elect Clinton's transition chief, said yesterday as he announced a new code of ethics for members of the transition team.
Only time will tell whether Mr.
Clinton is fully capable of stopping the revolving door that has allowed public servants to cash in on their proximity to Presidential power.
Even so, the sensible new rules send a reassuring signal that the new President is serious.


Uno Restaurant Corp.  reports earnings for Year Sept 27


Republic Bancorp Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


General Communications reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Scope Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Struggle to Get Biggest Corn Crop In
From Nebraska to Ohio, farmers are battling drenching rains, high winds, early snowstorms and the effects of harvesting late in the season to bring in their largest corn crop in history.
"I've only had four days in the field this month," said Bob Johnson this morning after surveying the third blanket of snow his family's farm near De Kalb, Ill., has received in the last month.


W.B.C. Sets H.I.V. Tests For Fights
Delegates to the World Boxing Council voted yesterday to require boxers in future championship fights to undergo testing for the virus that causes AIDS a month before their title bouts.
The action by the delegates, meeting in Cancun, Mexico, made the W.B.C. the first athletic organization known to require such testing.


Trustmark Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Using Insurance for Income After a Disabling Injury
Barry Kaler, an osteopathic physician from Palm Beach Gardens, Fla., severely injured his hand in an automobile accident.
He was 29 years old, two years out of medical school, and was working on a freelance basis at emergency medical centers.
Because he was self-employed, Dr.
Kaler had to provide his own disability insurance and had prudently taken out a policy just five months before the accident.
His work schedule -- and income -- abruptly halted.
For one month he could not work at all; for the next seven months he could work only part time.
Here is how he managed to meet expenses while recuperating.


Tele-Communications reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Black Woman In Race to Be Mayor of Rio
In Rio, where Afro-Brazilian success stories are usually confined to soccer and samba, a black woman is rattling Latin dominance of politics by campaigning strongly in Rio de Janeiro's mayoral elections on Sunday.
The candidate, Benedita Souza da Silva, a 50-year-old congresswoman, has broken four centuries of racial tradition in Brazilian politics by bidding to lead Rio, the cultural and social bellwether for Latin America's largest country.


Peter Brook's Liberties: Fewer With Debussy
In 1981 the Paris-based English director Peter Brook won hordes of new admirers -- and shook up the staid world of opera -- with his "Tragedy of Carmen." As radically shortened and rearranged by his music director, Marius Constant, this 80-minute "Carmen" compaction sold out for months in Paris, then toured Europe and finally arrived in New York in 1983, playing in both French and later English at the Vivian Beaumont Theater.
Now, several projects (including "The Mahabharata" play and film) later, Mr.
Brook has come back to opera.
His and Mr.
Constant's new operatic production, called "Impressions of Pelleas," opened tonight at Mr.
Brook's Theatre des Bouffes du Nord, after being greeted by cheers and prolonged applause from invited Parisian movers and shakers at the three previous nights of previews.


COMPANY NEWS: The Petroleum Dividend; Amoco Enlists Aid Of Los Alamos Lab
For Isaiah it was swords into plowshares, but in 1992 that translates, loosely, to nuclear weapons into gasoline.
The Amoco Corporation and Los Alamos National Laboratory have announced a deal under which the lab, for years a principal site for the design of nuclear weapons, will help develop a computer program to simulate chemical reactions in a refinery.


KEANE IS NEAR GE CONSULTING SERVICES TAKEOVER
Keane Inc., a $100 million software services company based in Boston, has signed a letter of intent to acquire GE Consulting Services, a $90 million subsidiary of General Electric.
A spokesman for Keane would not disclose the amount Keane would pay to G.E., but he said Keane was "cash rich" and the deal should be completed within two weeks, pending government approvals.


Care Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Delors Has Become the Odd Man Out in Europe
It has been a very bad year for Jacques Delors, the president of the European Commission, the executive body of the European Community.
Lauded until recently as the man who galvanized Europe and put flesh on the frail outline of European integration, he has now become the squinting symbol of Europe's disarray, a focus of criticism, insult and ridicule.
"Delors equals chauvinism, protectionism and selfishness," Michael Fuchs, the president of the German Foreign Trade association, proclaimed this week.
"We don't need another Sun King in Brussels. Once in Paris was enough."


Tuckahoe Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Humana Off $4 in Day of Heavy Sales
Investors in Humana Inc., one of the country's largest hospital and managed-health-care companies, rushed to sell their holdings yesterday after Humana announced it would stop paying dividends next year.
Humana shares plunged $4, or 16.8 percent, to close at $19.875 in heavy trading on the New York Stock Exchange.
With 5.1 million shares changing hands, it was the day's most actively traded stock.


Crown Heights Stabbing Verdict Is a Travesty; Not the King Case
To the Editor:
In a disgraceful example of pandering to a portion of the electorate, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo characterized the acquittal of Lemrick Nelson Jr. for the murder of Yankel Rosenbaum during last year's Crown Heights disturbances as an "injustice." He compared the results in the Nelson trial to the acquittals of the Los Angeles police officers in the Rodney King case.


Biocraft Laboratories reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Ardent Recyclers Meet Grim Realists; Superintendents From Bronx Apartment Buildings Say They Know the Hard Facts
Patricia Grayson is an icy-eyed zealot with a tone of voice that would make Patton seem meek and a blunt insistent message that her audiences rarely want to hear.
"Good morning ladies and gentleman!" Ms.
Grayson barked to a capacity crowd of 250 stone-silent building superintendents from the Bronx.
"There is absolutely no reason to clap, because you will all hate me when I am done. But please pay attention. Because if you don't, your buildings will make dumps smell sweet, and the cockroach from hell will soon be on its way."


Presidio Oil reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


United Financial Corp. of S.C. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Bando McGlocklin reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Transactions
Basketball  National Basketball Association
HOUSTON ROCKETS -- Signed Mark Acres, center. Waived Tom Copa, center.
SACRAMENTO KINGS -- Placed Spud Webb, guard, on injured reserve.
Signed Stan Kimbrough, guard.
Continental Basketball Association
OMAHA RACERS -- Placed Damon Vance, center, on injured reserve.
ROCHESTER RENEGADE -- Named Keith Bryant director of community relations.
Placed Chris Collier, forward, and Van Usher, guard, on injured reserve.
YAKIMA SUN KINGS -- Acquired the rights to Brian Quinnett, forward, from Wichita Falls for future considerations.
Football  National Football League
TAMPA BAY BUCCANEERS -- Placed Rob Taylor, offensive tackle, on injured reserve.
Canadian Football League  BRITISH COLUMBIA LIONS -- Fired Bob O'Billovich, head coach and vice president of football operations.
Hockey  Colonial Hockey League
FLINT BULLDOGS -- Released Joe Musa and Paul Caufield, forwards.
Placed John Heasty, defenseman, on the injured list retroactive to Nov. 8.
Activated Jason Simon, forward, and Ken Spangler, defenseman, from the injured list.
East Coast Hockey League  LOUISVILLE ICEHAWKS -- Added Mike Greenlay, goaltender, to the roster following his return from Atlanta of the International Hockey League.
Soccer  National Professional Soccer League
MILWAUKEE WAVE -- Signed Al Gillette, goalkeeper, to a 15-day disabled list.


Carl A. Pescosolido Jr., Citrus Grower, 55, Dies
Carl A. Pescosolido Jr., a California citrus grower and president of the board of Governor Dummer Academy, died Wednesday night in an automobile accident in Dallas.
He was 55 years old and lived in Exeter, Calif.
Mr.
Pescosolido gained notoriety by battling against Federal marketing regulations and shipping quotas for more than a decade.
During this struggle he testified on behalf of citrus growers at many Agriculture Department hearings.


York Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Counsel Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


HF Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Adage Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Vintage Petroleum Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Net Falls 60% At Berkshire
Berkshire Hathaway Inc., the conglomerate headed by the noted investor Warren E. Buffett, reported yesterday that third-quarter earnings had dropped nearly 60 percent, mainly because of insurance losses from Hurricane Andrew.
Net fell to $38.3 million, or $22.90 a share, from $93.2 million, or $65.58 a share, in the period a year earlier.


Knicks Surrender Lead And Undefeated Record
The Knicks, who escaped with last-minute victories in their previous two games, could not get away tonight and are no longer unbeaten.
Overcoming a 6-point deficit in the final three minutes, the Washington Bullets stunned New York, 106-104, before a capacity crowd at the Capital Centre.
It was Washington's first victory this season after four consecutive losses, and it was the Knicks' first loss after three consecutive victories.


Davis Distribution reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 26


Public School Choice, Perfected
Some members of New York City's Board of Education are questioning a plan by Schools Chancellor Joseph Fernandez to promote parental choice in public schools.
These questions can help fine-tune a proposal that deserves to go forward.
School choice is a troublesome idea when applied to public funding for private schools, but not when applied to public systems.
Mr.
Fernandez believes, reasonably enough, that giving parents more flexibility to pick schools within the public system can force weak schools to do better.
He would make it easier for elementary and junior high students to transfer to schools outside their own neighborhoods.


Billington Shuts Out Punchless Capitals
The Devils held a meeting after practice on Thursday to examine the reasons for losing four games in a row at home or, as several players said, to take a look at themselves.
The desired changes came drastically and quickly tonight, from Craig Billington in goal to the last forward on the fourth line, as the Devils scored an inspiring 3-0 triumph over the Washington Capitals at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.


Shelton Bancorp Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Adrienne Rich Gets Prize
Adrienne Rich is the recipient of this year's Lenore Marshall/Nation Prize for Poetry, given annually by the New Hope Foundation and Nation magazine for outstanding work by an American poet.
Ms.
Rich, who teaches English and feminist studies at Stanford University, was awarded the $10,000 prize for her latest collection of poems, "An Atlas of the Difficult World: Poems 1988-1991." She is to receive the award at a reception on Tuesday at the National Arts Club in Manhattan.


Vornado Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


European Community Finds Its Unity Plans Under Threat
A month before a summit meeting of the European Community that is intended to set the stage for ambitious expansion, the goal of economic and political unity among the existing 12 members seems farther away than it was a year ago.
Weaknesses of political leadership in France, Britain and Germany, and economic problems in all the major countries, are to blame for the malaise, in the view of many experts.


Zenith Laboratories reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Suspect Sought In Sex Assaults In Brooklyn
The police in Brooklyn are seeking a man suspected of sexually assaulting a total of nine women and teen-age girls in Bedford-Stuyvesant during the last six weeks and of trying to assault two others.
The most recent attack was reported Thursday morning.
Last week, the man apparently raped two women and tried to rape a 13-year-old girl within a five-hour period, said Sgt.
John Garrity, supervisor of the Brooklyn Special Victims Squad.


The Tragedy in Somalia Can't Wait for Clinton
To the Editor:
"Don't Forsake Somalia" (editorial, Nov. 4) focuses on the tragedy in Somalia and the international community's responsibility to stop it.
Hundreds of relief workers -- Somalis and foreigners -- are risking their lives to save hundreds of thousands from starving.
Their efforts are jeopardized not only by the anarchy in Somalia but also by bureaucratic sidestepping at the United Nations.


Gertrude Farber Koskoff, Legislator, 81
Gertrude Farber Koskoff, a three-term Representative in the Connecticut General Assembly and former member of the State Board of Parole, died on Thursday at her home in Plainville, Conn.
She was 81 years old.
She died of complications from pancreatic cancer, said her son, David.


Warsaw Journal; Strange, Brutal Murders, and Everyone's Baffled
Piotr Jaroszewicz, Poland's hard-line Communist Prime Minister from 1970 to 1980, was obsessed with security.
His villa in a fashionable Warsaw suburb was ringed by a seven-foot wall topped with barbed wire.
When he and his Rottweiler attack dog took their evening stroll, neighbors said, he carried a pistol.
The precautions taken by this seemingly obscure retired politician proved unavailing.
On Sept. 1, intruders pierced the walls, immobilized the dog, and killed 83-year-old Mr.
Jaroszewicz (pronounced yahr-oh-SHAY-veetch) and his wife, Alicja Solska, with a brutality that has made this one of Warsaw's most notorious killings since World War II.


Biosearch Medical Products reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Offshore Insurers
To the Editor:
"Offshore Insurers Creating Concerns Among Regulators" (front page, Oct. 19) is misleading and damaging to the Turks and Caicos Islands.
You name three companies.
Of these, one applied for a license, did not meet our requirements and was struck off our company register; another is licensed and is settling its claims; the third is unknown to us and has never been registered or applied for an insurance license here, which would explain why "attempts to take legal action" against it in these islands have been unsuccessful.
You also mention a company "based in the British West Indies": it was registered here, applied for a license, did not meet our requirements and was struck off our register.


Scitex Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Dinkins Issues Appeal On Crown Heights Debate
Mayor David N. Dinkins warned New Yorkers yesterday not to allow the verdict in the Crown Heights case to divide the city.
He said the decision should not be used as a litmus test for people's commitment to justice and civil rights.
The Mayor made his comments at a news conference at City Hall in response to assertions by some Jewish New Yorkers who contend that the verdict in the trial of Lemrick Nelson Jr., the black youth acquitted in the killing of Yankel Rosenbaum, should be denounced, and who have sought to make it a litmus test for elected officials.


Browning-Ferris Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Sterling West Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Icot Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 24


Jailers Charged With Sex Abuse Of 119 Women
Fourteen former employees of the Georgia women's prison here were indicted today on sexual abuse charges, including rape and sodomy, in what is being called one of the worst episodes of its kind in the history of the nation's women's prisons.
The indictments of 10 men and 4 women, including a former deputy warden, stem from a 1984 lawsuit against the prison.
The lawsuit tells of prison employees trading favors for sex from inmates, of coerced abortions and of an incident in which a mentally disturbed woman was stripped and hogtied on a concrete floor.
More Charges Expected
Officials involved in the investigation say that at least 119 female prisoners have been identified as victims and that the investigation is almost certain to lead to more indictments.


Dance in Review
Young Korean Choreographers The Danspace Project St.
Mark's Church Second Avenue at 10th Street


Surprise in Abuse Trial Appears to Contradict Defense
The mildly retarded woman in the Glen Ridge sex assault case once told a close friend that her 1989 sexual encounter with former schoolmates was a "terrible thing" that physically "hurt" her, the friend testified today.
The testimony brought the fifth week of the trial to an unexpected conclusion.
It was produced under questioning by a defense lawyer, not the prosecution, and it appeared to contradict the defense team's strategy of depicting the woman as a sexual aggressor who willingly participated in and enjoyed the episode.


Ozzie Smith Attracts Interest
At least 10 teams have contacted OZZIE SMITH, a free agent after 11 years as the St.
Louis Cardinals' shortstop.
"We knew there would be teams interested, but there are more than we thought," DEBRA EHLMANN, Smith's agent, said yesterday, a day after Smith met with the Houston Astros.


Review/Pop; Spiritual Technology Dance
Human presence is tenacious; it survives even in the wired heart of the computer-chip world.
The debut on Tuesday night at Limelight of the Communion tour, which takes the club's weekly "spiritual technology" dance scene to 23 cities across the nation, exemplified the odd combination of self-loss and self-awareness common among the denizens of the alternative dance scene.
The headliners Meat Beat Manifesto failed to make it past United States Customs in time for the show (the entire bill is rescheduled for Dec. 1 at the same location; tickets for Tuesday's show will be honored).
The groups Orbital and Ultramarine shared the beat-conjuring duties instead.
Ultramarine opened with an ambient house set.
The trio crafted billowy layers of samples from new-age philosophers, California folkies and British art rockers, laced with a dose of jazzy organ.
Bobbing to their own rhythms like happy junior scientists, the three scrubbed young fellows were appealing, but hardly offered a show.
Yet the audience -- especially the shy boys whose misfit styles most resembled the band's -- kept their attention on the stage as they swayed and applauded at each perfunctory break in the music.


Inside the New Transition Team Headquarters


ECONOMIC REPORTS ARE GIVING SIGNALS OF A QUICKER PACE
The path of economic recovery brightened today as the Government reported that retail sales rose nine-tenths of 1 percent last month and pollsters at the University of Michigan found consumer confidence soaring in the first half of November.
Combined with yet another decline in first-time jobless claims that was reported Thursday, today's findings raised hopes among many economists that the exceptionally sluggish business recovery may finally be gaining some momentum.


Classical Music in Review
Sergio and Odair Assad Merkin Concert Hall


Jails Switch May Prove Problematic
New York City said yesterday that it would stop using two prisons near the Canadian border by the end of the year, a move that officials said would save the city $51 million a year but would create a budget headache for the state.
The decision caps an effort by the city to turn over the prisons to the state and court efforts to compel the state to expedite inmates' transfers from city to state prisons.
At issue is a dispute involving the city, the state and a prisoners' rights group over who has to pay for running the two upstate prisons, prison jobs upstate and finding room for inmates who should be in state custody.


Review/Music; Getting Just the Essence From a Country Singer
"I can't believe I'm in New York," George Jones said as he started his set on Thursday night at Tramps, and he wasn't the only one.
Country music's most revered living singer had not performed in New York City since the 1970's, and he received an adoring welcome from the packed club.
With a fresh crease in his jeans and every silver hair in place, Mr.
Jones was on stage for precisely 60 minutes, singing a set that probably wasn't much different from any other one-night stand on his current tour.
The 61-year-old singer paced himself carefully, noting "the age I'm at" and having the six-member Jones Boys play an instrumental after every two or three songs.
But the vocal style that has been imitated by every country singer who calls himself a "new traditionalist" was as lucid, moving and sly as ever.


Corrections
An article yesterday about President-elect Bill Clinton's transition team referred incorrectly in some copies to the law firm in which a Clinton adviser, Samuel R. Berger, is a partner.
It is Hogan &amp; Hartson, in Washington.


Wills and Estates; Asset Lists, Essential Adjuncts to Wills
The base of an old lamp had long been the hiding place for $30,000 worth of jewelry that had belonged to the mother of Ralph Warner, a lawyer in Berkeley, Calif.
Were it not for a chance mention of the cache by his father, just before he died, the lamp and its treasures would have been tossed out.
It's not only jewelry or other valuables that can get lost when someone dies.
Bank accounts, insurance policies and stocks and bonds worth thousands of dollars regularly go unclaimed because the owners of the assets have not left an inventory of their property for their heirs.


Q &amp; Q
Housing for a Daughter
Q We are buying a condominium town house near the University of North Carolina, where our daughter is a graduate student.
She will live in the house with two other graduate students, who will pay rent.
How can we structure the equity shares so that most of the tax benefits accrue to us?
GEORGE and BETTY AWSUMB, ROME, Ga.


Giulio Carlo Argan, Art Historian, 83, Dies
Giulio Carlo Argan, a leading art historian of Italy and an expert on the modern and Baroque periods, died on Thursday.
He was 83 years old.
He died of a heart attack, his family said.


Two Added to Tournament Lineup
HELENA SUKOVA of Czechoslovakia and AMY FRAZIER of St.
Louis have been added to the Virginia Slims Championships at Madison Square Garden next week as the tournament's 15th- and 16th-seeded players.
The final two places in the tournament, which is limited to the 16 players with the most Kraft Tour points, could not be determined until Sukova advanced to the semifinals of a tournament in Indianapolis.
She will play JENNIFER CAPRIATI in the opening round, and Frazier will face GABRIELA SABATINI.


Beliefs
Sometimes a single statistic sums up a whole era.
Then along comes a different look at the same statistic and, click, the era suddenly looks quite different.
For many Roman Catholics, nothing better captures the idea that the 1950's and early 60's were the Golden Age of American Catholicism than the number of priests serving the church.


CitFed Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Cease-Fire Brings Residents of Sarajevo Outdoors


A Campus Atmosphere at East Side Bars


JAPANESE MAY CUT ATOMIC SHIPMENTS
Yielding to the storm of international protests surrounding their shipment of plutonium from Europe, Japanese officials hinted today that they might scale back plans for 30 more shipments of the nuclear fuel in the next decade.
The officials' comments, delivered at a hastily called news conference at the Foreign Ministry, were the first indication that Tokyo had doubts about the wisdom of proceeding with a multi-billion-dollar plutonium energy plan that has drawn criticism around the world.


Ampex reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


William Hillcourt, A Boy Scout Writer And Columnist, 92
William Hillcourt, the principal author of the "Official Boy Scout Handbook" who was known to scouts worldwide as "Green Bar Bill," died Monday in Stockholm.
He was 92 years old.
Terry Howerton, a friend who was working as a co-author on Mr.
Hillcourt's autobiography, reported his death on Wednesday.


Kiddie Products Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Aequitron Medical reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Stanley V. Margolis, Professor of Geology And Geochemist, 49
Stanley V. Margolis, a geochemist and professor of geology at the University of California at Davis, died last Saturday at the Sutter Davis Hospital.
He was 49 years old and lived in Davis.
He died after a four-month battle with cancer, his family said.


CHRONICLE
How do you celebrate the 25th anniversary of Rolling Stone, the magazine that was started to reflect the music, politics and attitudes of the counterculture?
If you are JANN WENNER, its founder, you do it with a black-tie dinner for 400 at the Four Seasons, the restaurant described by TOM WOLFE as "the Versailles of American corporate culture."
But before the guests were seated on Thursday evening, before the speeches and toasts were given by such Wenner friends as Mr.
Wolfe, ED BRADLEY, AHMET ERTEGUN, DAVID BOWIE, YOKO ONO, RON BROWN, DON HENLEY and HUNTER S. THOMPSON, there was an hour and a half of paparazzi paradise.


Aaron Weintraub, Zionist Campaigner, 97
Aaron Weintraub, one of the last survivors of the Jewish Legion, died on Wednesday at Mount Sinai Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 97 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died of heart failure, the family said.


General Magnaplate reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Brampton Brick reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


All Canadians Together, Stride by Stride
To the Editor:
After having read the comments on Canada's future by Peter Newman in "A Canadian Warns: Breaking Up Is Now Much Easier to Do" (The Week in Review, Nov. 1), I thought you and your readers might be heartened by an experience I and my colleagues shared the afternoon of Friday, Oct. 30, with hundreds of Canadian marathoners visiting New York.


In Czechoslovakia, an Earlier Time Remembered


Crown Heights Stabbing Verdict Is a Travesty; 'A Jury Biased'
To the Editor:
To criticize the postverdict behavior of the jury and defense lawyer in the Yankel Rosenbaum trial as "insensitive" grossly understates the point (editorial, Nov. 4).
The image of a jury toasting a defendant it has just acquitted mocks the jury and judicial system, and reeks of blatant injustice.
It jeopardizes the concept of a fair and impartial jury.


Bridge
A hybrid form of the game is popular among experts at some New York City clubs.
A pool of at least 8 players form themselves into two teams by cutting, and play a short match for a money stake measured in imps, with a bonus for winning the match.
Then they cut again.
Some of the country's best players, continuing a tradition of the deceased Cavendish Club, gather for this purpose each Monday night at the Young Men's Philanthropic League, 4 East 80th Street.
In this week's game one match was decided by the part-score deal shown in the diagram.
The South player, Brian Glubok, persevered to four clubs in a competitive auction.
This was a doubtful decision: Three hearts might well fail and did in the replay.


Graham-Field Health Products reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Bio-Technology General reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Provident Bancorp Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Bosnian Official Says Serbs Have Killed 100,000
The Bosnian Foreign Minister said here today that 100,000 people, most of them Muslims, had been killed in Serbian attacks on his country since last spring.
Other officials in the delegation accompanying the Foreign Minister, Haris Silajdzic, on a mission to establish diplomatic relations with Germany, said today that they believed that 140,000 boys and men alone had been killed since the fighting began.


Tech-Sym Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Nets' Bowie Gets Set for Trial by O'Neal
As if he didn't have enough problems trying to please a highly suspicious new coach, Sam Bowie, whose body is held together by a variety of fragile bones and surgically implanted screws, will have to hold off a 7-foot-1-inch, 303-pound wall of muscle tonight.
Bowie, no midget at 7-1 and 240, will meet the Orlando Magic's rookie giant, Shaquille O'Neal, for the first time, at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.
It was bad enough last season when O'Neal's predecessor in the middle for the Magic, 7-1, 280-pound Stanley Roberts, left Bowie with bruises and a black eye following a collision going after a loose ball.


On Iraq-Turkey Border, Kurds Are Being Used to Kill Kurds
To the Editor:
Re "Iraqi Kurds Report Capturing Big Base of Turkish Kinsmen" (news article, Oct. 27): In line with State Department and Iraqi Kurdish sources, you appear to be covering the war on the Iraq-Turkey border as an unpleasant but necessary effort by Iraqi Kurds to remove their kinsmen, Turkish Kurdish "separatists," from camps inside Iraqi Kurdistan.
Not quite the whole story.


Fifth Dimension reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Vehicle Sales Rise Brisk 21.6%
Sales of domestically built vehicles rose 21.6 percent in early November, with light trucks accounting for most of the increase.
The results follow on the heels of higher retail spending in October, suggesting that consumers may be gaining confidence to commit to bigger-ticket items.


Greater New York Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Canadian Group Will Buy Japanese Supercomputer
Japan's leading supercomputer maker has arranged its first sale in North America in more than three years, saying today that it had made a deal with a consortium of two corporations and a university in Canada.
The sale is the first to be announced by Fujitsu Ltd. since it re-entered the North American market with an improved machine earlier this year.
The company's United States subsidiary, Fujitsu America Inc., began marketing the new supercomputer this March; it withdrew from the United States market in 1989 after selling only three machines.


Noble Drilling reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Former Iona Player Released After Arrest
STEVE BURTT, a former Iona and National Basketball Association guard, was released from custody yesterday in Salonica, Greece, three days after being arrested on drug possession charges.
The police said he was released after the Public Order Ministry in Athens told Burtt he could remain in Greece until his trial.
No date was set.
The public prosecutor's office said the player was free to leave the country.


High Winds Make for Great Waves


Advanced Logic Research Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


3 Arrests Hit Burglary Ring In Manhattan
A burglary ring that victimized more than 1,000 businesses in Manhattan in the last three years has been broken up and three of its members arrested, law-enforcement officials said yesterday.
The three men admitted that the ring had committed about a burglary a day at shops and restaurants, fast-food restaurants in particular, the officials said.
About 400 businesses in midtown and lower Manhattan were burglarized this year, the officials said.


Radiomutuel Inc. reports earnings for Year to Aug 30


The Jets Hitch a Ride On a Tank
In last Sunday's game in Denver, fullback Brad Baxter was perhaps one carry away from doing something that the Jets have not seen in more than five years.
Baxter, who gained 96 yards on 12 carries, fell just 4 yards short of becoming the first Jets running back since Freeman McNeil in 1987 to have consecutive 100-yard rushing games.
The week before, against Miami, Baxter had rushed for 103 yards on 20 carries to become the first Jets running back this season to have a 100-yard game.


Community Banks-Pa. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Wiser Oil reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Reading &amp; Bates reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Sanchez Vicario and Capriati Advance  Third-seeded Arantxa Sanchez Vicario of Spain and fourth-seeded Jennifer Capriati won quarterfinal matches yesterday at the Virginia Slims of Philadelphia tournament.
Capriati defeated eighth-seeded Lori McNeil, 6-2, 6-1, to set up a meeting this afternoon with top-seeded Steffi Graf.
Sanchez Vicario defeated Natalya Zvereva of Belarus, 6-2, 6-1, and will face second-seeded Gabriela Sabatini tonight. (AP) Courier Rallies to Beat Forget: Top-seeded Jim Courier rallied to beat France's Guy Forget, 6-7 (4-7), 6-4, 6-4, yesterday in Antwerp, Belgium, pushing him into the semifinals of the European Community Championship.
Courier will play Richard Krajicek, who saved a match point before downing third-seeded Petr Korda of Czechoslovakia, 3-6, 6-1, 7-6 (9-7).
Second-seeded Michael Chang scrambled in the backcourt and scored at the net to beat Michael Stich of Germany, 6-3, 6-4, to join Courier in the semifinals.
Chang, sixth in the ATP ranking, will play an Australian, Mark Woodforde, who beat Sweden's Magnus Larsson, 6-0, 7-6 (7-2). (AP)
Another Upset in Kremlin Cup: Marc Rosset of Switzerland upset top-seeded Karel Novacek of Czechoslovakia, 6-4, 6-2, on a night of surprises yesterday in the Kremlin Cup in Moscow.
The upset wave in the quarterfinals caught up two local favorites, two-time defending champion Andrei Cherkasov of Russia and 18-year-old Andrei Medvedev of Ukraine.
Cedric Pioline of France beat the fourth-seeded Cherkasov, 6-4, 7-6 (7-4).
The third-seeded Medvedev lost a close match to Germany's Carl-Uwe Steeb, 6-4, 6-7 (3-7), 6-3. (AP) HOCKEY  Red Wings Win; Lemieux Is Hurt  Steve Yzerman scored twice to reach the 400-goal mark for his career and Jimmy Carson had his 10th career hat trick last night as the Detroit Red Wings routed the Pittsburgh Penguins, 8-0.
The Penguins may have also lost their star, Mario Lemieux, who left late in the second period with a heel injury and did not return. (AP) HIGH SCHOOL FOOTBALL  Elizabeth Pounds Newark East Side  Elizabeth High School scored four touchdowns in the second quarter and cruised to a 39-13 victory over winless Newark East Side yesterday in Elizabeth, N.J.
Al Hawkins completed a 26-yard scoring pass to Dulayne Morgan and ran 11 yards for another touchdown during the second-quarter burst which sent Elizabeth (6-2-1) to a 33-0 halftime lead.


AGP &amp; Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


American Travelers Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
The economic recovery appears to be gathering momentum.
Retail sales rose 0.9 percent in October, and a University of Michigan survey found consumer confidence soaring in the first half of November.
The findings raised hopes that the sluggish business recovery may finally be gaining strength.  [ Page 1. ]
Sales of U.S.-built vehicles rose 21.6 percent in early November, with light trucks accounting for most of the increase.
Car sales rose 7.9 percent, while light trucks advanced 44.6 percent.  [ 35. ]


Review/Music; From One End of the Keyboard to the Other
When tonality went into its celebrated coma some 80 years ago, music became obsessed by procedure.
With accepted rules of discourse discredited and with the last vestiges of a musical lingua franca divided into competing dialects, composers had to find new ways of making sense, the ways often taking precedence over the sense.
Composers are still looking.
Called back to consciousness, tonality has sat up, blinked its eyes and gone out into the world again, but listeners are as confused as they ever were.
This wrestling with new instruments, new methodologies, indeed, new ideas about what music really is, has induced creative exhaustion.
One can only wonder how good Beethoven's music would have been had he been asked first to invent the piano, then 32 sonatas for it.


THE TRANSITION: The State Department; HIGH BUSH OFFICIAL IS LINKED TO SEARCH OF FILE ON CLINTON
The State Department official dismissed this week for authorizing a search of Bill Clinton's passport files has told Federal investigators that the search was approved by one of the highest-ranking political appointees in the department.
The official, Elizabeth M. Tamposi, has been described by the Bush Administration as the person responsible for the search, which embarrassed the State Department and the White House at the height of the Presidential campaign.


Unitil Corp.  reports earnings for 12mos Sept 30


2d Air Pollution Issue, Smog, May Yet Curb Cars
While New York City says that it will not have to take drastic measures against car traffic to meet carbon monoxide standards, state and Federal pollution officials predicted yesterday that they would still end up requiring such measures to solve the region's other major air pollution problem, smog.
The measures being discussed include limiting access to midtown Manhattan by cars with one passenger, leveling special charges on such cars and limiting cars to fewer than five trips to Manhattan a week.


Discus Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 27


Salvation Army Learns Some Past Donors Are Needy Themselves
The Salvation Army, for the first time in memory, faces the holiday season unsure that it will have money to send out vans with hot meals to feed New York City's street people through the winter.
Local army groups in some areas, including New York, fear that they may not be able to raise nearly as much as the record $649 million raised by the army's 40 divisions across the country last year -- even as they confront more demands for help, including requests from people who have given money in the past.


INSIDE
Bowe Dethrones Holyfield
Riddick Bowe, a 25-year-old from Brooklyn, beat Evander Holyfield by unanimous decision to win the world heavyweight championship.
Page 29.
Officers in Beating Case Gain
A judge dealt a setback to prosecutors by barring a critical line of evidence in the civil rights trial of officers who beat Rodney King.
Page 6.
For F.B.I.
Chief, a Cloud Lifts
The Justice Department dropped its criminal inquiry on the F.B.I.
Director, William S. Sessions.
An internal ethics inquiry goes on.
Page 6.


Devcon International Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


AW Computer Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


United Financial Banking Cos. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Corrections
An article in Science Times on Tuesday about Bill Clinton's probable policy toward science and technology misstated the time he said it would take to move $7.6 billion in annual Federal spending on scientific research from military to civil projects.
He said the move would occur gradually, taking three years to reach $7.6 billion; thus, the total funds shifted over four years would be somewhat less than $30 billion.


Classical Music in Review
Giorgia Tomassi and the Arthur Rubinstein Philharmonic Orchestra Queensborough Community College


Sunrise Bancorp (Calif.) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


The Latest Party Zone
It was time for another drink on the Upper East Side, which for Ronald Then involved pressing his lips against a sloped, two-foot slab of ice as two flavors of liquor, in this case tequila and Jagermeister, sloshed into his mouth.
This is called a slalom shot.
Mr.
Then, a 22-year-old student from Washington Heights, said it was one of many reasons he traveled south to drink.
"When we go out drinking, we go for broke," he said after wiping his mouth dry at the Ski Bar, a popular club at Second Avenue and 94th Street with an Alpine motif and the nothing-can-be-this-fun feel of a beer commercial.
"There is no limit to it. It's until you pass out."


William Hillcourt, A Boy Scout Writer And Columnist, 92
William Hillcourt, the principal author of the "Official Boy Scout Handbook" who was known to scouts worldwide as "Green Bar Bill," died Monday in Stockholm.
He was 92 years old.
Terry Howerton, a friend who was working as a co-author on Mr.
Hillcourt's autobiography, reported his death on Wednesday.


Winpak Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Noteworthy New Offerings for Investors
Among new funds being offered to the public is one from the Calvert Group, the biggest sponsor of socially responsible funds.
It recently introduced the first such fund to invest around the world.
The Calvert World Values Fund buys shares of companies with good records in health care, human rights and the environment, and avoids those involved in nuclear power, weapons production, alcohol and tobacco.
The Vanguard Group now sells shares in the first balanced index fund.
Index funds aim to produce market returns by owning all or a sampling of securities in a market index, while balanced funds combine stocks and bonds in one portfolio.
The Vanguard fund, 60 percent in stocks and 40 percent in bonds, tracks the Wilshire 5000 Index, comprising all stocks traded on the New York, American and Nasdaq exchanges, and the Salomon Brothers Broad Investment Grade Bond Index, a benchmark for the bond market.


THE TRANSITION: The Old Team; President's Economic Stewards Defend Reputations and Actions
For the Bush Administration's economic stewards, these are trying times.
Everyone knows the bad economy sank President Bush, and a lot of people are pointing fingers at those who steered the economic ship.
With their reputations on the line, the men who argued and fought over the economic policies of the last four years are now fighting for the white hats in the history books.


Prejudice on Parade
The haters of homosexuals lost last week in Oregon and in Portland, Me., but they'll be back.
Buoyed by the distressingly strong showing for anti-gay initiatives in those states, and the approval of anti-gay measures in Colorado and Tampa, Fla., conservative Christian groups are already planning their next round of gay-bashing proposals.
The response to this year's initiatives is a jolting reminder of the prejudice homosexuals still confront daily.
Just as homosexuals were celebrating the election of a President who is more sympathetic to their concerns, they were confronted with an outpouring of bigotry at the grass roots.


Zero Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Coastal Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Tips for Taxpayers at the Top, Who May Soon Be Paying More
Some people are going to pay higher taxes if President-elect Bill Clinton gets his way -- and his way is likely to include added tax burdens on families with adjusted gross incomes of at least $200,000.
For the 830,000 or so taxpayers in this category, it's a good bet that their top Federal income tax bracket will rise to 36 percent next year from 31 percent this year.
Even higher taxes may be in store for those with incomes of $1 million or more because of a Clinton proposal to impose a 10 percent surtax on them.


Classical Music in Review
Music Today Walter Reade Theater Lincoln Center


Majors May Be Out, but He's Not Down
Don't write JOHNNY MAJORS out of coaching just yet.
The 57-year-old Tennessee coach, who announced on Friday that he would leave after the season, is expected to be high on search-committee lists after the season takes its inevitable toll of head coaches.
Rebuffed when he sought an extension of his Tennessee contract, which had two years to run, Majors decided to get out while the getting was good, decidedly good, as it turns out.
He negotiated a buyout of more than $500,000, although the university was obligated to pay no more than his $96,000 annual salary.


BUSH'S GAMBLE
I can only imagine the difficulty of re-examining one's own political loyalties in public view.
It took courage to reveal so ambivalent and inquisitive a thought process.
If only our Presidential aspirants had had the intellectual spunk to contemplate national issues with such honest and critical rigor.
DORON BEN-AMI
Newtown, Conn.


Sampling the Cartographer's Art; In New York, Exhibitions Map Old and New Worlds
MAP fanciers in New York need not wander the globe to see some unusual examples of the genre, thanks to major exhibits at the Cooper-Hewitt Museum and the New York Public Library.
"The Power of Maps" exhibit, at the Cooper-Hewitt to March 7, examines the role of maps since 1500 B.C. as tools to express particular points of view.


Pushing Their Buttons
ARRESTING IMAGES
Impolitic Art and Uncivil Actions.
By Steven C. Dubin.
Illustrated. 374 pp.
New York: Routledge. $$29.95.


The Executive Computer; A Parade of New Portables, With New Engines Under the Hood
Within moments of the news last week that the Intel Corporation was introducing a new chip designed specifically for portable computers, Compaq, NEC and AST Research announced new notebook computers that would use it.
The new chip is the i486SL, the fourth member of Intel's 486 family (the others bear the suffixes SX, DX and DX/2).
Its special power-management features make it better suited to battery-powered computers than are its brethren, which are intended primarily to serve the needs of desktop machines.


O'Rourke Proposes a Westchester Budget Without a Tax Increase
The Westchester County Executive, Andrew P. O'Rourke, today proposed a budget that for the second straight year requires no tax increase.
The $1.2 billion spending plan for 1993 is the same size as the 1992 budget.
The proposed spending plan allows for no pay increases and offers few new programs.
But Mr.
O'Rourke promised there would be no layoffs, and he vowed that the county would continue its practice of hiring new personnel whose jobs can help the county save money.


Cities March To Different Drummers
During a meeting of the Music Critics Association in Chicago recently, a Midwestern colleague posed an important question: what effect will the shifting demographics of the central city have on musical life?
The cities in which major musical institutions are based have changed radically during the last two decades.
The white middle class has in many cases left the urban centers for the suburbs, and no new audience has replaced it.
Concert halls, built to be at the heart of the cities' cultural life, are increasingly catering to suburban audiences; the halls also seem irrelevant to their surrounding, largely black, communities.
The issue is not so apparent in New York, which is such a world center of the arts that neighborhoods make less of a difference.
But it is a profound concern for institutions in cities like Detroit, St.
Louis and Cincinnati.
Related problems exist in many other urban centers.
As a result, the institutions are subtly altered.
For a suburbanite, a trip to the concert hall requires a significant occasion, a justification.
So programming must lure listeners with more stars and extravagant productions.


The Editorial Notebook; The Times Square Test
It has one of the more elegant lobbies in New York and soon it will have some of the finest efficiency apartments.
But those distinctions pale beside another: The Times Square Hotel is about to begin a bold social experiment with powerful implications for the city's future.
Opened in 1923, the Times Square Hotel, on 43d Street at Eighth Avenue, for years enjoyed a reputation as a gracious, affordable residential hotel that also offered rooms for tourists and other transient guests.
But in the 1970's, the 735-room hotel began attracting the aged poor and former mental-institution inmates.
Transient business fell off.


GAY POLITICS GOES MAINSTREAM
Jeffrey Schmalz's article "Gay Politics Goes Mainstream" (Oct. 11) was sensitive and informed.
However, his assertion that "for years, homosexuals have, for the most part, been politically apathetic" is misleading.
For decades, gay people have swelled the ranks of progressive political movements, albeit outside electoral politics.
The peace, civil rights, antinuclear, student, women's and environmental movements all owe much to the energies of gay people.
That lesbians and gay men often worked "in the closet" in earlier years accounts for why credit may not be placed where due.
That homosexuals now work openly inside the system should not overshadow the contributions of the many who have helped to change the system from without.
SHARON PAGE
Oakland, Calif.


Environmental Causes Are Uniting Old Enemies
WHILE the Presidential candidates pitted environmental issues against jobs, a coalition of labor, industry and environmental groups maintains that Connecticut can have both.
The coalition advocates spending an estimated $6 billion on advanced sewage treatment plants that could clean up Long Island Sound.
Every $1 billion spent on public works projects generates about 57,000 jobs, the group estimates.


Grunge: A Success Story
WHEN did grunge become
grunge?
How did a five-letter word meaning dirt, filth, trash become synonymous with a musical genre, a fashion statement, a pop phenomenon?
From subculture to mass culture, the trend time line gets shorter and faster all the time.
It was just over a year ago that MTV began barraging its viewers with the sounds of Seattle "grunge rock," featuring the angst anthems and grinding guitars of bands like Nirvana and Pearl Jam.
By last summer, the glossy magazines began tracking grunge looks, the threadbare flannel shirts, knobby wool sweaters and cracked leatherette coats of the Pacific Northwest's thrift-shop esthetic.
Hollywood weighed in, too, with a grunge-scene movie, "Singles." Then two weeks ago -- all in the blink of a flashbulb -- the fashion designer Marc Jacobs, who has never even been to Seattle, was hailed as "the guru of grunge."


Christina Johannsen, Nicholas Hanks
Dr.
Christina Barbara Johannsen, the director and a founder of the Iroquois Indian Museum in Howes Cave, N.Y., was married there yesterday to Nicholas Fox Walton Hanks, a radio reporter in Warnerville, N.Y.
The Rev.
Eugene Umberger, a Presbyterian minister, officiated at the museum.
Jim Sky, an Onondaga Iroquois, took part in the ceremony.
Mrs.
Hanks, 42 years old, graduated from Beloit College and received a Ph.D. degree in anthropology from Brown University.
She is the daughter of Dr.
Oscar B. Johannsen of Roselle Park, N.J., and Catherine Ferguson of Warnerville.
Her father is the director of the Schalkenbach Foundation, which promotes the work of the late economist Henry George.
The bride's stepfather, Dr.
John P. Ferguson of Warnerville, is a professor of anthropology at the State University College at Cobleskill, N.Y.
She is also the stepdaughter of Irene Johannsen of Roselle Park.
Mr.
Hanks, 45, is a son of Dr.
Jane R. Hanks of North Bennington, Vt., and the late Dr.
Lucien M. Hanks.
His mother is an anthropological researcher in North Bennington.
His father was a professor of anthropology at Bennington College.
The bridegroom's previous marriage ended in divorce.


Laurie Greenwald, Mark A. Saloman
Dr. and Mrs.
Israel Greenwald of Sunset Hill, S.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Laurie Jill Greenwald, to Mark Andrew Saloman, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Josef Saloman of Monmouth Junction, N.J.
A March wedding is planned.
Ms.
Greenwald, 26 years old, is the managing editor of Institutional Distribution, a food service trade magazine in New York.
She graduated from Brandeis University and received a master's degree in journalism from Northwestern University.
Her father is an optometrist in Dongan Hills, S.I.
Her mother, Ruth Greenwald, is a fourth-grade teacher at Public School 31 in West Brighton, S.I.


At Barneys, There's Arising Such a Clatter
Adelle Lutz is creating some holiday cheer with a feminist message.
Ms.
Lutz, a costume designer and actress, is working on her first project since her sister, Tina Chow, died of AIDS in January.
She is outfitting a series of mannequins for Barneys New York's always provocative Christmas windows.
The store asked Ms.
Lutz to create mannequins inspired by Santa's reindeer for the 17th Street windows, which will be unveiled on Wednesday.
Ms.
Lutz made them women.


SURFACING
ACCESSORY --
Pacifier necklaces:
Plastic models of baby pacifiers dangling from teen-agers' necks.
Sold on the street and in discount stores and youth-oriented boutiques.
WORDS --
Doing a double red-eye:
Fly all night, work all day, fly all night and work all day
again. CHRISTMAS -- Issue-oriented tree ornaments
evoke the spirit of the season and messages of the day: tiny bird- houses (the environment) and red ribbons in glass spheres (AIDS).


Abortion Pill's Sale Unlikely Soon Despite Change of Administration
There is still little prospect that French abortion pill RU-486 will be available in the United States soon, despite President-elect Bill Clinton's willingness to encourage the marketing of the drug in the United States.
Officials of the Food and Drug Administration and the French Company that makes the drug, Roussel Uclaf, agree that whether the abortion pill is sold in the United States depends mostly on top officials of the German company Hoechst A.G., which controls Roussel, and how those corporate officials view abortion politics in Germany and the United States.


November 8-14; Kissinger Sends His Regrets
The words "I'm sorry" do not come readily to Henry Kissinger.
It took him more than two decades to apologize for his role in the wiretapping of 17 national security aides and journalists.
The man who was President Nixon's national security adviser and later his Secretary of State long defended the 1969 wiretaps on grounds of national security.
At the time, the Nixon Administration had sought in vain to learn who had leaked classified information to reporters.


Little League Goes Easy on the Kids
Should young baseball players be punished because the adults who run their program turn out to be world-class cheaters?
Not according to the directors of Little League baseball.
At a meeting in Williamsport, Pa., on Friday they voted unanimously not to impose new restrictions on the Filipino program, whose adminstrators carried out a massive fraud to win the Little League World Series last fall.
The winning team, supposedly representing a league in the city of Zamboanga, was stripped of its title after Phillipine officials admitted they had stocked the team with ineligible ringers from as far as 700 miles away.
Since then, the Phillipine newspaper that first disclosed the cheating has reported that the players who really were from Zamboanga were over-age imposters.


THE DISTURBING PHOTOGRAPHY OF SALLY MANN
The wide array of responses elicited by Sally Mann's photographs of her children is an example of a kind of Rashomon effect (Letters, Oct. 18 and 25, in response to "The Disturbing Photography of Sally Mann," by Richard B. Woodward, Sept. 27).
Whether one sees highly charged sexual images, the innocence of childhood, exploitation, mean faces or beauty says as much about the reader's own lens as about the photos.


Mitchell-Lama
To the Editor:
In discussing homes built under the Mitchell-Lama law, Angelo Aponte, the New York State Housing Commissioner, is quoted in "Mitchell-Lama Going on Sale," on Oct. 4, as saying that "government subsidies have allowed people to remain in their apartments paying affordable rents." When the likes of NBC, Prudential Bache and First Chicago are offered enormous tax reductions to remain in New York, why is the word "subsidy" only used to stigmatize those of us who live in Mitchell-Lama apartments?


Shock Jocks Shake Up Uncle Sam
Whose problem is Howard Stern?
The Federal Communications Commission thinks he's a government problem; it recently levied a fine of $105,000 on Mr.
Stern and his Los Angeles radio outlet, KLSX, for 12 counts of verbal "indecency" during his morning show.
But the real question is why his mixture of juvenile humor and hostility, his crusading vulgarity, draws such huge audiences, and that makes him everybody's problem.
Mr.
Stern, the reigning talent among so-called shock jocks, is now simulcast to 10 cities, including New York, Chicago, Dallas and Los Angeles.
The empire grows because he draws large audiences (his morning show leads the ratings in both New York and Los Angeles); he has also made forays into movies and television (his nationally syndicated show was recently canceled, but he will be doing an interview program for the Entertainment Channel).


Michele C. Miles, Paul L. Berger
Michele Cheri Miles, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
David Miles of Brooklyn, was married last evening to Paul Lloyd Berger, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Jeffrey Berger of Orangeburg, N.Y.
Rabbi Charles J. Davidson performed the ceremony at Temple Emanuel in Kings Point, L.I.
Mrs.
Berger, 25 years old, is a regional sales manager in New York for Ross Laboratories, a pharmaceutical company.
She graduated from the C. W. Post Campus of Long Island University.
Her father is a director of operations at the Rosenwach Tank Company, a manufacturer of water tanks in New York.


The Mystery of Faith
To the Editor:
Evelyn Toynton's review of "Jesus," by A. N. Wilson (Oct. 11), has confronted me once again with the mysterious quality of faith.


Gina M. LaRoche, Alan Curtis Price
Mr. and Mrs.
Calvin C. LaRoche of Weston, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter Gina Marie LaRoche to Alan Curtis Price, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Cyril H. Price of New York.
A December wedding is planned.
Ms.
LaRoche, 26 years old, graduated from Georgetown University and is an M.B.A. candidate at Harvard University.
Her father is the vice president of information integration at the International Business Machines Corporation in White Plains.


Her Majesty's Lonely Service
WILL there
really
always be an England?
As if the marital travails of Charles and Di and Fergie and Andy were not enough -- as if Prime Minister John Major's approval rating in public-opinion polls were not already at rock bottom -- along comes the coup de grace: "Elizabeth R," a singularly gloomy two-hour BBC documentary to be seen on PBS tomorrow night at 9 P.M.
Intended as a warm, respectful, behind-the-scenes valentine to the ruler who may be her nation's last hope for dignified public relations, this peculiar film unintentionally produces the reverse effect.
The sun, having already set on the British empire and much of the Windsor family, seems about to plop down on the reigning monarch, as well.


Data Bank/November 15, 1992


Victory for an Entire Neighborhood
There are times when one man's success becomes a whole neighborhood's, and on the gritty streets of Brownsville, Brooklyn, yesterday, people were celebrating.
In the early hours of the morning yesterday, Riddick Bowe, the big kid from Brownsville, had become the heavyweight champion of the world, upsetting Evander Holyfield in a 12-round brawl in Las Vegas.


Nets Control Magic, Not O'Neal
On a night in which Shaquille O'Neal was not the most dominating player on the floor and sat out almost an entire quarter in foul trouble, he scored 29 points, grabbed 15 rebounds, blocked 3 shots and fouled out both centers for the New Jersey Nets.
"I wish we could've gotten lucky enough to get him," said Willis Reed, the Nets' vice president, after his team broke a three-game losing streak tonight by handling O'Neal's Orlando Magic, if not O'Neal himself, 124-113, at a sold-out Meadowlands Arena.


Broncos a Curious Opponent for Taylor-less Giants
With Lawrence Taylor playing his best football of the season, the Giants won their last three games.
Now, with Taylor's season and probably his career over after surgery on an Achilles' tendon, the Giants are about to start their last difficult stretch of the season: the Broncos Sunday night, then the Philadelphia Eagles, the Dallas Cowboys and the Washington Redskins.
In a season that a month ago seemed lost, the Giants have a 5-4 record and playoff hopes.
The Broncos are 6-3 and lead their division, and in John Elway they have the National Football League's most dangerous fourth-quarter quarterback.


Let New Yorkers Heed the Lessons of the D'Amato Victory
To the Editor:
In "New York's Perverse Losses" (editorial, Nov. 5), you chastise Bob Abrams, the Democratic Senate nominee, for "a weak, unfocused effort" and for letting Al D'Amato blur ethical differences with him.
And so Bob did.
But before we blame the victim for the political mugging, may I comment on other factors in that tawdry campaign?


Artists Amid Industrial Panache in Stamford
NOT many galleries have gone into business with bunting and a Grand Opening sign.
But then, Waterside Art Studios is an unusual gallery staking its claim in virgin territory -- to wit, the area in back of the Stamford waterfront that is mostly warehouse-type buildings, rough ground and chain-link fencing.
Though hardly a SoHo in the making, the section has a touch of the industrial panache that is catnip to artists -- and not lost on its developer, Murray Goldblum.
Whereas landlords have traditionally tolerated artists until such time as they have improved the tone of the neighborhood and can be replaced by wealthier tenants, they now seem to be encouraging them.
For instance, the owners of the old Lorillard tobacco building in Jersey City are not only renting to artists but also giving them the run (for the time being) of a space for exhibitions, the better to magnetize more tenants.


Mozambicans Brave Jungle To Flee War
The dangers of the bush sound more chilling after dark when the hyenas start howling, a sudden snort betrays a rhinoceros and lions patrol the water holes, ready to pounce.
But night after night, people venture into this wild border region on foot as they pick their way across the Lemombo Mountains, fleeing hunger and violence in Mozambique.


Knicks Go Cold But Win By a Shiver
The Knicks spent most of last night missing layups, missing wide-open jumpers and turning in a pathetic offensive performance.
It would have been a horrendous night for them, except for one important fact.
The Knicks still managed to win.
Overcoming a 10-point deficit with eight minutes to play, New York rallied to defeat the Boston Celtics, 85-80, before a capacity crowd of 19,763 at Madison Square Garden.
It was the ugliest game of the Knicks' young season, as they hit only 31.5 percent from the field and shot the ball as if they had spent the afternoon sleeping in a refrigerator.


Ms. Cutler, Mr. de Vicq de Cumptich Jr.
Mrs.
Ralph H. Cutler Jr. of Harding Township, N.J., has announced the engagement of her daughter, Fearn Cutler, to Roberto de Vicq de Cumptich Jr., the son of the late Mr. and Mrs. de Vicq de Cumptich.
A March wedding is planned.
Ms.
Cutler, 33 years old, also the daughter of the late Ralph H. Cutler Jr., is the art director of Pantheon Books, a division of Random House Inc., in New York.
She graduated from Hampshire College.


Staging Painterly Visions
When I was young, I did a children's play," Robert Wilson recalled recently. "I had 10 10-year-old boys wrapped in Saran Wrap so tight they had only one finger free.
After five minutes, one of the mothers screamed, 'Mothers should take their children off the stage.' Afterwards, my father said, 'Son, not only was that thing absurd, it was sick.' "
There are those who have the same reaction to Wilson's mammoth theater pieces today; at every Wilson performance, some people can be counted on to walk out, huffily.
Sometimes half the audience does, especially in his native United States.
But those who stay, stay to cheer.
Enough have cheered so that Wilson can be considered this country's -- or even the world's -- foremost vanguard "theater artist," a term that almost seems to have been coined for him.


A Beautiful Day for a Magic Moment


Facing Up to Racial Pains of Past, Birmingham Moves On
Once known as the largest segregated city in the nation, Birmingham has never been able to escape its past completely.
The bombing of the 16th Street Baptist Church on Sept. 15, 1963, and the deaths of four black girls attending Sunday school there, seemed to seal a permanent judgment on the city.
"The shame will be ours forever," an Alabama newspaper wrote at the time in an editorial.


Talking: Investments; Buying Rental Property
WITH interest rates lower than they have been for 20 years and foreclosures still glutting the market, could this be a good time to buy rental property?
An informal poll of about a dozen brokers suggests that only a few brave souls agree.
But for contrarians willing to take the plunge there's a whole new universe of expectations and strategies compared to the high flying days of the 1980's.


Tracking The Trackless Gobi Desert
AT an early age, Joseph Conrad was fascinated by the strange names and blank spaces on maps of Africa.
In "Heart of Darkness," he has Marlowe saying: "Now when I was a little chap I had a passion for maps. I would look for hours at South America, or Africa, or Australia, and lose myself in all the glories of exploration. At that time there were many blank spaces on the earth, and when I saw one that looked particularly inviting on a map (but they all look that) I would put my finger on it and say, 'When I grow up I will go there.' "
Graham Greene acknowledged his debt to Conrad and a similar attraction to darkest Africa.
One of his early books, "Journey Without Maps," expresses the enchantment and dread of being in such an exotic land without the comfort of that simple instrument of knowledge most travelers take for granted: a trustworthy map.


Mutual Funds; When Index Funds Make Sense
While some mutual fund investors try to squeeze out the last dollar of return, most are satisfied with building value over time.
About the only way to do that is to invest in stocks, and the simplest way to go is to buy a fund that tracks an index like the Standard &amp; Poor's 500.
A combination of simplicity and assured market returns has made winners of index funds lately.
For the last decade, the average stock fund has underperformed the S.&amp;P. 500, leading some experts to say indexing is the only way to go.


THE TRANSITION: The President; President Readies Himself for the Final Leg


Making Thanksgiving More Nutritional
AS with most holiday meals, the traditions of Thanksgiving are decidedly durable.
But this year, with the publication of the nutritional pyramid that recommends from 6 to 11 servings of bread and grain, 3 to 5 of vegetables and 2 to 4 of fruit each day, the many side dishes that accompany turkey have assumed even greater importance.
And it may be time to consider revising recipes for classic accompaniments.


Graphic Violence
Posters promoting war and revolution are called paper bullets, because often they are every bit as damaging as conventional ordnance.
During the early to middle 20th century, graphic images were the primary propaganda tools of Western nations.
Offices and ministries of war information maintained studios with skilled, often well-known artists, devoted to the design of powerful imagery for cautionary and agitational needs.
Most governments maintained large archives of their own and their enemies' posters, which were studied and often copied in efforts to achieve the most effective propaganda.
One of the most important American collections of visual propaganda is at the Hoover Institution at Stanford University, from which PERSUASIVE IMAGES: Posters of War and Revolution From the Hoover Institution Archives (Princeton University, $35) draws its contents, which span the two world wars, the Russian Revolution and the Spanish Civil War.
The authors -- Peter Paret, who teaches in the School of Historical Studies at the Institute for Advanced Study; Beth Irwin Lewis, an adjunct professor of art history at the College of Wooster; and Paul Paret, a former assistant to the curator of 20th-century art at the Philadelphia Museum of Art -- provide background rather than a definitive history of these works, but to display the Hoover Institution's vast holdings is a service to anyone interested in 20th-century propaganda.
They reveal a wide range of graphic styles consistent with fashions in painting and commercial art, but there is a chilling redundancy: whatever the national, political, social or ideological root, these posters use the same heinous images and symbols to sell the glory of war.


Lithuania's Dangerous Orphans: 2 Huge Reactors
With the dissolution of the former Soviet Union, the two most powerful nuclear reactors in the world have been cast adrift by their creator.
And if the foster parents of these formidable orphans fail to resolve some big problems, a devastating accident could occur.
The two graphite-core reactors at the huge Soviet-built Ignalina plant here are essentially identical to those at Chernobyl, except that they are half again as powerful as the Chernobyl reactor that blew up in 1986.
In some respects, the gigantic power of the two Ignalina reactors, each capable of producing 1,500 megawatts, forces their operators to react to emergencies particularly rapidly -- a situation that Western experts regard as dangerous.


Believe It, Women Elected This President; The Market Zealots
To the Editor:
"An Incomplete President" (editorial, Nov. 8), on George Bush's Presidency, misreads an essential aspect of modern Republicanism when it attributes the passivity of Mr.
Bush's economic policies to a character flaw or bad advice.
His inaction reflected a Republican ideology's uncritical embrace of markets as the solution to all economic problems.


Believe It, Women Elected This President; Why Bush Failed
To the Editor:
Peggy Noonan's "Why Bush Failed" (Op-Ed, Nov. 5) fails to grasp both why and, to some degree, how President Bush lost.


High School Football Report
P.S.A.L.
ONE MAN'S ISLAND: Jeff Forde (16 of 22 for 185 yards) threw one touchdown and Will Haskell (17 carries for 79 yards) rushed for another as CURTIS rolled over Staten Island rival TOTTENVILLE , 20-6, to advance to the P.S.A.L.
A semifinals.
Curtis will play Wagner in the semis if Adams defeats South Shore this afternoon.
If South Shore is victorious, the Warriors will play Lincoln.
TWO-WAY STAR: Peter Clarke scored two touchdowns and had one of KENNEDY'S three interceptions as the Knights defeated MARTIN , 24-6, in the quarterfinals.
Kennedy will face Lincoln in the semis if Adams wins today.
If South Shore wins, the Knights will play Canarsie in the next round.
IS THERE A DOCTOR IN THE HOUSE?: The South Shore-Adams game was postponed until today because there was no doctor present at the quarterfinal yesterday.
C.H.S.F.L.
FINAL IS SET: St.
Francis Prep roared back from a 13-0 halftime deficit to beat Farrell, 21-13.
St.
Francis Prep (5-4) capitalized on three second-half turnovers by the Lions -- two interceptions and a fumble -- to upset Farrell (6-3), the defending champions.
The Little Terriers will go to the final for the fifth consecutive season and meet Mount St.
Michael, which rolled over Chaminade, 35-20, in the second game of the doubleheader at St.
John's yesterday.
St.
Francis Prep and Mount St.
Michael will face off in the championship final on Saturday at the same site.
The Mounties backfield, which calls itself the four horsemen because of its rushing ability, finished with 314 yards on 44 carries against Chaminade (8-1-1).
Long Island  TOP-SEEDED: Steve Nieroda established a school rushing record as he scampered for 248 yards on 11 carries and 3 touchdowns to catapult WEST ISLIP (7-0-1) to a 35-0 victory over NORTH BABYLON (0-8), earning the Lions a No. 1 seeding in Conference II.
Dom Pelligrino (11 tackles, 1 sack, 1 fumble recovery) was instrumental in the shutout.
BACK IN BUSINESS: Jim McGowan (5 of 8 for 154 yards) threw for 3 touchdowns and linebacker Evan O'Ferral had 9 tackles and 3 sacks as the state's former No. 1 team, BELLPORT (7-1), rebounded from a loss last week and defeated COPIAGUE (2-5-1), 43-6.
COLTS TAKE NEW STRIDES: Brandon Long rushed for 140 yards on 12 carries and 3 touchdowns as HALF HOLLOW HILLS WEST (6-2) trounced HAUPPAUGE (5-3), 34-6.
Jason Isom (15 tackles), Darrin Finkelstein (11 tackles) and Bob Mullenhauer (10 tackles) helped pave the way for the Colts to earn their first playoff berth in school history.
LONGEST YARDS: Dennis Murphy returned an interception 95 yards and Anthony Parisi ran back a kickoff 85 yards as MASSAPEQUA (5-3) rolled over OCEANSIDE (2-6), 36-0.
Murphy scored another touchdown on a 25-yard reception from Kevin Gillespie (4 of 7 for 85 yards).
JUST SHORT: A 30-yard field-goal attempt by Jason Skowroneck of LAWRENCE (5-2-1) fell short with six seconds to play and the Golden Tornado settled for a 14-14 deadlock with FARMINGDALE (5-1-2).
SIX PACK: Offensive lineman Brian Campion and tackle Mike Bonsignore opened gaping holes all afternoon for Carmine Apuzzo and Andy Kaneris, who each rushed for more than 100 yards and 3 touchdowns as ISLAND TREES (7-1) punished JERICHO (1-7), 40-6.
UNTIL THEY MEET AGAIN: Rodney McCoy, the quarterback of BETHPAGE (7-1), scored a touchdown with 4 minutes to play and Brian Herbert picked off a pass to the seal the Golden Eagles' 15-14 victory over CLARKE (6-2).
The two teams will meet again on Thursday in the Conference III semifinal game at Hofstra. . . .
Anthony Picone (32 carries for 150 yards) scored 2 touchdowns and Sean Goodwin (5 of 14 for 119 yards) threw for another to Mike Tavella to lead LYNBROOK (8-0) to its 18th consecutive victory, a 20-14 triumph over ROOSEVELT (6-2).
Roosevelt will get another crack at the Owls on Thursday with the Conference III semifinal game on the line.
Preps  YOU AGAIN: Jamal Patterson scored 4 touchdowns and rushed for 163 yards on 21 carries as BLAIR ACADEMY (9-0) routed PEDDIE (2-6), 35-0.
The game marked the 89th meeting between the two schools, which have the oldest independent school rivarly in the state.
Peddie still leads the series, 45-42-5. . . .
Mike Fitzpatrick scored 4 touchdowns and rushed for 237 yards on 25 carries as CHOATE (6-2) destroyed DEERFIELD (3-5), 35-3, in a rivarly that dates to 1922.
Deerfield leads the series, 32-31-10.
New Jersey  RECORD SETTERS: Mark DeRosa (10 of 16 for 121 yards) threw for 2 touchdowns, giving him a school-record 16 scoring strikes for the season, as BERGEN CATHOLIC (8-0) pounded BLOOMFIELD (2-6), 48-0.
Bill Tierney rushed for 2 touchdowns and the Crusaders defense scored 2 others to fuel their 19th consecutive victory, tying a school record.
Joe Piela returned an interception 41 yards and Mark Ruoff brought one back 67 yards to help Bergen Catholic clinch a top seeding in North Jersey Parochial A. WOLF LEADS THE PACK: Coach Warren Wolf (255-63-11) set a state record for career victories on Friday night as BRICK TOWNSHIP routed SOUTHERN REGIONAL , 30-7, behind the 4-touchdown performance of tailback Steve DeTata.
Wolf, who has been the head coach at Brick since 1958, ranks 12th nationally among coaches for most victories at one school.
Wolf served under the former record-holder, Joseph Coviello, as an assistant coach at Memorial in West New York.
NOTHING TO IT: All-state defensive end Bill Malloy added 3 sacks to his season total of 14, as IMMACULATA tied a state record of eight consecutive shutouts, by blanking CLARK , 35-0.
The Spartans have outscored their opponents, 217-0.


Carol Ann Loeb, William Meyers
Carol Ann Loeb, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Eric Loeb of Teaneck, N.J., was married yesterday evening to William Bennett Meyers, a son of Richard N. Meyers and Dr.
Marian B. Meyers of Harrison, N.Y.
Rabbi Norton Shargel performed the ceremony at the Jewish Community Center of Harrison.
Mrs.
Loeb Meyers, 26 years old, is a special education teacher at Public School 13 in Yonkers.
She graduated from Clark University and received a master's degree in special education from Hunter College.
Her father is the owner of Charles Loeb &amp; Company in Teaneck, a costume-jewelry wholesaler where her mother, Jean Loeb, is a bookkeeper and a vice president.


At Work; The Legacy of Jack McGann
THE plaintiff was gay and had AIDS, which might have dampened or precluded sympathy from "straight" people for his plight and consigned his lawsuit to the dustbin of marginality.
But Jack McGann was suing his employer, a self-insured music company in Houston that cut his health-care benefits when it discovered he had AIDS.
A lot of people, gay and straight, immediately understood the implications of that move.
"Workers who rely on health benefits offered by their employers have discovered they are often protected only until they get sick," said Representative William J. Hughes, Democrat of New Jersey, who has introduced legislation to keep companies from cutting benefits for medically necessary treatment.


Corrections
A listing of semifinalists from Long Island for National Merit Scholarships omitted the names of two students on Nov. 1.
They are Ericka Bishop of Roslyn High School in Roslyn Heights and Elizabeth Brill of Cold Spring Harbor High School, Cold Spring Harbor.


An Inheritance of Death
PILGRIM IN THE RUINS
A Life of Walker Percy.
By Jay Tolson.
Illustrated. 544 pp.
New York: Simon &amp; Schuster. $27.50.


In the Region: Long Island; Recent Sales
Bethpage 150,000
340 Martin Place  4-bedroom, 1-bath, 42-year-old Cape Cod; dining room, 1-car attached garage; taxes $3,300.
Glen Cove 170,000
10 Ridge Drive  4-bedroom, 1-bath, 37-year-old Cape Cod; fireplace, basement, 81- by 149-foot lot, 2-car attached garage; taxes $3,400.
Great Neck 212,000
27 Valley View Road  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 60-year-old colonial; dining room, 2 fireplaces, basement, 2-car garage, water views; taxes $2,700.
New Hyde Park 259,000
14 Daley Street  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 42-year-old Cape Cod; dining room, den, basement; taxes $3,900.
Plainview 192,000
5 Westbury Avenue  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 35-year-old ranch; dining room, finished basement, 1-car attached garage; taxes $3,800.
Roslyn Heights 258,000
87 Parkway Drive  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 40-year-old ranch; dining room, fireplace, 2-car garage; taxes $5,600.
OTHER AREAS North Haven, Conn. 335,000
13 Cromwell Heights  4 bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, newly built colonial; Palladian windows, whirlpool tub, oversized kitchen, 0.5 acre; taxes not yet available.
Briarcliff Manor, N.Y. 342,500
155 Holbrook Lane  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 31-year-old ranch; fireplace, dining room, den; taxes $7,628.
Edison, N.J. 195,000
743 Grove Street  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 23-year-old split level; finished basement, underground sprinkler system, new water heater; taxes $3,961.


AL GORE'S DOUBLE LIFE
After nearly two decades in public service and five years as a journalist before that, I have grown accustomed to shaking off the stories that don't quite get something right or, in the name of analysis, misinterpret a fact or piece of history.
But, after reading Alex S. Jones's profile of me ("Al Gore's Double Life," Oct. 25), I am compelled to write by a glaring error of fact and interpretation that is hurtful and unfair not to me, but to my parents.
I could never fully express in words the strength or depth of my feelings for my parents -- nor could any child committed to such loving parents.
And I suspect my parents would have the same difficult time expressing their feelings for me and my late sister, Nancy.
Throughout my life -- as a child growing up, as a teen-ager and young adult and even now, as a grown man with children of my own -- I have always felt blessed to have such loving, caring and involved parents.
Their love and their lessons in life have sustained me and continue to sustain my family.


Libraries Join in Drive For Food for Homeless
DESPITE the county's reputation as a haven for the affluent, hunger remains a problem for growing numbers of Westchester residents.
As the holidays approach, two local organizations will conduct a well-coordinated food drive to help struggling families cope.
Beginning tomorrow and continuing through mid-December, member libraries of the Westchester Library System, based here, will collect non-perishable food items, like canned or dried vegetables, canned soups and sauces, pasta, rice and cereal.
The donations will be picked up from each library and distributed to nearby community agencies by volunteers from the Westchester Coalition of Food Pantries and Soup Kitchens.
Maurice J. Freedman, director of the Library System, said he hoped the project, called "Libraries Help the Hungry," would bring relief to "the hungry persons in Westchester served by the coalition."


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
On the Connetquot
WHEN the home field is a river, sporting events are limited.
So are fans.
But Dowling College managed to have both last weekend.
"This is the only sport where we can watch our team at home," said a bundled-up Carol Pulsonetti as she sat on the grass overlooking the Connetquot River in Oakdale.


Making a Difference; Off the Bench Into Disputes As a Business
Judge Milton Mollen has found a great retirement job. Judging.
The 72-year-old former judge, who presided for 24 years in various New York State courts, recently opened the New York office of a private arbitration company.


A Company Move That Hasn't Irked the Neighbors
In an era when states and municipalities fight winner-take-all battles for corporate investment, the story of Merck &amp; Company's plan to move its headquarters from gritty Rahway to rural Hunterdon County is working against the script, and leaving everyone smiling.
Merck, a pharmaceutical giant that likes to remind visitors that it has been judged "America's Most Respected Corporation" for six years running by Fortune Magazine, is orchestrating the move with an all-absorbing finesse.
It has deployed long-range planning, careful diplomacy and a heavy dose of corporate munificence to soothe the familiar fears of abandonment that factory towns express when a corporate citizen makes a move.


It's Unanimous: Bowe Knows Boxing
It was the morning after he had his hand raised as heavyweight champion, and Riddick Bowe sat applying a towel-wrapped ice pack to his swollen right eye.
That was the only apparent problem Bowe was having adapting to life at the top, a bruise that was, he said, the result of being thumbed in the eighth round of his 12-round match here against Evander Holyfield.


Playing Games Within the Game
The Montreal Expos bought Tim Wallach's house for $180,000 Canadian (about $143,000 American) to induce him to waive his place on their protected list for Tuesday's expansion draft.
And they told him he could still live in it while he plays for them.
The Expos will also give Wallach $450,000 if he is selected by the Colorado Rockies or the Florida Marlins.
The Oakland Athletics opened two spots on their protected list by agreeing to give Bob Welch and Dave Henderson $1 million each if they are drafted.
Bob Walk, whose status also required him to be protected unless he waived that right, will receive $150,000 if he is chosen.


U.S. Team in Hanoi Studies Relics of the Missing
Up a musty stairwell in a museum commemorating the triumphs of the People's Army of Vietnam, a team of American investigators sit hunched over laptop computers and a camera tripod, trying to end what for many American families is the continuing torment of the Vietnam War.
Every half hour or so, a group of Vietnamese museum workers slowly make their way up the steps, lugging another assortment of relics collected from the enemy, the United States, in that long-ago war.


A Passionate Love Affair With Renaissance Majolica
When Arthur M. Sackler, the New York research psychiatrist, entrepreneur and philanthropist, bought and exhibited his collection of majolica in the 1970's and 80's, he had more on his mind than brilliantly colored Renaissance ceramics.
"One of Dr. Sackler's ideas was to form a collection that would document the history of the potter's art," said Cyril Humphris, the London dealer who sold Sackler most of his majolica jugs and jars.
"It was a very ambitious project, and he was on his way to accomplishing it."


Focus: Indian Land Disputes; South Carolina Settling Catawba Claim
THIS state is close to settling the land claim of the Catawba Indian tribe.
If the settlement is approved by Congress, the claim will raise the total Federal Government payments to Indian tribes east of the Mississippi River to nearly $200 million in the aftermath of landmark Supreme Court decisions since 1975.
In return for $30 million from the Federal Government and $20 million from South Carolina and local public and private sources, the Catawbas will relinquish claim to 144,000 acres surrounding and including this picturesque college town of 42,000 people 35 miles south of Charlotte, N.C.
The land now includes such valuable property as Winthrop College and Heritage USA, the Christian theme park built by the disgraced evangelist Jim Bakker.


Series of Rochester Killings Brings Up Fearful Memories
A string of unsolved killings here involving prostitutes and drug addicts is raising fears that another serial killer is at work -- just two years after another murderer was convicted in a series of slayings.
"We know what the community thinks out there," Monroe County Sheriff Andrew P. Meloni said at a recent news conference.
But he said it would be "irresponsible" to say even that some of the killings were the work of one person.


Mr. Pearce's Growing Domain
Seven years ago, the General Motors Corporation's legal department recruited an obscure trial lawyer from Bismarck, N.D., named Harry J. Pearce, who knew G.M. vehicle technology, having defended many product liability cases for the company.
Two weeks ago, in the G.M. shake up that elevated John F. (Jack) Smith Jr. to chief executive and John G. Smale to chairman, Mr.
Pearce, 50, was the surprise choice to become the executive vice president in charge of G.M.'s two huge nonautomotive assets -- the Electronic Data Systems Corporation and the G.M.
Hughes Electronics Corporation.


Warsaw Hotel Gets a New Look
The Hotel Bristol in Warsaw, which first opened in 1901, will open its doors again on Dec. 5 after two years of restoration and modernization.
Now part of the Forte hotel group, the Art Nouveau Bristol has 163 rooms and 43 suites decorated with Secession-style furniture produced in Poland and custom-made lamps, chandeliers and curtains imported from Britain.
The hotel has a pool, gymnasium, sauna and solarium and beauty treatment facilities.


Museum Displays Indian Artifacts
Drums and American Indian songs resound these days through the rotunda of the Alexander Hamilton Custom House, the new Manhattan home of the Smithsonian's National Museum of the American Indian, opening today at 1 Bowling Green.
Since the previews began last Tuesday at the museum, more than 2,000 visitors have filed through "Pathways of Tradition," the inaugural exhibition of 103 objects.
On display are the feathered headdresses worn on the prairies of North America and in Brazil, pre-Columbian gold figures, Eskimo bone carvings, button blankets stitched by the Northwest Coast Haida Indians, and ancient Mimbres pottery found in New Mexico.


With a Rally, Islanders End a Streak
After squandering a two-goal lead and falling behind the Buffalo Sabres tonight, the Islanders were in danger of beginning a five-game road trip on a six-game losing streak.
Another defeat might have prompted another angry team meeting and certainly would have fueled the trade rumors that are filling the locker room with anxiety.


Problems With the Fountain of Youth
To The Editor:
I beg to differ with the alleged "simple clarity" of thought in the "theory that death is a genetic disease" and that "there is no religious, preordained reason to die."


It's Time to Take a Victory Ride
The bell rang for Round 1 and Mitchell Pendleton began ducking and moving at the television set, throwing jabs and hooks that the champ couldn't stop.
The volume kept going up and up, but no one heard the commentators.
Only Pendleton's voice rose in the room.


Suzanne Pollock, Andrew Peisch
Suzanne Alicia Pollock, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Donald Pollock of Menlo Park, Calif., was married yesterday to Andrew Philip Peisch, a son of Francis R. Peisch of Shelburne, Vt., and Mary V. Wilson of St.
Louis.
The Rev.
William Pindar performed the ceremony at the Central Presbyterian Church in New York.
Mrs.
Peisch is a management consultant in London for McKinsey &amp; Company, the New York-based management-consulting company.
She graduated from Stanford University.
She received an M.B.A. from Harvard University, as did her husband.
Her father, now retired, was a lawyer for Utah International Inc., a former mining company in San Francisco.


School Board Members Offer Alternative on Teaching About Homosexuals
A Queens school board remains publicly defiant over a plan to teach schoolchildren to respect and appreciate gay people, even though members have quietly submitted a three-volume alternative curriculum for Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez to review.
The community school board of District 24, which includes Elmhurst, Maspeth and Middle Village in Queens, is the only city school board that has balked at deadlines requiring either the adoption of a first-grade teachers' guide or the submission of an alternative teaching plan.


The Maps Are In the Computer
THE marriage of more powerful and relatively inexpensive desktop computers and software that can produce maps and other geographical data has resulted in a flood of information for travelers, both actual and armchair.
One can prepare the children for trips -- or the children can prepare themselves and you -- printing out maps pinpointing the locations of sites to visit in a distant state, getting background information on a city or historic place, or just playing with the programs for fun or learning.
Here are a few of the current offerings.
USA Geograph contains a wealth of information about this country in both maps and charts.
One can imagine a child -- the publisher suggests age 9 and older -- exploring an area on a Macintosh before a vacation trip.
One can also envision an adult doing the same thing, provided the children don't catch him at it.


Deals and Discounts
EUROPEAN LODGING Hotels affiliated with Steigenberger Reservation Service have Winter Celebration rates at 66 hotels from Dec. 1 to March 31.
There are five categories of rates.
Category one, at $132 for two people in a double room, includes the Hotel Reina Isabel in Las Palmas in the Canary Islands and the Parkhotel Schonbrunn in Vienna; category three, $176, includes the Steigenberger Badischer Hof in Baden Baden and the Husa Princesa in Madrid; category five, $218, includes the Park Hotel Bremen in Germany and the SAS Royal Hotel in Copenhagen.
Rates include service charge, tax and breakfast.
Contact SRS Hotels at (800) 223-5652.
CRUISE NOW AND LATER Passengers who book a four-night cruise on selected dates in 1992 on the new Royal Majesty may book a second cruise in 1993 for $99.
Remaining 1992 sailings for which the offer is good are Nov. 30, Dec. 7 and Dec. 14.
The ship sails from Miami to Key West, Fla., and Nassau, and rates from New York are $599 to $1,499, including round-trip air fare.
Next year the ship cruises to Playa del Carmen and Cozumel, Mexico, as well as Key West.
The $99 rate is good for any sailing except those over holidays and does not include air fare, which passengers must arrange independently.
For reservations, contact a travel agent or Majesty Cruise Line at (800) 532-7788 or (305) 536-0000; fax (305) 358-4807.


Q and A
Renting a Van in Europe
Q.
Six of us would like to rent a van for three weeks in Europe, visiting the Netherlands, Belgium, Luxembourg, France and Switzerland.
Is a van available? -- Isadore Kamer, West Trenton, N.J.


THE TRANSITION: Campaign Finances; With Gifts From All Sides, Who Gets Clinton's Ear?
From his convention address in July to his victory speech last week, Bill Clinton vowed to change the political landscape by reducing the role of big money and powerful special interests.
But now that he has won after raising more private money for a Presidential campaign than any contender in modern times, his biggest financial backers are preparing to call in their chits.
And one difficulty for the President-elect is that many contributors are seeking laws and regulations at odds with one another.


Bon Jovi's New Sound: Lean, Tough, Uneasy
Jon Bon Jovi was one of MTV's faces of the 80's.
Underneath a teased fluff of light-brown hair, singing about love and loyalty and fronting a band that packed the power to sell more than 26 million records worldwide, Mr.
Bon Jovi's face and smile became tokens of the late 80's easy promises.
He could wail and screech like any metal dude, but he was at his best wringing out anthems like "I'll Be There for You." The band -- Mr.
Bon Jovi, Richie Sambora on guitar, David Bryan on keyboards, Tico Torres on drums and Alec John Such on bass -- could slam and jab, but the pop hooks were Bon Jovi's ticket to stardom.
Ever since the 70's, loud rock has traditionally been the preserve of a predominantly male audience.
Then MTV helped bring Bon Jovi to millions of young women as well.
In the video for the group's greatest hit, "Wanted Dead or Alive," from the 1986 album "Slippery When Wet," Mr.
Bon Jovi's attraction was that he looked positively vulnerable.


If the Roads Have It, and the Air Has It . . .
To The Editor:
As reported in "To Track Unity in Europe, Watch Its Fast Trains" (Oct. 25), most European railway companies operate at a loss now, and will continue to in the future.
It is the nature of the beast: almost all major transportation schemes in this century have depended greatly on subsidies.
Our cities build airports and charge nominally for their use, and the Government provides a navigation system for our crowded skies.
We all know about the encouragement we gave the automobile manufacturers and oil companies with our gargantuan interstate highway system.
Even our inland water ways offer navigational aid to barges gratis.


Growing Down Grows Up
During the late political unpleasantness, Governor Clinton promised to "
grow the economy
." President Bush derided this promise not on the basis of its syntactical formulation but in regard to its object: he accused his opponent of intending to "
grow government
," and he pledged that if re-elected he would
grow down the deficit
.
"At first," writes a horrified Anthony Lanyi of McLean, Va., "I assumed these were slips of the tongue, since
grow
as a transitive verb is used only in an agricultural context, as in 'I grow tomatoes in my garden.' " In similar dismay, Esther B. Fein, a New York Times reporter reared in the tradition of fine distinctions, stopped me in the hall to say, "You
raise
cattle and
rear
children, but
grow the economy
and
grow down the deficit
?"


Alice Gelber, Steven Schoen
Alice Michelle Gelber, a daughter of Gail Nahmias of East Windsor, N.J., and Arthur Gelber of Cliffside Park, N.J., was married on Thursday to Steven Bruce Schoen, the son of Manfred and Amy Schoen of Rye Brook, N.Y.
Rabbi Carol Balin performed the ceremony at the Sheraton Hotel in East Rutherford, N.J.
Mrs.
Schoen, 26 years old, is a fund raiser for the United Jewish Appeal-Federation of Jewish Philanthropies of New York.
She graduated from the Fashion Institute of Technology.
The bride is a stepdaughter of Barbara Gelber of Cliffside Park.


Q and A
Reallocating Co-op Shares Question: My owner-occupied, nine-unit brownstone was converted to a co-op in 1985.
Most of us are second buyers and were not part of the conversion.
We feel the shares were not fairly allocated and would like to readjust them.
Can we do this? . . .
George Gross, Manhattan.
Answer: Yes.
But it would be both impractical and expensive, according to Stuart Saft, a lawyer and president of the Council of New York Cooperatives.


Corrections
A list of semifinalists for the 1993 National Merit Scholarships on Nov. 1 omitted the semifinalists from Middletown High School North and Middletown High School South.
They are Danielle E. Quirk and Amro M. Mosaad.


November 8-14; Matisse Prices Raise Art Market's Spirits
The first of the two-week fall art auctions could easily be characterized as the week of Matisse madness.
At Christie's in New York last Wednesday, "Harmony in Yellow" (1927-1928) set a world record for the artist, selling for $14.5 million to an unidentified telephone bidder.
The price far exceeded Christie's estimate that it would fetch $5 million to $7 million.
Another important Matisse also sold for a hefty price.
At Sotheby's on Tuesday night, the New York dealer William Acquavella paid $11 million for "Asia" (1946).
Mr.
Acquavella was acting as agent for the Kimbell Museum of Art in Fort Worth, Tex.


Lift the Ban on Gay Soldiers
President-elect Clinton has wisely reaffirmed his determination to lift the longstanding ban on homosexuals in the military.
The ban is unfair to patriotic homosexuals, male and female, and deprives the military of talent.
The prospect of change nevertheless stirs anxieties among military personnel who fear that open acceptance of homosexuals will hurt morale and possibly provoke mass resignations.
Some distinguished military leaders -- including Gen.
Colin Powell, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff -- have opposed lifting the ban.


Running Water Turns Fleas Into Antiques
THERE are two main drawbacks to shopping at flea markets: they're not heated, and they generally don't have rest rooms.
But when they move indoors and get "antiques" into their names, what they gain in comfort they often lose in liveliness.
The Metropolitan Arts and Antiques Pavilion seems to have escaped this trap.
The six-month-old weekend market in the renovated ground floor of a landmark Chelsea building offers intriguing merchandise from as many as 55 dealers.
There is a sense that even the most arcane collecting specialty might be satisfied here.


Gathering No Moss
Rolling Stone magazine, and the people it reports on, mark an anniversary, and the color is silver, Nov. 12.


Money Problems Are Issue as Bishops Gather
The picket signs and petitions are already being prepared in Washington for this week's meeting of the country's Roman Catholic bishops, who are to cast a final vote on a long-debated and much-revised pastoral letter on women's issues.
Scarcely noticed, however, is the bishops' scheduled vote on another pastoral letter dealing with "stewardship." That letter was prompted by the financial pressures buffeting Catholic dioceses around the country and the discovery that Catholics now give a far smaller share of their incomes to their churches than Protestants do.


In Tunisia, a Mosaic of Art
THERE is very little gray in Tunisian art, I discovered on a trip there to look at ancient ceramics.
Almost from the beginning, when Phoenician sailors founded Carthage in 846 B.C., building surfaces have been enlivened by color, texture, light and shadow.
Recent excavations have unearthed the world's earliest terra cotta mosaics, made there in the fifth century B.C.
Destroyed by the Romans in 146 B.C. at the end of the Third Punic War, and rebuilt by them, Carthage guarded the narrowest straits between Africa and Europe and was the capital of Rome's African Province.
The rich grain merchants of Carthage supported local ateliers that created mosaics for the Mediterranean world until the Arab invasion, which brought a new kind of decorative art and a new capital city, Tunis, 11 miles from Carthage.


BENEFITS
Lupus Foundation
MONDAY -- In its 21 years, the S.L.E.
Foundation has raised and allocated more than $2 million for research grants and fellowships for the fight against lupus, a chronic disease that attacks the immune system.
The foundation's annual black-tie fund-raiser will be held at the Plaza Hotel.
Cocktails at 6 P.M. will be followed by dinner, dancing and a new production of "Forbidden Broadway." Tickets, $350, from (212) 685-4118.
Urban League Dinner
TUESDAY -- The 36th annual Equal Opportunity Day Dinner of the National Urban League will be held at the New York Hilton starting with cocktails at 6 P.M.
Former tennis star Arthur Ashe; Ron Brown, chairman of the Democratic National Committee, and M. Anthony Burns, chairman, president and chief executive of Ryder System Inc., will be honored.
Black tie.
Tickets, $500, from (212) 310-9126.
Fund-raising for Wishes
TUESDAY -- Sergeant Slaughter, the Bushwackers and other professional wrestlers will be on hand for a cocktail party and buffet from 6 to 10 P.M. at Planet Hollywood, 140 West 57th Street.
The party will benefit the Make-a-Wish Foundation's program to make wishes come true for critically and terminally ill children.
Tickets, $50, from (212) 505-9474.
Aiding Disabled Children
TUESDAY -- The Foundation for Developmentally Disabled Children in Israel will benefit from a party from 7 to 11 P.M. at the Children's Museum of Manhattan, 212 West 83d Street.
The evening is sponsored by the foundation's young-professional division, whose members are between the ages of 21 and 45.
Tickets, $85, from (212) 586-2464.
Animal-Lovers' Gathering
TUESDAY -- The Animal Medical Center will present Top Dog Humanitarian Awards to Henry and Nancy Kissinger, Liz Smith and others at a black-tie benefit at the Pierre Hotel.
Barbara Walters will be the mistress of ceremonies.
Cocktails at 7 P.M. will be followed by dinner and dancing.
Tickets, $500, from (212) 997-0100.
Writers Read Their Works
TUESDAY -- The 15 writers nominated for the National Book Awards this year will read from their fiction, nonfiction and poetry at a benefit for the Off Broadway Manhattan Theater Club.
The 8 P.M. readings at the auditorium of the Equitable Center, 787 Seventh Avenue near 51st Street, will be followed by a Champagne reception at Sam's, 152 West 52d Street.
Tickets, $20, from (212) 645-0905.
Gaining Entry Into Fashion
TUESDAY -- In its major annual drive for scholarship funds, the High School of Fashion Industries will hold a dinner and dance at Windows on the World.
Cocktails at 6 P.M.
Tickets, $175, from (212) 255-1235.
Brooklyn Museum Opening
WEDNESDAY -- A cocktail party and preview of "Modernism: 1860-1992," an exposition of fine and decorative arts at the Brooklyn Museum, will be held from 6 to 9 P.M.
The preview of works from 75 American and European dealers will benefit the museum's decorative-arts department.
All items will be for sale.
Tickets, $125, from (718) 638-5000.
Children With Special Needs
WEDNESDAY -- The Nordoff-Robbins Clinic at New York University treats children with autism and other disorders with music therapy.
A benefit for the clinic, which is largely supported by the music industry, will be held at Roseland, 239 West 52d Street.
Cocktails at 7 P.M. will be followed by dinner and an auction of vacations, music items and events including a tennis game with John McEnroe.
Tickets, $500, from (212) 541-7948.
Holocaust Remembrance
WEDNESDAY -- A black-tie dinner at the Pierre Hotel will benefit the Museum of Jewish Heritage's Living Memorial to the Holocaust, to be built in Battery Park.
The event, which starts at 6 P.M. with cocktails, is sponsored by the Associates Division of the New York Holocaust Memorial Commission, a group of men and women between the ages of 20 and 40.
Tickets, $300, from (212) 687-9141.
Help for Young Scientists
WEDNESDAY -- ARCS (Achievement Rewards for College Scientists) will hold a three-tier, evening-long benefit to raise scholarship funds for promising college students heading into science research.
Cocktails and a buffet starting at 6 P.M. at the Dish of Salt, 133 West 47th Street, will be followed at 8 P.M. by the musical revue "The Sheik of Avenue B" at Town Hall.
From 11 P.M. on there will be admission to the Casino at Mr.
Fuji's Tropicana, 61 Fifth Avenue (entrance on 13th Street).
Tickets, $100, from (212) 861-0885.
Arts Club Anniversary
WEDNESDAY -- The National Arts Club will celebrate its 94th anniversary with a black-tie benefit for its club-restoration and scholarship funds at the club, 15 Gramercy Park South.
Martin E. Segal, former chairman of Lincoln Center and founder and chairman of the New York International Festival of the Arts, will be honored.
Cocktails at 6:30 P.M.
Tickets, $250, from (212) 475-3424.
Planetarium Party
THURSDAY -- The Junior Council of the American Museum of Natural History, a new group of people in their 20's and 30's, will have a cocktail party beginning at 8 P.M. in the museum's Hayden Planetarium followed by a laser show.
Tickets, $150, which includes membership in the council and notification of later events, from (212) 769-5019.
Cocktails in Court
THURSDAY -- The American Lung Association of Brooklyn will hold a cocktail buffet from 5:30 to 8 P.M. in the courtroom at Brooklyn Borough Hall.
Jane E. Brody, personal-health columnist of The New York Times; Samuel Plotkin, the Brooklyn Public Administrator, and the Mobil Oil Corporation are to be honored.
Tickets, $75, from (718) 624-8531.
Momentum Dinner Party
THURSDAY -- The Momentum Project, which provides counseling and other services to people with H.I.V. or AIDS, will hold a dinner party at the Russian Tea Room.
Julie Wilson, the singer, will entertain.
Cocktails at 7 P.M.
Tickets, $200, from (212) 268-0720.
Anti-Defamation Event
THURSDAY --The Young Leadership forum of the Anti-Defamation League will hold a cocktail party at Savories in Rockefeller Center from 6 to 8 P.M.
Tickets, $50, from (212) 490-2525, extension 361.
Outreach Dinner
THURSDAY -- Former Gov.
Hugh L. Carey will be honored at the annual dinner and dance of the Outreach Project, an addiction-treatment program.
Cocktails at 7 P.M. open the benefit at Antun's, 96-43 Springfield Boulevard near Jamaica Avenue in Queens.
Tickets, $200, from (718) 847-9233.
Ball for Cooley's Anemia
FRIDAY -- The Cooley's Anemia Foundation, which raises funds for the genetic disorder that strikes people largely of Mediterranean and Asian lineage, will hold a black-tie Lifeline Ball at the Plaza Hotel starting with cocktails at 7 P.M.
The Los Angeles Dodgers' manager, Tommy Lasorda, and former United States Attorney Rudolph W. Giuliani will be among those honored.
Tickets, $300, from (800) 522-7222 in New York and (800) 221-3571 elsewhere.
Family Carnival
Nov. 22 -- The National Council for Adoption, an international advocate for children in need of families, adopted children and adoptive parents, is holding a Kids at Heart carnival from 1 to 4 P. M. at the Puck Building, Lafayette at Houston Streets.
Tickets, $250 for an adult with one child, $25 for each additional child, from (202) 328-1200.
Help After Prison
NOV. 22 -- David Rothenberg, who founded the Fortune Society in 1967 to provide guidance for ex-convicts, will be honored at a benefit for the society at the National Arts Club, 15 Gramercy Park South, from 4 to 7 P.M.
Mayor David N. Dinkins and the Manhattan Borough President, Ruth W. Messinger, are scheduled to speak after a cocktail reception, buffet and singing by Valerie Pettiford.
Tickets, $125, from (212) 206-7070, or $150 at the door.
SoHo Concert and Buffet
NOV. 23 -- The Leonardo Trio will perform Bach, Mozart and Dvorak at a 7 P.M. concert followed by a buffet in a loft at 83 Grand Street near Broadway.
The evening will benefit God's Love We Deliver, which takes daily hot meals to about 600 people with AIDS.
Tickets, $50, from (212) 865-4800.
Film Society Benefit
NOV. 23 -- The Film Society of Lincoln Center will present the premiere of Louis Malle's "Damage," starring Jeremy Irons, at two showings at the Walter Reade Theater across from Lincoln Center on West 65th Street.
The 6:30 P.M. movie will be followed by dinner in the lobby of the Vivian Beaumont Theater.
Desserts and Champagne will be served at the theater after the 9 P.M. showing.
Tickets, $500, for the 6:30 P.M. showing and dinner; $250 for the 9 P.M. showing and reception, from (212) 875-5610.
For Free Concerts
NOV. 23 -- For 17 years, Horizon Concerts has brought free concerts of classical music to shelters, hospices and clinics.
A fund-raiser for the organization will be held from 6 to 8 P.M. at Steinway Hall, 109 West 57th Street, starting with a reception followed by the concert featuring Mignon Dunn, Thomas Hampson, Frank Lopardo and Paul Plishka from the Metropolitan Opera.
Tickets, $150, from (212) 563-6885.


Rowan Rolls to 10-0 Mark And a Second Title in a Row
Rowan 42, Montclair State 17
Quarterback Ed Hesson threw two touchdown passes of 29 and 39 yards to Gantry Fox as undefeated Rowan rallied for a 42-17 victory over Montclair State to win a second straight New Jersey Athletic Conference championship yesterday afternoon at Sprague Field in Upper Montclair.
Hesson finished 13 for 24 for 192 yards.
The Profs (10-0, 6-0), ranked No. 1 in N.C.A.A.
Division III, will be the host for a first-round playoff game Saturday.
Wagner 31, Duquesne 6
The Seahawks (8-2), already the Liberty Conference champions, kept their hopes alive for the E.C.A.C. playoffs as quarterback Terry O'Hare, who connected with Jim Bogacki for a 16-yard touchdown, completed 13 of 24 passes for 182 yards to set a school single-season record with 2,161.
Merchant Marine 42 Coast Guard 0
Dreu Beers had touchdown runs of 1, 4 and 2 yards, and Wes Stearns rushed for two more scores (10 and 9 yards) as the Mariners (7-1-1) captured the Secretary of the Treasury Cup and remained in contention for the E.C.A.C. playoffs.
William Paterson 32 Central Connecticut 19
John Trust, who carried 33 times for 253 yards, four short of the school record, scored twice on runs of 42 and 1 yards for the Pioneers (8-2) against the Blue Devils (1-8).
He became the third player in school history to reach 1,000 yards at 1,164.
Montana 50, Hofstra 6
Tony Rice scored three times on runs of 5, 1 and 4 yards, all in the first half, as the Grizzlies (5-5) crushed the Flying Dutchmen (4-6).
Bentley 48 St.
John's 28
Greg Navarro's 75-yard run was the longest of his four touchdowns as he finished with 317 yards on 37 carries for the Falcons.


Criminal Charges Make Outlook Grim for Collor
President Fernando Collor de Mello's political prospects grew bleaker this week as Brazil's Attorney General formally charged him with corruption for a criminal trial and the Senate promised a verdict by Christmas in a parallel impeachment trial.
A conviction in either trial would cause Mr.
Collor to be permanently removed from office.
On Sept. 29, a congressional vote forced him to surrender his powers to Vice President Itamar Franco for six months to allow the first impeachment trial in Brazil's history.


Undressed, Dressed
A 40-foot nude was unveiled, Nov. 7, and children put on finery for a party in a toy store, Nov. 11.


Crown Jewel
To the Editor: The Crown Jewel may have been a diamond in the rough on its maiden trans-Atlantic voyage, but by Sept. 5 when we sailed from New York City to Halifax, Nova Scotia, and back she was a polished gem.
Contrary to Mr.
Drucker's experience, the library was filled with a great selection of paperbacks and the shelves remained well stocked throughout the voyage.
The food was fine although the service was slow.
"Not the waiter's fault," everyone agreed.
And how about the daily 4 P.M. ice cream bar with all the fixins!" Unbelievably, we somehow managed to drift in at the opportune time each afternoon.


Progress Is Slow In New Efforts To Find Bombs
Nearly four years after the bombing of a Pan Am flight over Scotland started a search for better ways to find hidden bombs, the widespread use of more advanced detectors is still years away.
Both the families of victims of the bombing, which killed 270 people, and top aviation security officials say there are signs of progress but the prototype bomb detectors being tested in airports have not been developed as swiftly as they had hoped.


First the Slow March, Then All-Out Attack
IN today's sophisticated play, with almost everyone seeming to know almost everything, patient slogging matches far outnumber quick kills.
You must wear the opponent down with long maneuvers, marches and countermarches before you can get into position for a serious attack.
By then the opponent may be in time pressure trying to figure out what you are really up to.
Typical of this strategy was the game between Grandmasters Yevgeny Vladimirov of Kazakhstan and Julio Granda Zuniga of Peru in the first round of the Interpolis International Tournament in Tilburg, the Netherlands, on Oct. 9.


Sampling the Cartographer's Art; Exploring England With Friendly Guides
WHEN I think of England, I sometimes picture its familiar landscapes: seacoast, moors, rolling hills, hedgerows, sunken country lanes.
But almost as often I see instead an infinitely detailed close-up, a rectangle covered with lines, symbols and tiny print.
These are mesmerizing hieroglyphics I have studied so intensely that after a long day on English roads or paths, they can drift before my eyes as I fall asleep.
Nowhere but in England do I dream of maps.
Of course I use ordinary maps at home, the standard highway issue for trips into neighboring states and street maps for locating unfamiliar addresses in Minneapolis and St.
Paul.
But useful as these maps are, they seem dull, unimaginative and limited compared to the imposing splendor of England's Ordnance Survey series.
These are distinctly royal maps.
Each, in fact, carries a discreet notation: "Made and published by Ordnance Survey, Southampton. Crown copyright."


From Farthest Distance Sighted, an Exploding Star
Using a telescope outfitted with an especially sensitive electronic camera, astronomers have detected the flare of light from an exploding star almost halfway to the edge of the universe, five billion light-years away, the most distant such supernova ever observed from Earth.
The dim light from this supernova and from others like it that could be discovered in coming months is expected to help scientists settle one of the most vexing questions in cosmology: whether the universe is infinite and will continue to expand forever, or whether it is finite and will eventually slow down and collapse in what is sometimes called the "big crunch." Part of Systematic Search
Supernovas of this type are considered reliable yardsticks for measuring distances in deep space.
By careful analysis of the light from such objects, astronomers should be able to determine their distance and the velocity at which they are moving away in the expanding universe.
These are the two measurements necessary to determine the expansion rate and density of the universe, which in turn hold the key to the fate of the universe.


Broadway Stars Glitter in Stamford
THE billing of today's 3 o'clock concert with orchestra at the Stamford Palace as "Two Ladies of Broadway" is remarkably modest, since any number of high-powered adjectives could well be applied to Rita Moreno, one of the original cast stars of "West Side Story" and Carol Channing, the first "Hello Dolly." For further information: 323-2131.
When the New York City Ballet brings "An Evening of Dance" to the New Haven Shubert today at 7, a legendary theater and film couple of an earlier era will be remembered: one of the works on the program has Darcy Kistler and Robert LaFosse rendering a "Salute to Fred Astaire and Ginger Rogers." Performance-only tickets are available or, for a donation of $50, one can also attend a post-concert dessert reception (562-5666).


Hindsight


When Weak 2-Bid Confuses Opponents
WHEN the American Contract Bridge League's Fall Nationals begin in Orlando, Fla., on Friday, one of the experts will recall a deal from the 1991 Championships in Indianapolis.
Charles Coon of Gloucester, Mass., who came close to winning the world team title in 1990, held the South cards.
Some of the most difficult bidding situations in the game arise when an opposing weak two-bid is raised to game.
The third player may have a wide variety of hands, from weak with a fit to strong with a misfit.


Prize Pupil


Forming a Coalition To Feed the Hungry
This is in response to the article "Safety Net for the Hungry Is Collapsing" on Oct. 25:
In central New Jersey, we are very aware of the problem and the difficulties faced by the food pantries and organizations that are trying to feed the hungry.
We realize that the burden will increase after Dec. 31, when additional people will be off welfare.


A Classic Route Ahead For Winner of Remsen?
The road to the Triple Crown isn't likely to twist through a cold Aqueduct race track in November, but they held the annual stakes race for late bloomers and possible prodigies yesterday.
And a gray 2-year-old colt named Silver of Silver, who didn't even go to the races until Sept. 10, came shooting out of the pack and won the $200,000 Remsen over the favored Dalhart and promptly raced himself into contention for next year's classics.
It was the third victory in five starts for Silver of Silver, and it gave him a record of distinction.
He was bought without fanfare for $27,000 last winter, and didn't make his debut until two months ago.
But in his last start, two weeks before the stars of the juvenile class took the stage in the Breeders' Cup, he was off on a tangent at Calder Race Course winning the $250,000 Florida Stallion Stakes.


Hussein Invokes His Illness To Change Jordan's Course
KING HUSSEIN, who in 40 years has proved the most resilient and durable of the Middle East's leaders, has stirred his three million subjects and puzzled the whole region lately by simultaneously raising broad hints about his own mortality and laying out a road map for his people to follow.
In the last couple of weeks, in a spate of pronouncements, he has been at times fatalistic, at times rebellious against the status quo, and at times both at once.


November 8-14: Castro Convert; Exile Leader in Miami Says He Spied for Havana
Miami was vividly reminded last week that it is still one of the last redoubts of the cold war.
Francisco Avila Azcuy, military chief of Alpha 66, an exile group that seeks to violently overthrow Fidel Castro, announced on a local television program that he has been a double agent since 1979, spying for Havana while simultaneously informing the American Government of his contacts with both Cuban intelligence and exile organizations.


No Headline
We've been saying for years to the younger generation, 'Hold on, there's hope.' What do we tell them now? -- JULIUS BUTLER, a Los Angeles lawyer.  [ 1:2. ]


On Sunday; Refusing To Overlook the Homeless
MARGARITA LOPEZ and Patty Moon West cannot give out their peanut butter and jelly sandwiches to just any homeless people.
They drive the Project Reachout van around the Upper West Side of Manhattan and through Central Park, saving the peanut butter and jelly for the homeless mentally ill.
"He one of ours?" asked Ms. West.


History Is Another Recruit in the Balkan War
IT was very late one night at the new border between Yugoslavia and Macedonia when a tired Yugoslav immigration officer began to complain that United Nations sanctions against his country are unfair.
He lamented first about personal inconvenience: The sanctions had forced him to break his promise to take his daughter to Disney World for her next birthday.
But as he turned his collar against a cold Balkan wind, he said the sanctions also have a profoundly immoral aspect.
"We Serbs were slaughtered in two world wars, and there wasn't a word of protest," he said.
"Now that we are trying to protect our children, suddenly the world is saying that we are barbarians."


Correction
A list of semifinalists for the 1993 National Merit Scholarship on Nov. 1 omitted the semifinalists from Guilford High School.
They are Zachary J. Bortolot and Joshua L. Solomon.


Julie Rubinstein, Joseph Faranda
Julie Ann Rubinstein, a daughter of Lydia and Daniel Rubinstein of Miami, was married last evening to Dr.
Joseph Anthony Faranda, a son of Angela and Carmelo Faranda of Jamesburg, N.J.
Rabbi A. Bruce Goldman performed the ceremony at the St.
Regis Hotel in New York.
Mrs.
Faranda, 36 years old, is the bilingual clinical supervisor in the speech and language clinic at Pace University in New York.
She graduated from the State University at Buffalo and received a master's degree in communication sciences and disorders from New York University.


Making a Difference; Hewlett-Packard's Latest Master Synthesist
Few segments of the computer industry are more hotly contested than the $10 billion-a-year work station market.
And when the action heats up even more than usual, as it did last Tuesday when three of the top four sellers of the powerful desktop machines tried to outdo each other in announcing new products, it is not a place for the faint of heart.
Gary B. Eichhorn, general manager of Hewlett-Packard's Workstation Systems Group in Chelmsford, Mass., certainly seems to have heart.
Despite having spent 17 years at the Digital Equipment Corporation -- he switched to H-P just over a year ago -- he did not hesitate to have H-P's announcement on the same day that Digital unveiled a very fast set of computers.


Brooklyn Lead-Reduction Effort Draws Criticism
Almost six months after potentially hazardous levels of lead were found in soil near the Williamsburg Bridge, the city has begun screening children for lead poisoning and handing out fliers on lead safety, but has yet to start cleaning the affected areas.
The city's efforts are now being criticized by lead experts, local officials and residents who live in the Williamsburg, Brooklyn, area as too little, too late and as evidence of plodding governmental bureaucracy.


THE TRANSITION: The Inaugural; Clinton Team Wants an Inauguration That's Dignified, and Folksy
For an event they hope will symbolize the new administration, the planners of Bill Clinton's inauguration want to make the festivities accessible, affordable and a unique blend of Arkansas folksiness and Presidential dignity.
"A cross between a state dinner at the White House and a Crittenden County 'coon supper" is how Richard Mintz, a press aide to the inaugural committee, described the plans.


THE TRANSITION: The President; Friends Describe a Melancholy Bush
Stoic and reclusive, President Bush has been steeling himself for his final weeks in power by driving golf balls and angling for snook and redfish through a vacation that his family and friends hoped would revive him from what they say is a state of despair.
The four days in this sleepy enclave, where he came to make peace with the nation's decision to replace him, were a needed respite for Mr.
Bush, a trip suggested by his son George.


Hayes Status Could Have Big Effect on Yanks
Finding a third baseman was such a tremendous problem for the Yankees in 1991 that eight different players mishandled the position.
The Yankees seemed to parade a new candidate out to the hot corner each week.
That same predicament could afflict the Yanks again in five months because they might lose Charlie Hayes in the expansion draft.
If the Yankees made a glaring oversight on their protection list, it is probably their failure to protect Hayes.
Sure, Danny Tartabull and Steve Farr are bigger names, but their absence was expected.
The Yankees also left such minor league pitchers as Roberto Munoz and Rafael Quirico unprotected, but both are still at least a year from the majors.
Besides, the Yankees did protect six pitchers under the age of 24 so someone is bound to be exposed.
Inquiries Already Made
But leaving Hayes available and hoping that he sneaks through the first round undrafted is a serious gamble.
Both the Colorado Rockies and the Florida Marlins have already made inquiries throughout the American League concerning the 27-year-old Hayes, and there is a strong possibility that he will be selected.


An Economy That Will Test Clinton's Pledge on Jobs
It sounded like a promise from the campaign stump.
President-elect Bill Clinton told a news conference last week that "I will ask the Congress to adopt an investment tax credit that I have been advocating for well over a year now to give the private sector incentives to go out and invest in new plant and equipment and to increase their capacity to hire." That one proposal, Mr.
Clinton said, could create half a million new jobs in the first year alone.
Even more jobs could be created, he said, by accelerating investment in the infrastructure.
At first blush the logic seems straightforward enough: tax credits from Washington create incentives for entrepreneurs to start companies and hire workers and for existing companies to buy equipment.
Spending on the infrastructure leads to more hiring.
The unemployment rate -- now 7.4 percent -- falls as more people find work.


Making Thanksgiving More Nutritional
AS with most holiday meals, the traditions of Thanksgiving are decidedly durable.
But this year, with the publication of the nutritional pyramid that recommends from 6 to 11 servings of bread and grain, 3 to 5 of vegetables and 2 to 4 of fruit each day, the many side dishes that accompany turkey have assumed even greater importance.
And it may be time to consider revising recipes for classic accompaniments.


Acquittal in Israeli Rape Case Draws Protests
The black-bordered pictures in the newspapers looked like portraits of fallen soldiers, but the clean-cut youths in the photos were not heroes.
Acquitted last week of raping a 14-year-old girl four years ago, they were being pilloried in advertisements taken out by various women's groups protesting the verdict.
Outrage over the verdict has reverberated for days in newspaper columns, on radio and television and in street demonstrations, and has revealed a growing sensitivity here to violence against women and in society at large, issues that for years were pushed aside for various reasons.


Clinton's Promise of Cleaning House Worries Some Career Civil Servants
As a senior official of the Social Security Administration, Louis B. Hays staunchly defended Federal efforts to halt payment of disability benefits to tens of thousands of people.
More recently, he made concessions to California officials resisting Congressional efforts to set strict standards for nursing homes.
Mr.
Hays has carried out Reagan and Bush policies so vigorously, in fact, that Toby S. Edelman, a lawyer at the National Senior Citizens Law Center, said she had been astounded to learn that he was a career Government employee.


Believe It, Women Elected This President; Arms for Hostages
To the Editor:
In "George Bush, Caught in the Loop" (editorial, Nov. 2), concerning then-Vice President Bush's role in the arms-for-hostages deal with Iran, you quote Mr.
Bush, on the "Larry King Live" program, as saying: "to this very day, President Reagan didn't feel that that arrangement was arms for hostages. . . . go ask President Reagan if he thought it was arms for hostages . . . and he'd say no."


Weatherstripping Makes for a Snug Door
ENTRY doors and doors leading to unheated parts of a house need weatherstripping to eliminate drafts around the edges.
Most entry doors have some form of weatherstripping, and often it is a type that can be restored if it has lost its effectiveness.
With other kinds or where no weatherstripping exists, installing new weatherstripping is usually easy.
To test weatherstripping, wait for a windy day.
Then close the door and move a tissue or a lighted candle slowly around the edges of the door on the inside.
Excess movement of the tissue or flame indicates draftiness caused by air leaking past the stripping.


Susan Prusaczyk, Alexander Prout
Mr. and Mrs.
Bernard D. Prusaczyk of South Windsor, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Susan Rosemary Prusaczyk, to Alexander Maurice Prout, a son of Mrs.
Francis J. Prout of New York and the late Mr.
Prout.
A January wedding is planned.
Miss Prusaczyk, 28 years old, is a freelance marketing consultant based in New York.
She graduated from the College of the Holy Cross.
Her father, who is retired, was a teacher of English at East Hartford (Conn.) High School.
Her mother, Susan Prusaczyk, is an accountant with the city of Manchester, Conn.


No G.O.P. Bad-Will Ambassadors on Tour
To the Editor:
While traveling through Latin America, I caught up with Leslie Gelb's Nov. 8 column ("Is Clinton Tough Enough?"), alleging that I and other unnamed Republican former national security aides have begun undermining the President-elect by vilifying his probable policies and likely associates.
Mr.
Gelb recommends countermeasures to the President-elect unworthy of The Times.


William E. P. Doelger, Real-Estate Executive, 91
William E. P. Doelger, the last president of Peter Doelger Inc., died at his home on Thursday in West Palm Beach, Fla.
He was 91 years old.
He died of natural causes, family members said.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: November 15, 1992
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
4
MIDNIGHT WHISPERS, by V. C. Andrews. (Pocket, $5.99.) The travails of Christie Longchamp, haunted by her relatives' passions.
2
2
HIDEAWAY, by Dean Koontz. (Berkley, $5.99.) A man miraculously resuscitated after he has technically died is haunted by visions of evil.
3
42
THE FIRM, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $5.99.) A young lawyer learns that his firm is engaged in secret, possibly illegal activities.
4
4
PRIVATE EYES, by Jonathan Kellerman. (Bantam, $6.50.) The psychologist-detective Alex Delaware goes to the rescue of an actress.
5
5
THE HELLION BRIDE, by Catherine Coulter. (Jove, $5.99.) The romance of a British rake and a plantation belle in 19th-century Jamaica.
6
6
SCARLETT, by Alexandra Ripley. (Warner, $6.99.) The sequel to "Gone With the Wind."
7 *
3
REMEMBER, by Barbara Taylor Bradford. (Ballantine, $5.99.) A television correspondent takes a trip across Europe to learn the truth about her fiance's suicide and herself.
8
31
A TIME TO KILL, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $5.99.) Racial tensions surface during the trial of a man charged with murder in rural Mississippi.
9 *
2
A RIVER RUNS THROUGH IT, by Norman Maclean. (University of Chicago, $9.95.) Three stories about the pleasures of the outdoors in western Montana.
10
8
NO GREATER LOVE, by Danielle Steel. (Dell, $6.50.) The sinking of the Titanic greatly alters the fortunes of Edwina Winfield and her large family.
11
8
A THOUSAND ACRES, by Jane Smiley. (Fawcett, $12.) The fortunes of a family that operates a large industrialized farm in the Midwest.
12
3
A RIVER RUNS THROUGH IT, by Norman Maclean. (Pocket, $4.99.) Three stories about the pleasures of the outdoors in western Montana.
13
8
SAINT MAYBE, by Anne Tyler. (Ivy, $5.99.) The struggles of a young man to atone for the wrong he feels he has done his brother.
14
2
THE LAST OF THE MOHICANS, by James Fenimore Cooper. (Pocket, $4.99.) The 1826 novel about the adventures of a frontier scout and his Indian friend during the French and Indian War.
15
1
NATIVE TONGUE, by Carl Hiaasen. (Fawcett, $5.99.) Crimes and comic capers among the creatures, animal and human, at a Florida amusement park.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
2
3
THE AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF MALCOLM X, with the assistance of Alex Haley. (Ballantine, $5.99.) The life story of the black leader, originally published in 1965.
3 *
6
PUTTING PEOPLE FIRST, by Bill Clinton and Al Gore. (Times Books/Random House, $7.99.) The next Administration's program for "changing America."
4
5
BACKLASH, by Susan Faludi. (Anchor/ Doubleday, $12.50.) A journalist contends that the media and political groups are staging a war against women's rights.
5
30
AMERICA: WHAT WENT WRONG? by Donald L. Barlett and James B. Steele. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $6.95.) How the practices of Washington lawmakers and Wall Street deal makers have benefited a few Americans at the expense of most.
6
2
WHEN YOU LOOK LIKE YOUR PASSPORT PHOTO, IT'S TIME TO GO HOME, by Erma Bombeck. (Harper Paperbacks, $5.99.) The tribulations of travel.
7
78
YOU JUST DON'T UNDERSTAND, by Deborah Tannen. (Ballantine, $10.) The different languages men and women speak.
8
2
MOLLY IVINS CAN'T SAY THAT, CAN SHE? by Molly Ivins. (Vintage, $11.) Essays about the recent political and cultural scene.
9
12
THE GOVERNMENT RACKET, by Martin L. Gross. (Bantam, $7.99.) Examples of waste, with suggestions for curbing it.
10
471
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Inspiration. (LP)
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
95
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $9.95.) Principles for success.
2
66
LIFE'S LITTLE INSTRUCTION BOOK, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $5.95.) Some 500 tips for achieving a self-fulfilling life.
3 *
8
THE INDISPENSABLE CALVIN AND HOBBES, by Bill Watterson. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $12.95.) A collection of previously published cartoons.
4
114
THE T-FACTOR FAT GRAM COUNTER, by Jamie Pope-Cordle and Martin Katahn. (Norton, $2.50.) How to reduce fat in one's diet.
5
2
MRS. FIELDS COOKIE BOOK, by Debbi Fields. (Time-Life, $12.95.) One hundred recipes.
6 *
1
COWS OF OUR PLANET, by Gary Larson. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $8.95.) "Far Side" cartoons.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,000 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 38,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.


YELTSIN SAYS FOES WAGE A CAMPAIGN TO STIR 'HYSTERIA'
Campaigning for his embattled reforms two weeks before a crucial session of the Russian legislature, President Boris N. Yeltsin lashed out today at the political forces ranged against him.
"Of late, there has been an unbridled campaign in the country to fire political hysteria," Mr.
Yeltsin said before the powerful lobby of industrial managers.


Shifts in Top Spots to Affect '93 Elections
THE election that swept a new Government into Washington earlier this month appears to some political leaders in Westchester to have set the stage for what may be major changes, perhaps even a new government, here.
Two of the county's three top elected officials -- District Attorney Carl A. Vergari and County Clerk Andrew J. Spano -- have already said they are not seeking re-election, and the holder of the third post, County Executive Andrew P. O'Rourke, may also be gone before the 1993 elections.


Intensified Liberia War Threatens To Engulf Other African Nations
The civil war in Liberia, now approaching its fourth year, is threatening to engulf other nations, as neighboring West African countries have joined Government troops here in a major military offensive against rebel forces.
In the last three weeks, troops from Nigeria, Ghana and five smaller West African countries have used a devastating array of heavy artillery, tanks, mortars, gunboats and fighter-bombers against ground targets on the outskirts of Monrovia, the capital, which is the only territory the Government still holds.


Sampling the Cartographer's Art; 53,000 Atlases, 4 Million Maps, 300 Globes
THE Library of Congress Geography and Map Reading Room, like so many places in Washington, is a sterile, highly secure room obscured in a huge office building.
Passing through a metal detector, checking your purse, relinquishing a photo ID, signing a few forms and entering the area armed with only a notebook and pencil (no pens allowed) may be a bit much to go though to get a peek at, say, the best route to Harrisburg.
But if you are doing research that requires any sort of geographic information, this is the place.


Rangers Find a New Missing Link
During their third straight defeat tonight, the Rangers sent a different sort of message: The problem might not be too many good players, but at least one too few.
Sadly lacking a mobile third defenseman capable of making the clearing pass or the quick backcheck, the Rangers committed homely, slow-motion errors that led to three first-period goals by Quebec and a 6-3 defeat at the Colisee.


Ms. von Wiesenthal, Mr. Townsend Jr.
Ruth von Wiesenthal was married Tuesday to Charles Coe Townsend Jr.
The Rev.
F.
Bryan Williams performed the ceremony at the Grace Episcopal Church in Camden, S.C.
Mrs.
Townsend, who is known as Bonnie, is the daughter of the late Mr. and Mrs.
A.
Lincoln Scott of Hudson, N.Y.
She graduated from Wells College.


Problems With the Fountain of Youth
To The Editor:
"Laying Pipe for the Fountain of Youth" (Nov. 1) is a fascinating case in point illustrating the potential for disastrous consequences of disjointed, specialized scientific research funded by people like Wallace Steinberg.


Making a Difference; It's a Sweet $50 Million For Andre Harrell's Lineup
SITTING behind a desk isn't exactly Andre Harrell's idea of running things.
Being where the music action is has helped the 32-year-old discover major young recording artists like Heavy D. &amp; the Boyz, the rhythm and blues group Jodeci and Mary J. Blige for his Uptown Entertainment label.
Those achievements, and his stint as a producer on the 1991 comedy "Strictly Business" for Warner Brothers, paved the way for a recent $50 million deal between Uptown, which he founded in New York, and MCA Inc., based in Los Angeles.


Truck With Ton of Explosives Is Found in London
The police thwarted what they said could have been a devastating terrorist attack today when they became suspicious of a passing furniture truck on a North London street, halted it and found a ton of explosives inside.
Police officials said they believed that the explosives were intended to be set off as a single bomb by the Irish Republican Army.


Atlas Sort of Shows Anglers the Way
The sportsman who calls himself F-STOP FITZGERALD, which is not, believe it or not, the name he grew up with in San Francisco, is a onetime punk rock photographer who is co-editor of the Gousha USA Today Sports Atlas, a pathfinder for fans and athletes.
As the atlas's second edition was being released last week, Fitzgerald admitted that his own favorite sport is fishing.


POSTURING
Paul Taylor may be a wonderful dancer and choreographer, but the posture he adopts in his About Men column "Posturing" (Oct. 25) indicates to me that he is far from a wonderful host and is, probably, insensitive to the "little" people.
He has two visitors who have traveled a great distance to his remote farm, apparently at his invitation.
Yet he cannot find even a floor where one of them can sleep -- the only sleeping accommodation is with a pig.
The clean sheets awaiting another guest, who doesn't seem to arrive, go unused.


Sampling the Cartographer's Art; At National Geographic, Tuned to News
THE venerable Cartographic Division of the National Geographic Society has charted everything from the depths of the Grand Canyon (one mile) to the mountains of Mars (Arsia Mons, about 73,000 feet, more than two Everests) since the division was created in 1915.
Soldiers and pilots carried National Geographic maps into combat during World War II.
But John F. Shupe, chief cartographer, says 1992 has been the busiest year for making new maps that he can recall in his 26-year career.
"With the breakup of the Soviet Union and Yugoslavia, and the new countries in Africa, we had 20 new pieces of geography to add to the map in about a year." Mr.
Shupe expects the remainder of the decade to be equally fluid.
The division's staff of 70 will be following the news, and networking with embassies and the United Nations to keep up with talk of the breakup of Czechoslovakia early next year, the formation of Nunavut, an Inuit province in Canada, in the mid-90's, and possibly a reunified Korea.


The Bottom Line: A Reality Check on Salaries
When Bill Clinton pointed to the audience in the second television debate and said "none of us can promise any of you that that what you do know for a living is absolutely safe from now on," he strucck a nerve - picking a career is a gamble.
Job-hunters have to weigh both availability of jobs and their pay prospects.


Milan
As a fashion, business, publishing and financial capital -- like New York or Paris -- Milan has the cosmopolitan zing of a great city, that tension in the air (alas, highly polluted), which makes it unique in Italy.
This is a city that knows how to do business, and if the winter weather is bad, which it usually is, that just means the natives show off their enviable knitwear; the Milanese are arguably the world's best-dressed urban population.
Thanks to La Scala, Milan's legendary opera house, the city is a world music capital, and thanks to both its proximity to Italy's northern frontier and a large and a varied immigrant population, Milan is Italy's most outward-looking international city.


Ms. Cleveland, Robert Heathcote
Mary Elizabeth Cleveland, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Eben S. Cleveland of North Coventry, Pa., was married yesterday to Robert Clayton Heathcote, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert H. Heathcote of Stratford-on-Avon, England.
The Rev.
Francis Melcher performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at Our Mother of Consolation Church in Philadelphia.
Mrs.
Heathcote, who is 28 years old and is known as Elizabeth, graduated from the University of Pennsylvania.
Her father retired as a driver-education teacher at the Spring-Ford School in Royersford, Pa.
Her mother, Joan Cleveland, who is retired, was a landscape design consultant in North Coventry.


Pamela Lipkin, Robert Sauertig
Mr. and Mrs.
Gerald Lipkin of Montville, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Pamela Beth Lipkin, to Robert Keith Sauertig, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Alan Sauertig of Hazlet, N.J.
A May wedding is planned.
Ms.
Lipkin and Mr.
Sauertig are 26 years old and graduates of the University of Massachusetts at Amherst, she summa cum laude and he cum laude.
She is a manager at Coopers &amp; Lybrand in New York.
Her father is the chairman and chief executive of Valley National Bancorp in Wayne, N.J.


Reading Up On Photos With Vision
READY for some winter photo-book reading? Three new books are worthy of consideration.
The quality of photographs in a book about filters is the key to judging the book's quality.
If they are alive with color and sparkling with light -- the kind of pictures you would like to take -- then the book is probably a good one.
A photographer who can make exciting pictures with filters can teach the art of using them.


Alexandria Aiello, George Hundt Jr.
Alexandria Ann Aiello, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Carmine P. Aiello of Cutchogue, L.I., was married yesterday to George Stout Hundt Jr., the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Hundt Sr. of Malvern, Pa.
The Rev.
Timothy S. Healy performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Vincent Ferrer Church in New York.
Mrs.
Hundt is a senior vice president in international program trading at James Capel &amp; Company, a securities brokerage, in New York.
She graduated from Mount Holyoke College.
Her father is a utilities industries consultant in Cutchogue.
Her mother, Dorothy A. Aiello, is a sixth-grade teacher at the Lenox School in Baldwin, L.I.


Grunge: A Success Story
WHEN did grunge become
grunge?
How did a five-letter word meaning dirt, filth, trash become synonymous with a musical genre, a fashion statement, a pop phenomenon?
From subculture to mass culture, the trend time line gets shorter and faster all the time.
It was just over a year ago that MTV began barraging its viewers with the sounds of Seattle "grunge rock," featuring the angst anthems and grinding guitars of bands like Nirvana and Pearl Jam.
By last summer, the glossy magazines began tracking grunge looks, the threadbare flannel shirts, knobby wool sweaters and cracked leatherette coats of the Pacific Northwest's thrift-shop esthetic.
Hollywood weighed in, too, with a grunge-scene movie, "Singles." Then two weeks ago -- all in the blink of a flashbulb -- the fashion designer Marc Jacobs, who has never even been to Seattle, was hailed as "the guru of grunge."


Elizabeth Horwich and Jay Lurie
Dr. and Mrs.
Mark S. Horwich of Larchmont, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Elizabeth Ann Horwich, to Jay Alan Lurie, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
William L. Lurie of Harrison, N.Y.
An August wedding is planned.
Ms.
Horwich, 23 years old, graduated magna cum laude from Dartmouth College, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
She is a doctoral student in ocean engineering at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
Her father is an associate professor at Cornell University Medical College and an attending neurologist at New York Hospital.
Her mother, Andrea Horwich, is an accountant at General Electric Investments in Stamford, Conn.


Fun, All the Way to the Bank
NAME: Monica Seles.
IDENTITY: The world's top-ranked female tennis player and, Forbes says, highest-paid female athlete in the world.


To Hillary Clinton, Or Occupant
HILLARY CLINTON: Congratulations!
You have won a free subscription to an exciting new fashion magazine for brainy, blond litigators who are moving to the White House and wondering what to wear.
It's called FIRST LADY.
In our first issue, FIRST LADY looks at the fashion profiles of former Presidential wives and offers dos and don'ts for you, HILLARY CLINTON.
*
Inaugural Hat:
Your fashion debut.
Millions of eyes on your hat.
Will it be wonderful?
Jacqueline Kennedy got off to a stylish start in a pillbox by Halston.
Barbara Bush went hatless, but Marilyn Quayle made up for it: A "Saturday Night Live" skit said Mrs.
Quayle, in a royal-blue hat, looked as if a spaceship had landed on her head.
Find a hat that isn't silly or forget it.
And remember who won.
If you like, you can have your headband back now.


'Sweeney Todd,' in All Its Musical Power
TO get right to the gist, the Paper Mill Playhouse's "Sweeney Todd" is the musical thriller's most thrilling production yet -- more so than the landmark Broadway staging in 1979, more so than the acclaimed scaled-down revival 10 years later and more so than the version that entered the City Opera's repertory in 1984.
Lest it be presupposed that Stephen Sondheim's macabre masterwork is but a gory story about a crazed barber who cuts throats and whose frumpy accomplice makes meat pie of the corpses, it should be emphasized that redemptive significance is never less than a shiver away.


POSTINGS: Signs, Stanchions, Sidewalks; Midtown Facelift
A facelift is in the works for the streets around Grand Central Terminal in midtown Manhattan that will bring new lamp stanchions, street signs, trash receptacles, pollution-resistant trees and in some places, new sidewalks and curb cuts to the neighborhood.
The improvements are part of a $30 million streetscape program being undertaken by the Grand Central Partnership, a coalition of businesses, corporations and property owners in the Grand Central area.
A ceremonial start to the installation of the improvements will take place on Thursday at 10:15 A.M. at the corner of 42d Street and Vanderbilt Avenue, as Partnership members and city officials dig up a patch of sidewalk in preparation for installation of new granite sidewalks and curbing.


Tribe's Village in India Is Supported by a Bordello
In this tiniest of villages, the grandest building here, an edifice of real brick and cement, painted brilliantly white, its ornate lintel bannered "Welcome 1992," is a bordello.
It is here that the women, and girls, of Kuku Ka Bas work, at least some of them, encouraged by the village men and defended by its elders.
It is also here, and in villages like this, that the fate of the Nats, one of India's hundreds of indigenous tribes, is being played out.


The Executive Life; Hollywood Agents On the Hard Streets
In the movie "Glengarry Glen Ross," a flashy real-estate executive played by Alec Baldwin storms into a branch office and warns four longtime employees to sell more property than their office colleagues or be fired fast.
That cutthroat, survival-of-the-fittest approach is more than just a screenplay at some of the talent and literary agencies that had long provided an oasis of stability in volatile Hollywood.
Especially fat during the 1980's boom, the industry has gone on a crash diet.
In the last month alone, five major agencies have consolidated into three, and 50 or so agents and their clients have abruptly found themselves among the homeless.


The New White House Order
President-elect Clinton promises to focus like a laser beam on the economy.
The effort is likely to begin with creation of a high-level adviser to head a new White House "economic security council." That's a powerful idea.
In this new world order, after the cold war, economic problems loom at least as large as military threats.
This new council could do for economic policy what the National Security Council does for diplomatic and military policy: bring coherent views to the President's attention, every morning.
But the proposed council also poses risks that are evident just by thinking for a minute about the name economic security council.
The parallel with national security invites the belief that America is still at war, only this time over foreign investment and trade rather than missiles.
That's not just misguided but dangerous, inviting a quick descent into the worst protectionism.


'THE BUSY, BUSY WASP'
What a spectacle it was to see A. N. Wilson posturing his way about the provincial literary scene of London, delivering himself of childishly nasty witticisms (" 'The Busy, Busy, Wasp,' " by James Atlas, Oct. 18).
In the age of molecular biology and microelectronics, of Somalia and Bosnia, this sort of arrogant nonsense should be consigned to obscurity.
S.
RACKOVSKY
Rochester


POSTINGS: TriBeCa Plan Going Ahead; Blood, Fire and Light
An obstinate blaze in TriBeCa two weeks ago injured 32 firefighters but will not disrupt an ambitious plan by the New York Blood Center to renovate a former warehouse next door.
Since January, the center has been preparing to convert a 10-story cold-storage warehouse at 22 Ericsson Place, between Hudson and Varick Streets, for use by its blood services division.
On Oct. 27 it won permission from the Landmarks Preservation Commission to add windows throughout the virtually windowless structure.
On Nov. 4, however, as that work was about to begin, fire broke out in the adjacent six-story building, 36 Ericsson Place.
The five-alarm blaze lasted well into the next day, requiring more than 200 firefighters to bring it under control.


MacPherson's Surgery Called Successful
Doctors say surgery to treat New England Patriots Coach DICK MacPHERSON for acute diverticulitis was successful.
A diseased portion of MacPherson's lower colon was removed in surgery on Friday.
MacPherson, 62 years old, has been in Massachusetts General Hospital in Boston since Nov. 4.


BUSH'S GAMBLE
I confess (if that doesn't sound too righteous) to being a member of the "far right" that William Safire labels too great a risk in his article.
The "family values" he so eloquently derides are very important to me and to others I know.
We are intensely concerned about the fate of unborn children as well as the future of children after they are born.
We disagree that people should be accorded special rights based on their sexual behavior.


Belize, Marketing Its Beauty, Fears Its Ruin
At the Chan Chich Lodge, a nature resort tucked amid Mayan ruins here in the thick forests of this Central American nation, a handful of affluent Americans bend forward, squinting to detect the movement of birds flitting silently in the moist, all-encompassing green.
After repeatedly playing a tape of its call, standing motionless for minutes and chirping expertly himself in vain, Drew Thate, the party's guide, issues a summons to move on.
"White-breasted wood wren 10, people nothing," he says, drawing a chuckle from the bird watchers who had each paid thousands of dollars for that frustration, as well as glimpses of exotic birds like the Aracari toucan and masked tityra.


New &amp; Noteworthy
MY HARD BARGAIN: Stories, by Walter Kirn. (Washington Square/Pocket Books, $9.) Mormons and the Midwest are among the many subjects covered in these 13 short stories, most of which feature the keen observations of young male narrators.
The author "should be sentenced to a lifetime writing fiction," Valerie Sayers said here in 1990.
"On the evidence of this first book, Mr. Kirn has the gift."
BLOOD MEMORY, by Martha Graham. (Washington Square/Pocket Books, $12.) Martha Graham was as original as her dances.
In this memoir, written just before her death and published posthumously, she gives her own account of a long life devoted to creativity and performance.
Last year our reviewer, Francis Mason, called her "the most articulate dancer and choreographer who ever lived," and this book a "masterly, buoyant legacy." For certain details and perspectives Graham left out, readers can turn to MARTHA: The Life and Work of Martha Graham, by her close friend and fellow choreographer Agnes de Mille (Vintage, $15).
In the same review Mr.
Mason observed that Miss de Mille "takes the reader into the possessive confidence of a worshiping younger sister who can find fault with a genius sibling, but who also wishes to remain close to the superior being."


Technology; Making Homes Into Prisons, Carefully
TONY PALMER, a convicted New Jersey drug dealer, was released from prison a year ago on the condition that he wear an ankle bracelet designed to monitor his movements.
Several times, he gave his electronic jailer the slip by removing the bracelet, and each time a computer at the corrections department took note.
But no official acted on these electronic warnings.
Finally, in April, Mr.
Palmer was arrested for the killing of a teen-age boy, and a grand jury is now reviewing the case.
Last month, bowing to months of political pressure following that killing, state officials scrapped the controversial home-detention program that was started in 1989.


Horticulture Gaining as a Career Option
TWO years ago, Carole Anderson of Florham Park was a travel agent.
Elizabeth Staley of Morristown was a housewife who spent every spare moment in her garden.
Now both are studying for two-year degrees in landscape design.
When she is not in class, Ms.
Staley works as an assistant horticulturalist at a large garden center, and Ms.
Anderson has already begun as a consultant on residential landscaping projects.
Both are eager to move ahead into their new lives.
"I want to get out and do this now," Ms.
Anderson said.


Whose New Health Plan Is This Anyway?
AS a Presidential candidate, Bill Clinton astutely diagnosed the malaise of the nation's health-care system.
But to cure its problems, in one year or even four, he will need to combine the skills of an emergency-room doctor, an economist, a faith healer and a miracle worker.
Health care was one of Mr.
Clinton's strongest campaign issues, and doctors, hospitals, private health insurers and drug companies now see profound changes as inevitable.
But they are girding for battle over the right to direct those changes.
Last week they were mouthing conciliatory words, offering to work with the new Administration, promising not to obstruct the changes envisioned by the President-elect.
At the same time, they were refining plans for sophisticated lobbying to define the public interest in a way that will coincide with their own.


For a Pitcher, Billy Goat Gruff Almost Smiles
This fantastical hand-painted goat pitcher is a relic of the 1930's art-pottery movement in Czecholsvakia.
The stylized billy goat with its swirly moustache is part of a line of animal pitchers by Erphila, a Czech company, that also included birds and cats.
The pitcher's colors are typically bold -- black and red on a yellow. ground.
It is $225 from Charles France at the Metropolitan Arts and Antiques Pavilion.


November 8-14: Clergy Is Divided; Church of England Approves Priesthood for Women
The vote by the Church of England last week to ordain women as priests provoked such a level of anger and anguish that there seemed little chance that the deep rift over the issue could be healed soon.
In narrowly approving the change, the Church of England joined 12 of the 28 self-governing provinces of the worldwide Anglican church, including the United States, in permitting women to be ordained.


Wall Street; Big Investors Get the Breaks
The RICH get richer in lots of ways, not the least of which is that it costs them less to compound their money.
For years, the nation's brokerage firms have been happy to cut special deals to woo wealthy clients: the bigger the account, the smaller the fees as a percentage of assets under management.
And now, a behemoth of the mutual fund industry is muscling in on the rich-people market, offering a series of cut-rate funds to the fortunate folks with $50,000 to spare.
In the coming weeks, the Vanguard Group plans to announce its new Admiral Funds, a high-minimum fund group for the country-club set.


Gay Church Again Rejected By National Council Group
After more than a decade of trying, a church composed mostly of gay and lesbian congregants has again been rejected in its bid to establish ties with the National Council of Churches, the nation's largest ecumenical organization.
In a 90-to-81 vote on Thursday at its annual convention in Cleveland, the top policy-making body of the National Council of Churches chose not to grant observer status to the church, the Universal Fellowship of Metropolitan Churches, a denomination that has 50,000 members in 264 congregations around the country.


World Markets; A Little-Used Window on Tokyo
WHEN it was introduced nearly two years ago, Japan's version of America's "5 percent rule" on stock ownership was hailed as a ray of light in the murky world of Japanese shareholdings.
The new law, which obligates investors to disclose when they have acquired 5 percent or more of a listed company's shares, and other data, was regarded as a big advance in a new field here: market analysis based on facts rather than rumors.
That was before the Japanese stock market crashed.
The Finance Ministry's files have filled with the disclosures, but the market remains deeply depressed and few have bothered to study them.
Many think it is not worth the bother.


The Game of Outwitting Uninvited Munchers
AT the risk of being tarred and feathered, or worse, run out of town, an important question needs to be asked: Has the time come to talk about coexisting with wildlife?
There have been many encounters with uninvited furry creatures.
Rabbits, mice, chipmunks, skunks, moles and deer have uprooted, eaten, nibbled or destroyed many a fine garden display.
Notice, the adjective peaceful was not joined with coexistence as this may be too much to ask.
Most reactions from gardeners are far from friendly.
The results of the damage done are usually heartbreaking, and often costly.


POSTINGS: 8 Stories in Brooklyn; Health Science Education
It could be called "A Triage Grows in Brooklyn": An eight-floor, $38 million, 250,000-square-foot Health Science Education Building has just been completed at Lenox Road and New York Avenue in East Flatbush.
It's part of the State University of New York Health Science Center, formerly known as the SUNY Downstate Medical Center, where a total of 1,650 students attend the College of Medicine -- the state's largest -- the College of Nursing, the College of Health Related Professions and the School of Graduate Studies.
The new building, designed by The Eggers Group Architects, contains teaching laboratories, classroom and administrative offices, a 250,000-volume library, a 500-seat auditorium and a facility for the School of Nursing that includes a self-contained intensive-care unit.


Margaret Weller, Willie Stargell
Willie Stargell, the former baseball player, plans to marry Margaret Elizabeth Weller, a crisis counselor, in January.
Miss Weller, 33 years old, is the executive director of the Crisis Line-Open House, a youth and rape counseling center in Wilmington, N.C.
She graduated from North Carolina State University.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Fritz W. Weller of Wilmington.
Her father, who is retired, was a postman in Wilmington.
Her mother, Katherine Scott Weller, also retired, was an administrative assistant in the New Hanover (N.C.) County school system.


THE DISTURBING PHOTOGRAPHY OF SALLY MANN
As a repeated visitor to Sally Mann's home, I was dismayed to read Anne Bernays's letter commenting that Mann's children have "ice in their veins." On the contrary, all three of her children are warm and affectionate.
Perhaps Bernays would prefer the rictuslike grin that so many children automatically paste on in response to a camera.
I wonder which reaction should be more troubling, the steady gaze of the Mann children or the insincere grimace encouraged by parents when they say, "Smile!" MARGARET MOULTON
Pasadena, Calif.


Capital Canadians


Lillian Chaparro, N. R. Sidorovich
Lillian Evette Chaparro, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Manuel Chaparro of Aguada, P.R., was married yesterday to Nicholas Raymond Sidorovich, a son of Theodore J. Sidorovich of St.
Petersburg, Fla., and Angela Anderson of Stapleton, S.I.
The Rev.
James E. Smith 2d performed the ceremony at the First Baptist Church in Hackensack, N.J.


Rutgers Has Shot At a Bowl
Rutgers kept its hopes for a bowl bid alive today in its final home game of the season.
Coming off a loss to Cincinnati, the Scarlet Knights beat West Virginia, 13-9, in a Big East Conference game before 22,295 fans at Rutgers Stadium.


Career Choice
To the Editor:
When film took the leap forward into sound, many stars fell from Hollywood's heavens simply because their vocal equipment did not measure up.
Should full male nudity become the norm, one wonders how many hunks might shrivel into insignificance.
FRANK O'DONNELL Rockville Center, N. Y.


Criminal Charges Make Outlook Grim for Collor
President Fernando Collor de Mello's political prospects grew bleaker this week as Brazil's Attorney General formally charged him with corruption for a criminal trial and the Senate promised a verdict by Christmas in a parallel impeachment trial.
A conviction in either trial would cause Mr.
Collor to be permanently removed from office.
On Sept. 29, a congressional vote forced him to surrender his powers to Vice President Itamar Franco for six months to allow the first impeachment trial in Brazil's history.


Sampling the Cartographer's Art; Searching and Researching In Two London Libraries
BEHIND locked doors on the mezzanine level of the British Library, a doorbell rings access to a nondescript room lined with row upon row of massive red-bound volumes, some of them nearly three feet high.
This is the map room, and it is one of the library's more spectacular but little-known treasures.
Hidden away in drawers and adjacent anterooms are an estimated two million items, ranging from two centuries' worth of detailed survey maps of the British Isles to the stunningly ornate work of Renaissance and medieval cartographers, whose maps more closely trace the landscape of their own imaginations than any real geography.


In the Region: Connecticut; Recent Sales
Milford, Conn. 188,000
35 Booras Lane  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 18-year-old raised ranch; oversized deck, above-ground swimming pool, 1 acre; taxes $3,449.
New Canaan, Conn. 740,000
465 Lost District  6-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 24-year-old colonial; billiard room, formal dining room, 4.1 acres; taxes $7,581.
North Haven, Conn. 335,000
13 Cromwell Heights  4 bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, newly built colonial; palladian windows, whirlpool tub, oversized kitchen, 0.5 acre; taxes not yet available.
Briarcliff Manor, N.Y. 342,500
155 Holbrook Lane  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 31-year-old ranch; foyer, fireplace, dining room, den; taxes $7,628.
Hartsdale, N.Y. 252,000
38 Poe Street
3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 63-year-old colonial; fireplace, den, laundry room; taxes $5,192.
Scarsdale, N.Y. 410,000
241 Rock Creek Lane
3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 40-year-old ranch; fireplace, dining room, den, finished basement, laboratory, laundry; taxes $11,855.
OTHER AREAS Edison, N.J. 195,000
743 Grove Street  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 23-year-old split level; finished basement, underground sprinkler system, new water heater; taxes $3,961.
Bethpage, L.I. 150,000
340 Martin Place  4-bedroom, 1-bath, 42-year-old Cape Cod; dining room, 1-car attached garage; taxes f$3,300.
Glen Cove, L.I. 170,000
10 Ridge Drive  4-bedroom, 1-bath, 37-year-old Cape Cod; fireplace, basement, 81- by 149-foot lot, 2-car attached garage; taxes $3,400.


Collectors to Have An Inaugural Ball
THE election of Bill Clinton offers a rich opportunity for hobbyists who are more interested in the cancellation on an envelope than in the stamp.
Presidents seem to be a favored topic for postmark collectors who seek mementos of inaugurations, birthdays and deaths.
Herewith is a primer on how to assemble philatelic souvenirs of Inauguration Day, Jan. 20, 1993.


An Australian Family With a Rebel Daughter
IT is not that a play with a line like "Anyone for cricket?" cannot be written about women these days -- the time designation for "Jigsaws," an atavistic play about feminism, at the Stamford Theater Works.
It is just that the playwright Jennifer Rogers's notion of the present seems to be a thing of the past.
In one Australian family -- five women spanning three generations -- the center of a crisis is the rebel Alex who's looking for a way to tell the others that she is a lesbian.


All Over State, Latin Redux
THE game was Simon Says, but in Mary Lou Mitchell's sixth-grade class at the Summit Middle School one recent morning, it had a different ring.
"Simon dicet caput," Mrs.
Mitchell said.
The students -- or most of them, at least -- touched their heads.
And on the game went, through "auris," "nasus" and "dentes."


Angola: From the Brink of Peace Back to the Brink of War
FOR anyone who hoped that the end of the cold war might also calm the longstanding conflicts in the third world that were stoked by it, Angola may be a profound disappointment.
After a brief interlude of peace culminating in free elections in late September, the nation appears ready to descend into civil war once more.
More than 1,000 people have been killed in recent weeks in fighting between Government and guerrilla forces touched off by the refusal of the rebels' leader, Jonas Savimbi, to accept defeat at the polls.
That interlude of peace and how it unraveled was chronicled by Alex Tehrani, a photographer who spent nine weeks in the southwest African nation.
His pictures capture the descent from near-democracy to near-chaos, beginning with mid-September political rallies and ending with the dumping of the first bodies on city streets.


A Year in the Life


A Spot of Glamour
The distinctive spots of leopards are this fall's most popular accessory, and they are all fake.
The photolike realism of the markings on fake furs, knitted fabrics and diaphanous chiffons have supplanted skins of real leopards, which gave yesterday's movie queens an exotic look.
Theda Bara, Gloria Swanson, Marlene Dietrich and others used to appear swathed in the real thing.


Columbia Stuns Cornell And Gets a Rare Victory
Cornell came to Columbia's Wien Stadium in Manhattan yesterday with a single loss in Ivy League play, and a serious chance to earn at least a share of the Ivy title.
The victory also marked only the second time in the last 14 seasons that Columbia (2-7) had managed to win more than one game.
The loss ended the seven-game winning streak for the Big Red (7-2) and effectively eliminated them from the Ivy title hunt.


He Said . . . She Said . . . Who Did What?
A year after the Clarence Thomas-Anita Hill hearings, the issue of sexual harassment remains in the air.
And not only in daily life.
Take "Oleanna," a new play by David Mamet.
Yet who is harassing whom in this two-character drama at the Orpheum?
A man is targeted on half the playbill covers, a woman on the other half -- both with a bull's-eye.
The message, if there is one, seems to be: make up your own mind.
The college student Carol (played by Rebecca Pidgeon) and the professor John (W. H. Macy) meet in his office.
She is doing badly in his course and can't understand the work.
He, about to receive tenure and buy a new house, offers to tutor her.


An Audience For the Lyrical
To the Editor:
As publisher of Kenneth Pitchford's English translation of Rainer Maria Rilke's "Sonnets to Orpheus" (Purchase Press, 1980), I read with interest Will Crutchfield's article on Richard Danielpour's new musical setting of six of the poems  [ "A 'Musician' in Spite of Himself," Nov. 1 ] .


'Mame' to Mozart in the Afternoon
MATINEE concerts are a boon to those who prefer not to venture forth after dark, as well as to parents wanting to introduce their children to the joys of music.
Fortunately, opportunities abound this week, outnumbering, in fact, the evening events.
The Bronx Arts Ensemble opens its Carousel Children's Concerts today at 2 P.M. at the Y.M.-Y.W.H.A. in Riverdale (on Arlington Avenue).
The music is by Bach, but the Vagabond Puppets will be there to act out the tale of "The Bremen Town Musicians." More information can be obtained by calling (718) 601-7399.


Judge and Heiress: The Rise and Fall of a Private Affair
It began, as perhaps most affairs do, with a combination of trust and longing.
Thrown together years ago by family links and a complex network of business and legal ties, Judge Sol Wachtler and Joy A. Silverman, both prominent, both wealthy, both married, grew from friends to associates to lovers over time.
In public, each promoted the other's talents, character and prospects with a vigor that struck some acquaintances as a pact: two driven people hoisting each other up the top ranks of Republican power circles and New York society.
Most friends thought them merely loyal allies operating out of mutual respect: he, at 62, almost a father figure to a stunning 45-year-old who had entrusted him with her estate.
Evolution of a Fund-Raiser
Few, even in the closed, close worlds that made up their interlinked social milieus, understood that the relationship was intimate.
Perhaps only a handful knew the devotion Joy Silverman once felt to a man she revered as honorable, honest and intelligent -- "her best friend," a close friend said -- or how it dissipated as she grew from under his shadow.


Panamanians Will Vote Today On Changes That Ban an Army
Panamanians vote Sunday in a constitutional referendum that many view as a verdict on the fragile Government that took office during the American invasion three years ago.
Some Panamanians believe a yes vote would help consolidate democratic changes introduced by President Guillermo Endara, the reluctant and easygoing leader of the coalition that won elections in May 1989 but could not take office.


In the Region: Connecticut; Detached Homes With a Condo Concept
WHILE unsold attached condominiums continue to clog the market and have declined steeply in value, the condominium concept offering detached homes with maintenance-free exteriors, landscaping, roads and recreation at reasonable cost is gaining acceptance throughout the country.
"In Connecticut it harks back to the compact New England village surrounded by open space," said Dennis K. Stone, developer of 15 detached condominium homes at High Meadow in Brookfield.
"Unfortunately, we have spent the past 20 years destroying it with one- and two-acre zoning regulations."


Time to Clean Up, Mr. Bossidy
To The Editor:
I read with great interest "Allied-Signal's No-Excuses Boss Tries for an Encore" (Nov. 1) about Lawrence A. Bossidy, Allied-Signal's chief executive.
My interest in Allied-Signal is the one million tons of chromium-bearing waste scattered around the ballparks, residences and businesses of this community which Allied's chemical business dumped when it left here in 1955.


Irish Catch Penn State at End of Series
They were brought here for moments like this.
Near the end of a Notre Dame season that had singed the Fighting Irish with controversy and frustration, two seniors in their final game at Notre Dame Stadium created something both old and new: a frenzied celebration of thousands.


Nicole E. Schefler, Brad I. Silver
Nicole Emilie Schefler, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Sylvan Schefler of New York, was married last evening to Brad Ira Silver, a son of Sheila Kliger of Merion, Pa.
Rabbi Baruch Silverstein performed the ceremony at the Plaza in New York.
Mrs.
Silver, 24 years old, is an associate producer and a production coordinator at Lancit Media Productions Ltd., a producer of family television programming in New York.
She and her husband graduated from the University of Pennsylvania.
Her father is the chairman of Crystal Asset Management, an investment-management company in New York.


U.S. Tries to Blunt Harm of Remark on Liberia Peacekeepers
State Department officals are trying to contain diplomatic damage caused by a senior department official whose off-the-cuff remarks may have compromised the effectiveness of a West African peacekeeping force.
The official, Herman J. Cohen, Assistant Secretary for African Affairs, was quoted this week by the British Broadcasting Corporation as having suggested that the United Nations take over the role of mediator in the Liberian civil war.
That role has been filled by a group of West African nations known as the Economic Community of West African States.


How U.S. Is Organizing Assault on Carjacking
On Oct. 25, President Bush signed a law imposing Federal penalties for carjacking, a crime that has gripped the public's imagination since a Maryland woman was dragged to her death in Washington in September while trying to stop thieves fleeing in a car with her infant still in it.
In the last few weeks the crime has received further attention after several carjackings and other violent incidents involving stolen cars, particularly the killing of Gail F. Shollar of Edison, N.J.
She was killed on Election Day by a man who stole her van while she and her daughter were on a routine errand in Piscataway.


Profile/Marvin Runyon; 730,000 Employees and a Challenge
The JOB has been called Mission Impossible, and the list of particulars is daunting.
The work force is bigger than the American payrolls of G.M. and I.B.M. combined.
The unions are powerful.
The pay is modest.
Costs are rising.
Service is patchy.
The customers are grumbling.
Rivals are nibbling away more of the business.
Meddling politicians are an ever-present threat.
No wonder the previous occupant of the office said the job was like being a "public whipping boy."
The job title that comes with this litany of headaches?
Postmaster General of the United States.


Passing the Jug
Time was when a wine maker knew his place.
If you fancied a jug wine, you bought Gallo.
If you preferred a fine wine, you bought, well, almost anything else.
Now, whatever your choice may be, Ernest and Julio Gallo want to be your wine makers.
America is drinking less but drinking better, and Gallo is on top of the trend.


Susan Ann Levy, Stuart Garawitz
Susan Ann Levy, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Benjamin N. Levy of New Haven, was married yesterday evening to Stuart Neal Garawitz, a son of Yetta Garawitz of Union, N.J., and the late Milton Garawitz.
Rabbi Herbert Brockman performed the ceremony at Congregation Mishkan Israel in Hamden, Conn.
Mrs.
Garawitz, 32 years old, is an administrator at Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center in New York.
She graduated from Connecticut College and received master's degrees in social work and in public health from Columbia University.
Her father is a professor emeritus of social studies at Southern Connecticut State University in New Haven.
Her mother, Sondra R. Levy, is a retired media specialist with the Hamden public school system.


Testing for Rabid Raccoons Isn't Easy
ON a recent Sunday Susan R. Bresler of Mamaroneck went out to her car parked behind her house and saw a raccoon with its head down, walking in circles.
She decided to call the police.
"It looked very strange and sick," she said.
"When the police arrived, they notified the Humane Society, and then they shot it and took it away."


THE GUIDE
HOLLYWOOD LOVERS
"Mack and Mabel," the tragic love story of Mack Sennett, the silent film producer, and Mabel Normand, his most famous star, has been made into a musical and will be presented at Southern Connecticut State University in New Haven Friday through Sunday and Dec. 3-5.


A New Director of Legislative Traffic
Bernard R. Sullivan will take on in January what is in many ways the ultimate political-insider job at the Connecticut State Capitol: chief of staff in the office of the Speaker.
Mr.
Sullivan says he's had a lifetime of career preparation: as a policeman.
Mr.
Sullivan, who is 49 years old and a Democrat, was chief of police for Hartford, state Police Commissioner and director of security for the Hartford Insurance Group.


Spies &amp; Thrillers
Two otherwise dissimilar novels have one thing in common: they deal with the Criminal Investigation Division of the United States Army, and we have not had many such books in recent years.
JADE LADY BURNING, by Martin Limon (Soho, $19.95), is a remarkable first novel set in South Korea.
THE GENERAL'S DAUGHTER, by Nelson DeMille (Warner, $21.95), takes place at an Army camp in Georgia.
It is not often that so impressive a debut as "Jade Lady Burning" appears.
Mr.
Limon had a 10-year hitch in South Korea and seems to know everything about the country and our Army.
But where did he find that compact style, that accurate ear for dialogue, that combination of tough-guy talk and sensitivity?
A bit of Hemingway, perhaps.
But it's mostly Limon, and one can't wait for his next effort.


HOME ON THE RANGE
Molly O'Neill can eat red meat with a clear conscience so long as it is American buffalo.
Buffalo meat has just half the calories, fat and cholesterol of beef and double the protein.
And buffalo ranching makes good ecological sense for the American prairie.
It's their home and, unlike cattle, buffalo leave ample browsing room for deer and antelope, and even coexist with prairie dogs.
If any creature is "home on the range," it's the American buffalo.
ALAN D. HUTCHISON
Reno


Ah, Macy's. The Pity of It All.
To The Editor:
"A Key for a Macy Comeback" (Nov. 1) would be very amusing it it were not so pitiful.
After decades of retailing, they finally discovered what is taught daily in merchandising 101: You should buy and have available what the customer wishes to purchase.


Cleaning Up Abuses
The remedy most educators prescribe for New York City's chronic problem with corrupt or indolent school custodians is to make principals their bosses.
The snag to that solution is that too many principals will say thanks, but no thanks.
They are not eager for the authority, says their union's president, Donald Singer, because with meager funds for repairs and supplies, they know they will be blamed, instead of the custodians, for filthy or hazardous conditions.


Finding the Best Judges In Nassau County
"Judgeships and Cross Endorsements"  [ Oct. 25 ]  gave a good picture of the highly political process used in determining endorsements for judicial candidates.


X-Man Hardly Tiptoes Through Garden
This time, Xavier McDaniel decided to put his bench time to good use.
No fuming over the coach's decision to sit him.
No grumping or harumphing or even pouting because he wasn't in the game.
This time, he scanned the Madison Square Garden stands.
Picked out Patrick Ewing's wife, Rita, among the spectators.
Grinned a little to himself.
Got prepared, should the proper moment arise.


Mutual Funds; Caution as the Quarter Plays Out
For investors who want to buy mutual fund shares now, the word from experts is: Use caution.
Most funds pay capital gains dividends in November and December.
While at first glance buying shares in funds that will soon pay dividends seems like a good idea, it is not, because of taxes due on the dividends.


Russians Move Mountain of Files
RUSSIA'S efforts to track down all the Americans who became caught up in the Soviet Union's terror machine have been an admirable act of compassion and contrition.
What is equally remarkable is that Dimitry Volkogonov, the Russian military historian charged with working with the Americans, has been able to find them at all.
Even now, with some access to official archives and few constraints on free discussion, nobody can say even within several million souls how many people may have perished in the purges, camps, famines and executions, nor how many perished in World War II.
Only in the period from Nov. 1, 1935, to June 22, 1941, do records show that 19,840,000 were arrested and 7 million were shot.


Sauce For the Goose . . .
To the Editor:
Reading Suzanna Andrews's article "She's Bare. He's Covered. Is There a Problem?"  [ Nov. 1 ]  raised my blood pressure.
I am so sick and tired of the exploitative use of female nudity in the film industry, with no similar male exposure.
I have been fed the bromide that women don't want to see naked men.
That is such nonsense!
It is an idea promulgated by men who don't want to get caught in that comparison bind that we women have been in all our lives.


Helen Marie Murphy, Paul Sweeney
Helen Marie Murphy, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James F. Murphy of Garden City, L.I., was married there yesterday to Paul Bernard Sweeney, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
James B. Sweeney of Irvington, N.Y.
Msgr.
R.
Emmet Fagan, an uncle of the bride, officiated at St.
Joseph's Church.
Msgr.
John Fagan, another uncle of the bride, took part in the ceremony.
Mrs.
Sweeney, 26 years old, is an associate in the New York law office of Denise M. Dunleavy.
She graduated from Georgetown University.
She and her husband received law degrees from Fordham University.
Her father is the president of the New York Shipyard Corporation, a ship-repair concern in Brooklyn.
Her mother, Helen M. Murphy, is a former second-grade teacher at the Woods Road School in North Babylon, L.I.


Montana Comes Back, But to What Role?
After a week of throwing in virtual secrecy, surprising the 49ers, Joe Montana this last week started working out under the gaze of trainers and football people.
"And he looks pretty good; he really does," said Carmen Policy, the team's president.
"It appears he can throw without pain."


B. J. Bures, Joseph E. Barnes
Dr. and Mrs.
George J. Bures Sr. of West Islip, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter Barbara Jean Bures to Joseph Edward Barnes, a son of Genevieve J. Barnes of Virginia Beach, Va., and the late Comdr.
Harry G. Barnes Jr.
A June wedding is planned.
Ms.
Bures, who is 29 years old, is known as B. J. She is an architect in New York.
She graduated from the University of Michigan, from which she also received a master's degree in architecture.
Her father is an obstetrician and gynecolgist in Amityville, L.I.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-17  MOOD OF HIGH NOON IN MOSCOW


Kurds in Iraq Warned by Turkey, Iran and Syria
The Foreign Ministers of Turkey, Iran and Syria condemned the creation of a de facto Kurdish state in northern Iraq today and warned Kurdish leaders that they would not allow it to lead to the partition of the country.
"We are concerned about the transfer of this de facto partition of Iraq into a permanent reality," said Foreign Minister Farouq al-Sharaa of Syria.
"We want to avoid a situation where this partition is inevitable."


Beverly Hills
To the Editor: The Beverly Hills Hotel was not always the glamorous spot that David Masello described in "Life Atop the Hills of Beverly" (Aug. 23).
In 1933 the Beverly Hills Hotel proper was closed.
This was the Depression.
Vacant, the large rambling hotel resembled a haunted house.
Perhaps the tennis courts were kept up.
I don't remember a pool, at least not one filled with water.
The grounds, however, were always beautiful.
The management did rent its bungalows and maintained a staff to provide maid service.


Making the Transition to a Little Rest and Recreation


Nina Troster, Andrew W. Hay
Vincent Riggio of New York and Judith D. Toland of Avoca, Wis., have announced the engagement of their daughter Nina Riggio Troster to Andrew Wellington Hay, the son of Nicholas R. T. Hay of Old Black Point, Conn., and the late Anne Hay.
A January wedding is planned.
Ms.
Troster, 32 years old, is a student at Columbia University.
Her previous marriage ended in divorce.
Her father is an investor in New York.
Her mother is a professor of anthropology at Alverno College in Milwaukee.


Leave It To the Imagination
To the Editor:
Having just read the list of forthcoming films that center on "erotic obsession that leads to trouble"  [ "The March of the Sex Fiends" ] , I am experiencing ambivalent feelings of rage and sadness.
Rage that our children and grandchildren are growing up seeing explicit, casual, sometimes cruel sex and always man's inhumanity to man.
Sadness that the figures at the box office prove that the masses line up for this kind of titillation.


Frank Perdue or Barbara Walters She Isn't
Diane Von Furstenberg does not have a bright, cheery face made for television.
Selling her new line of silk clothing on the QVC shopping channel on Nov. 7, Ms.
Furstenberg -- appearing with a QVC host, Jane Rudolph Treacy (at left below) -- seemed uncomfortable as an on-air huckster.
Although she eventually relaxed, she often looked to the side of the set and then down, pursing her lips or running her fingers through her dark hair.


From the Economic Doctors, Diagnoses and Some Cures
ALLEN SINAI Chief economist, the Boston Company in Boston


Maybe Wrong, But Not Illegal
To the Sports Editor:
Sportswriters often assume that the rules of the National Collegiate Athletic Association are the duly enacted laws of the land.
Hence, in his profile of Rollie Massimino, the new chief executive officer at U.N.L.V.'s basketball factory, Malcolm Moran mentioned the "illegal" out-of-season practices ascribed to Massimino's predecessor, Jerry Tarkanian ("Massimino Joins High Rollers," The Times, Nov. 1).


Princeton Clinches Tie For Ivy League Title
It took Princeton more than half the game to find the Yale goal.
But once the Tigers located it, they came back again and again.
They defeated the Bulldogs, 36-7, before a crowd of 16,450 at Yale Bowl and achieved at least a tie for the Ivy League championship.
Princeton improved to 8-1 over all and 6-0 in the league.
Ahead lies Dartmouth (7-2 and 5-1) next Saturday at Palmer Stadium.
A victory would give the Tigers their first outright Ivy title since 1964.


Kristen Hogin, William Spears Jr.
Kristen Evangeline Hogin, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Philip E. Hogin of Greenwich, Conn., was married there yesterday to William Gerli Spears Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Spears of Greenwich.
The Rev.
Dr.
Avery C. Manchester, a United Methodist minister, officiated at the First Church of Round Hill.
The Rev.
Edward J. Howley, a Roman Catholic priest, took part in the ceremony.
Mrs.
Spears, 30 years old, is a preschool teacher in the day-care center of the Mead School in Greenwich.
She graduated from Pine Manor College.
Her father, who is retired, was an executive vice president of A.T.&amp;T.
Technologies in New York.
She is a granddaughter of the late Laurence S. Harrison, a research director for International Business Machines, and of the late Ralph M. Hogin, a chief financial officer of the Atchison, Topeka &amp; Santa Fe Railway.


Voice for the New


More U.S. Support for Russia
Returning from 16 months as Ambassador in Moscow, first to the Soviet Union and then to Russia, reminds me again that people change their minds.
This is true in the United States and in Russia.
In my lifetime, Americans have changed their minds about Prohibition, isolationism and racial and sexual equality.
They have changed their minds several times about the role of government in the economy and society.
The ebb and flow of changing minds is what politics and government are all about.


BUSH'S GAMBLE
I was amused by William Safire's analysis of the Bush campaign ("Bush's Gamble," Oct. 18).
His dissection of the rifts and squabbles of the various Republican factions sounded uncannily like the Democrats' tales of woe after the '80, '84 and '88 conventions.


Bookshelf
Additional titles of interest:
SOMEWHERE TODAY.
Written and illustrated by Bert Kitchen.
Candlewick Press. $15.95. (Ages 5 and up) Curious and ordinary incidents in nature -- two bald eagles wrestling in the air, Western grebes running over water, a spotted skunk doing a handstand -- are caught in finely detailed illustrations.
The comments are brief and clear.


Sandy Hook Journal; Where Secrets and Surprises Await the Visitor Year Round
VISITORS are often startled by their first glimpse.
Viewed on a clear day from the drawbridge off Route 36 in Sea Bright, this six-and-a-half-mile sandspit seems to extend north all the way to New York City.
Barely half a mile wide at its thickest, it looks as though it could be taken in during a single afternoon's hike.
Yet there are secrets and surprises within its 1,655 sandy acres.
As one drives north onto the Hook, the sandspit abruptly widens, and the vistas are obscured by hills covered with dense scrub and stands of holly trees, some growing up to 60 feet high.
Side roads start splitting off and disappearing into the vegetation, and one begins to feel lost.


Frederique Moal, Dennis F. Lackner
Frederique Moal, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Yves C. Moal of Aix-en-Provence, France, was married yesterday to Dennis Finn Lackner, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Michael R. Lackner of New York.
Canon Hugh Wybrew performed the Anglican ceremony at St.
Mary Magdalen Church in Oxford, England.


Believe It, Women Elected This President
To the Editor:
The women in this country played a major role in the Clinton election victory.
According to your Nov. 5 analysis of the demographics, 46 percent versus 37 percent of women preferred the Clinton-Gore ticket, yet you say that the abortion issue was a factor for only one out of eight voters.


Wachtler Role at Issue In Dispute Over a Will
Sol Wachtler appears to have violated New York State judicial rules as well as a Bar Association Code of Conduct by serving as the executor of a contested $24 million estate, from which Joy A. Silverman inherited nearly $3 million, according to legal experts.
Mr.
Wachtler served as executor of the estate of Alvin B. Wolosoff, who was Mrs.
Silverman's stepfather and the uncle of Mr.
Wachtler's wife.
As executor, Mr.
Wachtler earned nearly $500,000 in commissions -- about four times his annual salary as a judge on the State Appeals Court.


Good Fellers
FIDELITY
Five Stories. By Wendell Berry. 201 pp. New York: Pantheon Books. $20.


Believe It, Women Elected This President; Holiday for Voters
To the Editor:
Last Sunday night, Nov. 1, in answer to a cab driver's question, I said Tuesday wasn't a holiday, everything will be open, and everybody will go to work.
Parents will take their kids to school or day care and pick them up afterward.
Commuters will ride to work, far from their polling places.
All this pleased my driver because he wouldn't lose business, but I thought it's absurd for us to try to vote while putting in an eight-hour day or more.
If your commute is a couple of hours a day (not to mention train delays and traffic jams), how much time does that give you to vote?


Conversations: Katrina Haslip; An AIDS Activist Who Helped Women Get Help Earlier
IT took Katrina Haslip 15 months to tell anyone, even her fellow inmates in an AIDS awareness group at the Bedford Hills Correctional Facility, that she had the virus.
She said she felt "dirty." Had she been free, she says, she would have gone back to the drugs that helped turn her into a prostitute, a pickpocket and a convict.
But by last month, when the Federal Centers for Disease Control announced plans to expand the AIDS definition, Ms.
Haslip had nothing to hide.
Since her release in 1990, she has talked about her infection at conferences, protests and in one-on-one outreach work.
She has met with C.D.C officials in private, and berated them in public, as she doggedly pushed for the new definition that she says will help get women tested and the disease diagnosed early, when treatment is more effective.


Sampling the Cartographer's Art; Keeping the World Up to Date
THE former Czechoslovak President, Vaclav Havel, recently lamented the difficulties of coming up with a name for the Czech half of his soon-to-be-split country.
To be absolutely accurate, and perhaps avoid future problems, he said the new country might have to be named, "The central European civic democratic republic of Czech citizens and some other ethnic groups living on the territory of the former Bohemian monarchy."
Mr.
Havel, who is unhappy about the breakup of his country, was indulging in some bittersweet humor.
But for the world's harried map makers, the scheduled division of Czechoslovakia on Jan. 1, 1993, is a grim matter indeed and merely the latest in a series of upheavals that have transformed cartography in recent years from painstaking craft to tumultuous roller coaster.


Speaking the Language of Business on Behalf of the Mayor
After nearly two years of negotiations, the Dinkins administration had by last spring offered the Morgan Stanley Group what even the investment bank called very attractive incentives to keep it from moving its headquarters to Stamford, Conn.
But to the frustration of city officials, Morgan Stanley held out throughout the summer.
Staying might be too big a gamble, given New York's long history of raising business taxes, its leaders said.


Crown Jewel
To the Editor: Stephen Drucker's "Choppy Maiden Voyage" (Oct. 11) describing the calamities visited upon us passengers on the first sailing of the Crown Jewel was, if anything, understated.
Among omissions we experienced were the inefficient boarding process in Barcelona, the nonfunctioning air-conditioning control; cabins too small to accommodate comfortably furnishings and two passengers at the same time; the construction-installation work; closed public bathrooms (renovations required); excessively salted food and the stressful hours and days for this passenger, whose normally adaptable dietary requirements were specifically described months in advance.
Let us not omit the rigors of the charter flight to Barcelona and delays in luggage delivery or nondelivery.


Green Has Worked His Way to the Top
Step by step, rung by rung, Dennis Green has climbed up the football coaching ladder for the last 21 years, maintaining his balance with a quiet confidence and evenhanded sensitivity for players and relationships.
Throughout his life, Green has focused on a similar blueprint for personal growth -- to clench each bar and reach higher.


'Murphy Brown' Meets 'Life With Father'
Dan Quayle may be a lame duck, but his legacy to "Murphy Brown" lives on.
In last week's episode of the series (seen Mondays at 9 P.M. on CBS), Eldin's job description officially changed from house painter to nanny, and the show ended with some blunt lines that seemed yet another response to the Vice President's criticism of Murphy's single parenthood.
"Did you hear that, Avery?" said Eldin (played by Robert Pastorelli) to the baby, whose new name was one of television's worst-kept secrets.
"We are now officially a threesome."


Weatherstripping Makes for a Snug Door
ENTRY doors and doors leading to unheated parts of a house need weatherstripping to eliminate drafts around the edges.
Most entry doors have some form of weatherstripping, and often it is a type that can be restored if it has lost its effectiveness.
With other kinds or where no weatherstripping exists, installing new weatherstripping is usually easy.
To test weatherstripping, wait for a windy day.
Then close the door and move a tissue or a lighted candle slowly around the edges of the door on the inside.
Excess movement of the tissue or flame indicates draftiness caused by air leaking past the stripping.


A Word of Praise
To the Editor: Elizabeth McDermott's letter in the Travel section about her difficulty in replacing a stolen airline ticket (Oct. 11), prompts me to write that the problem is not necessarily universal.
Last June, the office of American Airlines in Zurich immediately replaced two stolen tickets at a nominal charge and with no paperwork other than what I had already furnished to the United States Consulate to obtain new passports.
Perhaps my request was made a little more convincing by copies of the tickets, faxed to me by my travel agent.


5-Year-Old Injured as Car Jumps Curb
A 5-year-old boy was in critical condition last night after he and three women, including his mother, were struck by a car that mounted a curb in Harlem, the police said.
Police officers in two radio cars had twice tried to stop the car shortly before the pedestrians were hit because it was being driven erratically and had plowed into two parked cars, a police spokeswoman, Sgt.
Tina Mohrmann, said.
The car turned out to be stolen.


In Salvador, Will Officers Now Salute Civilians?
NEXT month, if things go as planned, some of El Salvador's most powerful military officers will begin to carry out orders that seem almost to defy the laws of Central American physics.
Implicitly, they will acknowledge having committed serious human-rights abuses or that they are otherwise unfit to serve a peaceful, democratic society.
And because civilians have told them to do so, they will step down from their posts before their allotted terms are up.
Yet after agreeing to a "purification" of their ranks as part of the peace plan signed last January, commanders fought bitterly to shield the identities of those named by a civilian panel for dismissal or transfer.
With the peace accords in jeopardy early this month, leftist rebels compromised: The purged officers are now to be hidden in a mass of routine movements and, for good measure, some will likely be given more honors as they go.
Salvadorans may end up guessing at those responsible for some of the war's worst atrocities from the medals they get.


SCARY MONSTERS
Lewin's speculation that conservatives "never got over the childhood fear that Mommy will go away and never come back" could explain their fear of the empowerment of women.
This fear of "uncontrolled" women might also explain their apparent fear of sexuality in general.
I believe that there is a connection between psychological motivation and political persuasion, both left and right.
Conservatives appear to be uncomfortable with the sexual aspect of human nature and liberals seem equally uncomfortable with the aggressive aspect.
As we are simultaneously aggressive and sexual animals, tension and disagreement are insured.
STEPHEN GERARD DIETEMANN
Troy, N.Y.


Views of Fisher Case A Motley Group
"Amy Fisher Case: Parable or Aberration"  [ Oct. 18 ]  was deeply disappointing.
Is it really reporting to poll a group of citizens for their views of the case?


Wall Street; The Theory of Relativity for the London Market
IN Britain, it looks like the London stock market has been surging.
In Frankfurt, that same stock market looks dull.
In New York it looks like a disaster.
The fate of British stocks since Britain was forced out of Europe's Exchange Rate Mechanism in mid-September shows that currencies do matter.
Since the end of August, the Financial Times-Stock Exchange 100 index has soared 17 percent measured in pounds, but only 2 percent measured in marks.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  Southern League  CHATTANOOGA LOOKOUTS -- Named Pat Kelly manager.
Basketball  National Basketball Association  MIAMI HEAT -- Signed Grant Long, forward, to a seven-year contract.
Football  National Football League  INDIANAPOLIS COLTS -- Placed Bill Schultz, offensive tackle, on injured reserve.
Signed Ron Mattes, offensive tackle.
PITTSBURGH STEELERS -- Activated Mark Didio, wide receiver, from the practice squad.
Waived Albert Bentley, running back.
Hockey  National Hockey League  RANGERS -- Sent Corey Hirsch, goalie, to Binghamton of the American Hockey League.


Classroom Lessons About a 'Fragile' World
VINCENTE MORALES, Urmeel Patel and Tina Lopez, all third-grade students at the Wallace School in Hoboken, were clustered around the computer, looking at an aerial map on the screen.
It was a map of Hoboken, a one-square-mile city on the Hudson River across from Manhattan.
"Look, there is where we live," the children said in unison as they looked at the screen.


N.Y.R.A. Feels Sting Of a Critical Audit
The state's confrontation with the New York Racing Association escalated yesterday when the details of a state audit were made known that disallowed some expenditures by the association and questioned others at a time of dwindling profits.
The audit was prepared by Edward V. Regan, the state comptroller, who sharply reminded the management of N.Y.R.A. that the law "states that a nonprofit racing association shall operate in a sound economical, efficient and effective manner so as to produce a reasonable revenue for the support of government." Regan charged the N.Y.R.A. with "management judgments and accounting decisions that we assert are unreasonable, excessive and inconsistent" with state law.


Balancing the Power at the Corporate Top, British Style
AFTER ousting Robert C. Stempel as chairman and chief executive, the board of the General Motors Corporation created what for companies in the United States is an unusual management structure.
It appointed John F. (Jack) Smith Jr. as chief executive from within the ranks of management but gave the chairman's title -- and ultimate authority over the company's direction -- to an outside director, John G. Smale.
Only a handful of other corporations in the United States have installed an outside director as chairman.
But the practice has long been common in Britain.
And with boards in the United States becoming more assertive, and occasionally imposing greater control, as in the case of G.M., analysts and executives said the British experience might hold lessons for companies in the United States.


New Chief, Old Order
Bill Clinton campaigned and won as the candidate of a new Democratic Party.
The trouble is that the old one is alive and waiting for him when he arrives in Washington.
Taming it will prove a long struggle, and the President-elect is already off to a shaky start.
News analysis, page 34.


'Lucia' as a Spine-Tingler
It is almost an exact analogy to call Sir Walter Scott the Stephen King of his day.
His action-packed novels, and the theatrical works based on them, filled the same need for thrilling escapism in the early 19th century that Mr.
King's spine-tinglers do today.
The English musicologist Winton Dean observed that no one would ever know how many operas had been based on Shakespeare, and something similar might be said about operatic treatments of Scott.
The most famous is Donizetti's "Lucia di Lammermoor" (1835), which will be presented in a new production by Francesca Zambello on Thursday evening at the Metropolitan Opera.
"Lucia" is one of the relatively few operas that have been performed continually since their premieres.
Its popularity is due primarily to its stirring, melodic score -- especially the title part, one of the juiciest ever written for coloratura soprano.
Yet the piece has also survived in large measure because of its romanticism, both lowercase and uppercase: the opera serves as an important bridge between literary and musical Romanticism.


NOTES
The words "pro choice" in a Bloomingdale's newspaper advertisement for bell-bottoms last week confused some customers.
"We were referring to pants," said Ann Stock, a spokeswoman, who insisted that Bloomingdale's was not taking a position on abortion.
"When you see fashion of the last few months, there's a lot of choice in it. I just don't think it's anything deeper than that."
At Glamour magazine's Women-of-the-Year awards on Monday, Ellen Malcolm, the president of Emily's List, the women's political action committee, wore a pin made of shattered glass.
"It's my glass ceiling pin," she said.
The $40 pins are made by Susan Harris of Manhattan Beach, Calif.


It's a Circus Out There
IT was a formidable office door, an elegant floor-to-ceiling portal painted a shade of green that suggests financial stability and serious chic.
With its panes of frosted glass, it was also the kind of door that, when closed, says, "You don't even have to bother knocking because you can't come in."
It had closed abruptly at the Rubenstein/ Diacono Gallery in SoHo last Saturday night toward the end of the opening reception for the painter Victor Matthews.
Perry Rubenstein, the suave owner of the gallery, had grabbed Mr.
Matthews and the artist Ross Bleckner and hustled them into his office.
There's always a more private party at a private party.
You know how it is.


Taylor Thompson, Aaron Taylor
Anne Taylor Thompson, the daughter of Carole B. Fauth of Charlottesville, Va., and Forest C. Thompson Jr. of McLean, Va., was married yesterday to Aaron Winter Taylor, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert B. Taylor of Simsbury, Conn.
The Rev.
Bruce T. Powell performed the ceremony St.
Paul's Episcopal Church in Key West, Fla.
Mrs.
Taylor, who is 29 years old and is known as Taylor, is a project manager at Health Management Systems, a financial consulting concern in New York.
She graduated from the University of Virginia.
Her father is a consultant in Washington to the Federal systems marketing division of the International Business Machines Corporation.
She is a stepdaughter of Gerald W. Fauth of Charlottesville and Katherine Thompson of McLean.


Data Update
NATIONAL HOUSING TRENDS
*4*In thousands of units, seasonally adjusted annual rates)
Sept. 92
Sept. 91
Change
Starts
1,256
1,020
+23.1%
Completions
1,121
1,193
- 6.0%
Sales
617
499
+23.6%
*4*Source: Census Bureau, U.S. Department of Commerce
*4*MORTGAGE INTEREST RATES (Averages)
Last Week
Previous Week
Year Ago
New York
Conventional (30-yr)
8.61
8.51
8.92
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.42
5.39
6.58
New Jersey
Conventional (30-yr)
8.43
8.33
8.81
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.24
5.19
6.48
Connecticut
Conventional (30-yr)
8.49
8.41
8.81
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.06
5.04
6.48
Co-ops (N.Y.)
Conventional (30-yr)
8.63
8.56
9.05
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.81
5.94
7.07
*4*Indexes for Adjustable-Rate Mortgages*
1-yr. Treasury security
3.58
3.50
5.00
National Mortgage Contract Rate
7.44
7.44
8.93
*Rates on most adjustable mortgages are set 1 to 3 percentage points above these indexes.  (Source: HSH Associates)


Small Stocks Are Loved, but For How Long?
Stock prices in America have been surging upward since bottoming this summer, and to some it looks as though the bull market is back.
To those who focus on the Dow Jones industrial average, the above statement looks downright absurd.
Rarely has the action on the Dow seemed more boring than it has in recent months, and 1992 is bidding to be the year with the smallest moves in that index of any since World War II.


INSIDE
Trooper Felled by His Lies
Before his crimes unraveled his life, David Harding was a rising star with the New York State police.
Page 41.
Home Foreclosures Rise
The number of homes in foreclosure in the New York region has risen to levels not seen in decades.
Page 41.
Hometown Cheers a Champ
Riddick Bowe's heavyweight title is also a victory for Brownsville, Brooklyn, where he grew up.
Page 43.


On Hitting the Jackpot in Huntington
DINERS who tried Panama Hattie's in the past may have dismissed it as just another casual spot with mediocre food.
But in the last year, at a time when other Island restaurants were downgrading, Panama Hattie's started moving in the opposite direction.
Now, buffalo, rabbit, wild boar, venison, moulard duck foie gras, alligator-corn fritters and Muscovy duck ravioli are mainstays.
The publike restaurant, in a strip shopping center on Jericho Turnpike in Huntington, is serving some of the Island's most exciting food.


Weatherstripping Makes for a Snug Door
ENTRY doors and doors leading to unheated parts of a house need weatherstripping to eliminate drafts around the edges.
Most entry doors have some form of weatherstripping, and often it is a type that can be restored if it has lost its effectiveness.
With other kinds or where no weatherstripping exists, installing new weatherstripping is usually easy.
To test weatherstripping, wait for a windy day.
Then close the door and move a tissue or a lighted candle slowly around the edges of the door on the inside.
Excess movement of the tissue or flame indicates draftiness caused by air leaking past the stripping.


KLM: Orlando To Mexico City
Nonstop service four days a week between Orlando, Fla., and Mexico City was introduced by KLM Royal Dutch Airlines last month.
The flights, with first-class, business and tourist classes, leave Orlando at 3:45 P.M. on Monday, Tuesday, Thursday and Saturday, arriving in Mexico City at 5:55 P.M., Mexico City time.
From Mexico City, departure is on the same days at 8:40 P.M., arriving in Orlando at 12:30 A.M.


Art Hounds
YOU arrive at a banquet room at Sardi's for an exhibition of contemporary dog art and a lunch.
Your host is the Dog Fanciers Club.
You shake hands with men in breed-specific neckties, women with gold dog pins on their dresses.
Very festive.
Plunging into the show, you come upon four dog fanciers huddled around an oil of a Norfolk terrier, displayed on an easel.
Title: "Ch. Reidmar Sweet Georgia Brown."


Sandy A. Wald, Geoffrey Barnet
George and Regine Wald of Riverdale, the Bronx, have announced the engagement of their daughter Sandy Anne Wald to Geoffrey David Barnet, a son of Saretta Barnet of Sands Point, L.I., and the late Howard Barnet.
A January wedding is planned.
Ms.
Wald, 31 years old, is an associate in the law firm of Rosenman &amp; Colin in New York.
She graduated from Brown University and received a law degree from the University of California at Berkeley.


Don't Forget Sydney Maree
To the Sports Editor:
All free people must take heart at the New York City Marathon victory of the South African distance runner Willie Mtolo.
But the closing query of William C. Rhoden's column ("A Mercedes Waits for South Africa," The Times, Oct. 31), which asks, "How many will be able to follow in his footsteps?" seems to do some injustice to the accomplishments of a man in whose footsteps Mtolo actually runs, Sydney Maree.


Sports of The Times; A Different Brownsville Champion
THEY grew up in the same nasty neighborhood of Brooklyn, only a few blocks from each other.
Riddick Bowe remembers seeing Mike Tyson walking the Brownsville streets carrying a bag of cookies.
And he remembers jogging one day around the Betsy Head public pool when Tyson had returned to the neighborhood as the heavyweight champion.
"You'll never be a fighter, kid," Tyson teased him.
The kid was only 14 months younger, but to him it seemed like a generation.
Tyson, known in the neighborhood as Bummy Ike, had returned as the youngest heavyweight champion in history.
The kid named Riddick Bowe had not yet qualified for the 1988 Olympics in Seoul.


Rafting in Alaska
To the Editor: Having just returned from a 10-day rafting trip on the Tatshenshini River, which flows through British Columbia and Alaska, I read Roger Toll's article ("A Dozen Days on the Tatshenshini," Sept. 6) with great interest.
I too found this trip to be "one of the ultimate river experiences."
I was surprised, however, that the Juneau-based outfitter with whom my trip was scheduled, Alaska Discovery, was omitted from the article's list of outfitters.
Alaska Discovery has been organizing expeditions in Alaska for more than 20 years and more than half of their participants, myself included, are repeat customers.
It also donates a portion of its proceeds to conservation organizations; in particular, the Tat trip assisted Tatshenshini Wild, a group devoted to preserving the areas in their natural state and assuring that the proposed copper mine is not developed.


A Restorer's Motto: If It's Broken, Fix It
WHEN it comes to fixing up old buildings, the "rip and replace" mentality of the 1980's has all but disappeared, said John Seekircher, a historic-restoration craftsman in Ardsley who has made a specialty of repairing steel casement windows.
John N. Caputo agrees.
Mr.
Caputo, owner of Woodstone General Contractors in New Rochelle, is known for his skill in restoring old houses by using such techniques as hewing beams from poplar wood by hand and reproducing wooden moldings to match originals.


Crediting the Source Of a Cinderella Story
The article about storytelling on Nov. 1 was a delight, and we storytellers are grateful for it.
However, I would like to correct the implication that I collected the Cinderella story from Haiti.
The story about "Tipingee" is from "A Magic Orange Tree," a book of Haitian tales collected in Haiti by the renowned storyteller Diane Wolkstein.


Making Thanksgiving More Nutritional
AS with most holiday meals, the traditions of Thanksgiving are decidedly durable.
But this year, with the publication of the nutritional pyramid that recommends from 6 to 11 servings of bread and grain, 3 to 5 of vegetables and 2 to 4 of fruit each day, the many side dishes that accompany turkey have assumed even greater importance.
And it may be time to consider revising recipes for classic accompaniments.


Jews Evacuate 200, Muslims Included, in Bosnia
With Jews and Muslims seated side by side on chartered buses and ducking at the sound of sniper fire, more than 200 people escaped this cold and hungry city today in an evacuation effort by Sarajevo's small Jewish population.
For the evacuees, among them many Serbs and Croats, it was a journey of only a few minutes from the last roadblock of the mainly Muslim forces defending the Bosnian capital to the first checkpoint of the besieging Serbs.
But it may as well have been a lifetime.


Clinton's Quandary
Bill Clinton campaigned and won as the candidate of a new Democratic party.
Trouble is, the old one is alive and waiting for him when he comes to Washington in January.
So he set out this week to tame its most vigorous elements, the lobbyists and the special-interest groups that had helped to give the Democrats their unenviable reputation in the bad old days.
Those were the days when they usually lost Presidential elections and were widely scorned as an irresponsible band of tax-and-spend brigands.


Believe It, Women Elected This President; Making Taxes Fairer
To the Editor:
Experts are flocking to Little Rock, Ark., and Washington to urge Bill Clinton to tone down any suggestions of social reform in the program he will present to Congress and the nation.
Political pundits urge the middle and working classes not to hope for improvements, but to prepare for more sacrifices.


Claudia Rosenthal And A. D. Plepler
Claudia Rosenthal, a daughter of Ellen M. Wright of Manalapan, Fla., and Dr.
Mitchell S. Rosenthal of New York, was married in New York last evening to Andrew David Plepler, a son of Sanford and Connie Plepler of Manchester, Conn.
Cantor Richard Botton performed the ceremony at the Waldorf-Astoria.
Mrs.
Plepler, 29 years old, graduated magna cum laude from the University of Arizona and is a doctoral candidate in clinical psychology at George Washington University.
Her father is the president and founder of the Phoenix House Foundation, the drug-abuse service agency in New York.
Her mother is the owner of EMW Interiors, an interior design concern in New York.
The bride's stepfather, Joseph R. Wright Jr. of Manalapan, was the director of the Office of Management and Budget in the Reagan Administration and is now the vice chairman of W. R. Grace &amp; Company, the chemical company, in Boca Raton, Fla.
She is also a stepdaughter of Sarah S. Rosenthal of New York.


To The Mat; Now Clinton Decides Which Promises Came First
WHEN President Franklin D. Roosevelt was addressing a rally at Madison Square Garden during his re-election campaign of 1936, someone up in the rafters held up a sign that read: "We love him for the enemies he has made."
Indeed, Presidents are defined as much by the promises they keep as by the enemies they are willing to make by breaking or postponing campaign vows.
The intriguing question about Bill Clinton is: now that he is President-elect, which of his campaign promises will he push and which will he push aside?


What's the Problem with 'Hispanic'? Just Ask a 'Latino'
HISPANIC Heritage Month ended recently.
But someday -- if some "Hispanics" are to be made happy -- it may be Latino Heritage Month.
Or perhaps Colombian-Dominican-Cuban-Mexican-Puerto Rican-and-Other Heritage Month.
The month dedicated to celebrating the contributions of those nationalities to the United States -- and coinciding with the anniversary of Columbus's voyage -- sparked anew the debate about just what to call the 22.4 million American residents who said they were of "Spanish/Hispanic Origin" on the 1990 Census.


Why It All Adds Up
PI IN THE SKY
Counting, Thinking, and Being.
By John D. Barrow.
Illustrated. 317 pp.
New York:  Clarendon Press/ Oxford University Press. $25.
NUMBER
By John McLeish. Illustrated. 266 pp. New York:  Fawcett Columbine. $20.


Richard Smart, 79, Hawaiian Rancher With Broadway Ties
Richard Smart, a onetime Broadway performer who became the owner of the Parker Ranch on the island of Hawaii, one of the largest cattle ranches in the United States, died Thursday at his home on Oahu.
He was 79 years old.
A statement issued by the ranch said he had died of cancer, which had been discovered only in recent weeks.


The View From: Mystic Seaport; A National Landmark With a Penchant for Moving Around
WHEN the reviewers at the National Parks Service consider something for national landmark status, they typically want to know how much of the structure is original and whether it is at its original site.
But those standards had to be set aside for the Sabino, a steamship built in East Boothbay, Me., 84 years ago and today a working vessel at the Mystic Seaport Museum.


Malcolm X: The Facts, the Fictions, the Film
He was Malcolm Little when he was born on May 19, 1925, in Omaha, and El-Hajj Malik El-Shabazz when he fell in a fusillade of bullets on Feb. 21, 1965, in New York City.
In the relatively few years in between, he was Detroit Red, Satan and Malcolm X. Now, 27 years after his assassination, his complicated life has been refracted through the prisms of history and myth, confirming him as a compelling political presence but leaving conflicting interpretations of his legacy.
In his new film "Malcolm X," which opens on Wednesday, the director Spike Lee traces the black leader's dramatic evolution, from impoverished child, hustler and thief to convict to angry spokesman of the Nation of Islam contemptuous of "blue-eyed white devils" and, finally, after a pilgrimage to Mecca, to the powerful humanist who used his rhetorical gift to repudiate racial exclusivity before being gunned down at the age of 39.
The film stars Denzel Washington as Malcolm X, Angela Bassett as his wife, Betty Shabazz, and Al Freeman Jr. as Elijah Muhammad, leader of the Nation of Islam.


Drunken Driving: A Mysterious Drop In Conviction Rate
ARMED with some of the toughest drunken driving laws in the country, police officials in New Jersey have mounted an unprecedented campaign against intoxicated drivers in recent years.
Many municipal police departments have created special patrols and task forces, and county and state police officers have set up checkpoints on highways and near interstate bridges and tunnels.
In 1991, according to figures recently released by the State Division of Highway Traffic Safety, deaths attributed to drunken driving dropped to 147, the lowest in many years and a 25 percent decrease from 1990.
At the same time, arrests have risen 8 percent over 1990 to 46,844.
Yet the figures also show that the rate of drunken driving convictions has fallen to 70 percent, the lowest in 20 years and a continuation of a generally downward trend.


New York Designates Father Time
Some of New York City's great public clocks owe their lives to Marvin Schneider.
Compelled by passion -- and the frustration of seeing time frozen above city streets -- the 53-year-old bureaucrat in the City Human Resources Administration pokes into, tinkers with and patiently nurses ailing clocks on civic buildings.
On Friday, Mayor David N. Dinkins officially named Mr.
Schneider to the post he has played unofficially since 1979: City Clock Master.


November 8-14: Defendant's Rights; As New York's Chief Judge Resigns, His Presence Is Felt
As if to provide a dramatic example of former Chief Judge Sol Wachtler's influence on New York State's highest court, a brouhaha erupted last week over a recent ruling that extends defendants' rights to new limits.
Raising the possibility of new trials in cases involving the Central Park jogger, the Happy Land Social Club fire and the tourist from Utah stabbed to death on a subway platform, among others, the controversy followed news of the former judge's untimely resignation amidst a personal scandal.
At issue is the right of defendants to be present at "sidebars," the private conferences sometimes held between judges and potential jurors, even if defendants do not specifically request it.
Judge Wachtler pointed the way for the court, writing the opinion in a similar case in April in which a defendant had asked to be included and was refused.
In this current case, he voted with a unanimous court in holding that a request is unnecessary.
The Manhattan District Attorney, predicting chaos, said he will ask for a rehearing.


Gay-Rights Vote Challenged
Three Colorado cities, gay and lesbian groups and the American Civil Liberties Union are suing in Federal court to overturn the anti-gay-rights measure passed by Colorado voters last week, arguing that it violates the Constitution's guarantee of equal treatment under the law.
The measure prohibits the state or any of its cities from passing ordinances to protect homosexuals.
It has the effect of repealing the gay-rights laws in Denver, Aspen and Boulder, the three cities.


Scoping Out New Photography at the Modern
People for whom no art is fully valid unless it comes certified by a movement must be disappointed in the 90's.
So far the decade has simply slouched along, with no dominant direction anywhere to be found.
In this uncertain climate, trend seekers in photography are bound to flock to "New Photography 8," at the Museum of Modern Art through Jan. 12, hoping to winkle out some hint of where things stand in the medium, and what might be next.
After all, this eighth edition of the Mod ern's annual presentation of new work by underknown photographers has been expanded this year from three artists to eight.
Wall space for the show has been tripled, allowing for the inclusion of more than 100 prints.
Moreover, this year's "New Photography" has been organized by Peter Galassi, new director of the museum's department of photography, and many people will look to it for signs of things to come.


Playwright Focuses on Australian Feminism
IT'S not that a play with a line like "Anyone for cricket?" cannot be written about the circumstances of women these days -- that's the time designation in the program for "Jigsaws," an atavistic play about feminism, at the Stamford Theater Works -- it's just that the playwright Jennifer Rogers's notion of the present seems to be a thing of the past.
In one Australian family -- five women spanning three generations -- the center of a crisis is the rebel Alex, who is looking for a way to tell the others that she is a lesbian.


No Gondolas
But Venice benefited at a party, Nov. 11.


Hayes Status Could Have Big Effect on Yanks
Finding a third baseman was such a tremendous problem for the Yankees in 1991 that eight different players mishandled the position.
The Yankees seemed to parade a new candidate out to the hot corner each week.
That same predicament could afflict the Yanks again in five months because they might lose Charlie Hayes in the expansion draft.
If the Yankees made a glaring oversight on their protection list, it is probably their failure to protect Hayes.
Sure, Danny Tartabull and Steve Farr are bigger names, but their absence was expected.
The Yankees also left such minor league pitchers as Roberto Munoz and Rafael Quirico unprotected, but both are still at least a year from the majors.
Besides, the Yankees did protect six pitchers under the age of 24 so someone is bound to be exposed.
Inquiries Already Made
But leaving Hayes available and hoping that he sneaks through the first round undrafted is a serious gamble.
Both the Colorado Rockies and the Florida Marlins have already made inquiries throughout the American League concerning the 27-year-old Hayes, and there is a strong possibility that he will be selected.


Staging Painterly Visions
When I was young, I did a children's play," Robert Wilson recalled recently. "I had 10 10-year-old boys wrapped in Saran Wrap so tight they had only one finger free.
After five minutes, one of the mothers screamed, 'Mothers should take their children off the stage.' Afterwards, my father said, 'Son, not only was that thing absurd, it was sick.' "
There are those who have the same reaction to Wilson's mammoth theater pieces today; at every Wilson performance, some people can be counted on to walk out, huffily.
Sometimes half the audience does, especially in his native United States.
But those who stay, stay to cheer.
Enough have cheered so that Wilson can be considered this country's -- or even the world's -- foremost vanguard "theater artist," a term that almost seems to have been coined for him.


Central Park Gets Cleaned Up


RESULTS PLUS
N.H.L.
North Stars End on Winning Note  Jon Casey stopped 13 third-period shots, making first-period goals by Gaeten Duchesne, Mark Tinordi and Craig Ludwig stand up, as the Minnesota North Stars defeated the visiting Chicago Blackhawks, 3-0, yesterday.
The North Stars ended a five-game home stand exactly as they began it: with a shutout victory by Casey.
In between, they went 0-2-1.
Casey, who faced only four shots in each of the first two periods, earned his 11th career shutout and snapped Chicago's four-game winning streak.
Duchesne, who had nine goals last season, scored his sixth of this season 6 minutes 16 seconds into the game.
Checked by Steve Larmer as he moved through the slot, Duchesne deflected Russ Courtnall's feed past goalie Ed Belfour.
Tinordi scored on his own rebound on a power play 2:04 later. (AP) Maple Leafs 4, Bruins 1: Kent Manderville's first National Hockey League goal broke a 1-1 tie and sparked Toronto to a victory over Boston last night, the Maple Leafs' first triumph at Boston Garden in five years.
Felix Potvin, starting his 10th straight game in the Toronto net, stopped 26 shots.
He has only allowed six goals in his last five games.
Glenn Anderson had two goals for Toronto.
Manderville picked up Doug Ellet's rebound off the post and jammed the puck under sprawling Boston goalie Andy Moog at 4:36 of the second as the Leafs won their first game in Boston Garden since Nov. 7, 1987, a span of seven straight losses. (AP) Red Wings 2, Whalers 0: In Hartford, Tim Cheveldae registered his second shutout in two nights, the sixth of his career, as Detroit won on the road.
Cheveldae, who shut out the Pittsburgh Penguins by 8-0 on Friday, made 19 saves against the Whalers to extend his shutout streak to 137:37 seconds since giving up a third-period goal against Tampa Bay on Wednesday.
He was helped by Detroit's strong defensive play and the Whalers' weak offensive effort.
Paul Ysebaert scored both goals to extend the Whalers' streak without a victory to nine games (0-8-1). (AP) Flames 5, Lightning 3: Joe Nieuwendyk scored two third-period goals and goaltender Mike Vernon registered his 200th career victory to lead Calgary in Tampa, Fla.
Calgary trailed, 3-2, entering the third period before Nieuwendyk scored the tying goal at 2:35.
His game-winner was a slap shot from the top of the circle past Tampa Bay goalie Pat Jablonski at 14:54.
The loss stopped the expansion Lightning's four-game winning streak.
But Tampa Bay (9-9-2) remained in first place in the Norris Division by 1 point ahead of Chicago. (AP) COLLEGE SOCCER Seton Hall Gains on a Shutout
Michael Magarinos and Gerson Echeverry scored yesterday as Seton Hall beat Hartford, 2-0, in the first round of the National Collegiate Athletic Association tournament in South Orange, N.J.
Magarinos, a freshman, scored in the ninth minute of the first half on a 22-yard shot.
Echeverry, a junior, scored in the 87th minute.
Seton Hall (12-6-3) plays the winner of today's game between St.
John's and Dartmouth.
Hartford finished at 13-6-3. (AP) Adelphi Women Head to the Finals: Adelphi, which finished third in all three previous tournaments, defeated Sonoma State of California, 3-1, to gain the finals today in the N.C.A.A. women's Division II championships at Stiles Field, Garden City, L.I.
The Panthers (15-2-1), who got goals from Vicky Sidorenko, Jennifer Cranga and Shannon Sepe, will oppose top-ranked Barry University.
Barry (15-2), the 1989 titlist, advanced with a 3-2 overtime victory over previously undefeated Franklin Pierce (21-1).
Chris Carlucci scored the game-winning goal 18 seconds into the second extra period.


Dancing With the Galaxies on Laser Beams
FOR 17-year-old Gillian Budman, it was "like being in a giant kaleidoscope." Her friends, seated near her in the Andrus Planetarium of the Hudson River Museum here, agreed that the laser show they had just seen, presented to the music of the rock group U2, was totally cool.
Now the lights went out, and the next spectacle, "Laser Floyd: the Wall," began.
More images than the eye could count, spiraling and gyrating against the blackness of the dome, rained their light and color on the audience.
Galaxies swirled and sinuous shapes danced in rhythm to the music of Pink Floyd.
Laser light and music shows, bigger than life, dream like and mesmerizing, have brought a powerful new art experience to the county.


A New Home in the Old Custom House


Well, the Ukraine Girls Really Knock Them Out
John Broussard, who is considered the founder of the modern mail-order bride business, was importing Oriental bowls and vases when he decided to diversify in 1974.
"He was bringing things over from the Orient, ceramic things, and one of his friends said, "I'd like to meet a woman from there,' " said Robert Burrows, who now manages the company, called Cherry Blossoms, in Kapaau, Hawaii. It is one of about 200 agencies that match American men with foreign women.


Amy Kiger, Chris Williams
IT is often said that when choosing a mate, it helps to get along with their family, No. 1, and their record collection, No. 2.
Chris Williams, 34 years old, has a record collection that is not exactly everyone's idea of easy listening.
Mr.
Williams, a software instructor at Merrill Lynch in New York and a Ph.D. candidate in sociology at New York University, is writing his dissertation on die-hard fans of Led Zeppelin, the rock band that split up a decade ago.


New American Cuisine Plus 40's Tunes
BAGDON'S site in New Haven has seen four successive restaurants (three of them very good) over the last dozen years.
One hopes that this, the latest, survives.
For style, quality and culinary skills it certainly deserves to stay and thrive.
Bagdon's (named for the owner, Jon Bagdon), a high-ceilinged, ground-floor space in a brick corner building, has been transformed into a stylish place to dine.
White brick walls, unobtrusive gray carpeting, black chairs, white-napped tables (luxuriously spaced) and indirect wall lighting create a handsome atmosphere enhanced by background tapes of pop favorites of the 1940's.
The short menu offers several popular dishes of New American cooking, adding to the restaurant's style.
As is often the case, the appetizers are among the most enticing items on the menu.
A major hit was oysters with champagne sauce: five plump oysters in a luscious champagne-edged cream sauce augmented by a julienne of carrots and leeks.


The Game of Outwitting Uninvited Munchers
AT the risk of being tarred and feathered, or worse, run out of town, an important question needs to be asked: Has the time come to talk about coexisting with wildlife?
There have been many encounters with uninvited furry creatures.
Rabbits, mice, chipmunks, skunks, moles and deer have uprooted, eaten, nibbled or destroyed many a fine garden display.
Notice, the adjective peaceful was not joined with coexistence as this may be too much to ask.
Most reactions from gardeners are far from friendly.
The results of the damage done are usually heartbreaking, and often costly.


Business Diary/November 8-13
THE ECONOMY A Warning Shot Across Recession's Bow


Brigitte Hughes, Peter Kujawski Jr.
Brigitte Ann Hughes, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
J.
Philip Hughes of New York, was married yesterday to Peter Thomas Kujawski Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Kujawski of Huntington, L.I.
The Rev.
Thomas Bowers performed the Episcopal ceremony at St.
Bartholomew's Church in New York.
Mrs.
Hughes-Kujawski, 28 years old, is an executive assistant at Sicurella &amp; Associates, a music production company for radio and television commercials in New York.
She and her husband graduated from New England College.
Her father is a partner in R. J. Colors, a restaurant in New York.
Her mother, Yvonne A. Hughes, is a registered nurse who is currently working at Mount Sinai Hospital in Miami Beach.


Australian Tours Of Jewish Sites
Visits to synagogues and Jewish organizations as well as sightseeing that includes penguins, kangaroos and excursions to Alice Springs and Ayers Rock are scheduled during a 21-day study tour of Jewish culture and history in Australia and New Zealand.
The tour, offered by the Ticket Counter, a Maryland travel agency, leaves Los Angeles Feb. 1.
Auckland and Wellington in New Zealand and Sydney, Melbourne, the Great Barrier Reef (by catamaran) and the Atherton Tableland (by train) in Australia are on the itinerary.
The price of $5,995 a person, double occupancy, includes round-trip air fare from Los Angeles, hotels, most meals, tour bus and guide, taxes and tips.
Information: The Ticket Counter, 6900 Wisconsin Avenue, Suite 706, Chevy Chase, Md. 20815; (800) 247-7651, fax (301) 913-0166.


THE TRANSITION: The New Team; Long Bottled Up, Advice From Democrats Flows
Bruce Reed, an assistant to President-elect Bill Clinton, was buttonholed on a stairway at the transition headquarters in Little Rock, Ark., the other day by a stranger from Finland with a long, handwritten list of policy recommendations.
Toss it on the pile, Mr.
Reed thought at the time, not even wondering how the man from Helsinki had managed to get past the security guards.


Travel Office Opens in Leipzig
American Express has opened a travel service office in LEIPZIG , Germany, bringing the number of its offices in former East European states to 25.
The company also has offices in Berlin and Dresden in eastern Germany.
The Leipzig bureau is in the Hotel Astoria, across from the city's main railroad station.
It is open 9:30 A.M. to 5 P.M. on weekdays and from 9 A.M.to noon on Saturday.


Beyond the PC: Apple's Promised Land
JOHN SCULLEY wants to become the apostle of the information age.
From Japan to Hollywood to Germany, the chairman of Apple Computer Inc. has been preaching about a post-industrial promised land where four giant industries -- computers, consumer electronics, communications and information -- will converge.
Picture an affordable electronic personal assistant that fits in your hand and works anywhere.
It not only has all the functions of a computer -- calculating, word processing and tapping into data bases anywhere in the world -- but also acts as a television, telephone, note taker (you can use a pen or your voice), fax machine, mailbox, appointment calendar and even a sketch pad for artists and designers.
Cerebral and soft-spoken, sounding more like a college professor than an evangelist, Mr.
Sculley describes an emerging industry that he says will be a $3.5 trillion business within a decade.
It will, he says, be more than half as large as the combined economies of the United States, Canada and Mexico are today.


BEST SELLERS: November 15, 1992
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
4
THE TALE OF THE BODY THIEF, by Anne Rice. (Knopf, $24.) To prove he is still a hero among the living dead, Lestat embarks on a dangerous enterprise; "The Vampire Chronicles," continued.
2
2
5
THE STARS SHINE DOWN, by Sidney Sheldon. (Morrow, $23.) The fortunes of a successful businesswoman are suddenly imperiled by secrets from her past and present relationships. (LP)
3
4
3
MOSTLY HARMLESS, by Douglas Adams. (Harmony, $20.) In the fifth volume of the "Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy" series, a survivor tries to cope with new predicaments.
4
3
3
DRIVING FORCE, by Dick Francis. (Putnam, $21.95.) An ex-jockey's horse-transport business is besieged by a series of mysterious deaths.
5
5
5
SABINE'S NOTEBOOK, by Nick Bantock. (Chronicle Books, $17.95.) Continuing the epistolary romance between two talented people begun in "Griffin &amp; Sabine."
6
9
11
GRIFFIN &amp; SABINE, by Nick Bantock. (Chronicle Books, $17.95.) The romance of an artist and a secret admirer, told through cards and letters.
7
14
2
MEXICO, by James A. Michener. (Random House, $25.) While researching the lives of his ancestors, an American journalist learns about the history of the land south of the border. (LP)
8
8
36
THE PELICAN BRIEF, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $22.50.) A woman law student probes the murder of two Supreme Court justices.
9
11
12
WHERE IS JOE MERCHANT? by Jimmy Buffett. (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, $19.95.) A couple on a wild chase through the Caribbean on the trail of a deceased rock star who has been sighted there.
10
7
5
THE SHADOW RISING, by Robert Jordan. (Tor/ Doherty, $24.95.) Book Four of "The Wheel of Time," a fantasy saga.
11
12
14
THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $14.95.) A photographer and a lonely farmer's wife in Iowa.
12
10
9
THE SECRET HISTORY, by Donna Tartt. (Knopf, $23.) Close friends at a small college must deal with the consequences of a crime they committed.
13
6
25
WAITING TO EXHALE, by Terry McMillan. (Viking, $22.) The friendships and romances of four black women in Phoenix.
14
13
18
GERALD'S GAME, by Stephen King. (Viking, $23.50.) Twenty-eight hours of horror suffered by a woman handcuffed to a bedpost.
15
16
5
LEAVING COLD SASSY, by Olive Ann Burns. (Ticknor &amp; Fields, $21.) The story of a marriage that survives many strains; a sequel to the 1984 novel "Cold Sassy Tree."
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
2
SEX, by Madonna. (Warner, $49.95.) Erotic photographs of the pop star by Steven Meisel, and her reflections on them.
2
2
9
THE WAY THINGS OUGHT TO BE, by Rush H. Limbaugh 3d. (Pocket, $22.) Anecdotes and opinions offered by the talk show host.
3
3
6
IT DOESN'T TAKE A HERO, by H. Norman Schwarzkopf with Peter Petre. (Linda Grey/ Bantam, $25.) The autobiography of the general who commanded the allied forces in the gulf war.
4
4
4
I CAN'T BELIEVE I SAID THAT! by Kathie Lee Gifford with Jim Jerome. (Pocket, $22.) The autobiography of the co-host of the television show "Live With Regis and Kathie Lee."
5
5
25
THE SILENT PASSAGE, by Gail Sheehy. (Random House, $16.) The psychological and social significance of menopause for today's women.
6
6
11
EVERY LIVING THING, by James Herriot. (St. Martin's, $22.95.) Continuing the memoirs of the Yorkshire veterinarian.
7
9
3
BANKRUPTCY 1995, by Harry E. Figgie Jr. with Gerald J. Swanson. (Little, Brown, $19.95.) The authors predict the collapse of America under Government debt and suggest ways to cope with it.
8
7
23
EARTH IN THE BALANCE, by Al Gore. (Houghton Mifflin, $22.95.) The Vice President-elect discusses the environment and what must be done to save the earth.
9
8
8
THE TE OF PIGLET, by Benjamin Hoff. (Dutton, $16.) Aspects of Taoist philosophy explained through the actions of an A. A. Milne character.
10
10
14
WOMEN WHO RUN WITH THE WOLVES, by Clarissa Pinkola Estes. (Ballantine, $20.) A Jungian analyst reinterprets myths and folk tales to enable women to understand their psyches.
11
11
22
TRUMAN, by David McCullough. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $30.) A biography of the 33d President.
12
13
2
GENIUS, by James Gleick. (Pantheon, $27.50.) The life and achievements of Richard Feynman, the Nobel Prize-winning physicist.
13
14
11
YOUNG MEN &amp; FIRE, by Norman Maclean. (University of Chicago, $19.95.) An account of a disastrous fire in a Montana forest in 1949.
14
15
3
THE CHANGE, by Germaine Greer. (Knopf, $24.) An extensive survey of the physical, psychological and social effects of menopause.
15
5
THE CREATORS, by Daniel J. Boorstin. (Random House, $30.) Three thousand years in the history of religion, philosophy, literature and the arts, told through the lives of those who made it.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
1
18
HARVEY PENICK'S LITTLE RED BOOK, by Harvey Penick with Bud Shrake. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $19.) Anecdotes and tips about playing golf, by a legendary teacher.
2
2
7
ARE YOU THE ONE FOR ME? by Barbara De Angelis. (Delacorte, $21.) How to choose and keep the right partner in love and marriage.
3
1
YOUR MONEY OR YOUR LIFE, by Joe Dominguez and Vicki Robin. (Viking, $20.) Ways to adapt your financial situation to a more frugal, satisfying style of living.
4
4
37
A RETURN TO LOVE, by Marianne Williamson. (HarperCollins, $25.) Inspirational advice about ways to replace feelings of fear with feelings of love in daily life.
5
3
7
THE AMERICAN HERITAGE DICTIONARY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE. (Houghton Mifflin, $39.95.) The third edition.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,050 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 28,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.
And Bear in Mind
(Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)
WE WERE SOLDIERS ONCE . . .
AND YOUNG.
Ia Drang: The Battle That Changed the War in Vietnam, by Harold G. Moore and Joseph L. Galloway. (Random House, $25.) A general and a journalist, both of whom were there, narrate and analyze this agonizing 1965 encounter as a prototype for the developing war.
THE AMERICAN WAY OF BIRTH, by Jessica Mitford. (William Abrahams/Dutton, $23.) The supercharged social critic of "The American Way of Death" takes no prisoners (especially not men) on her march through the other end of life in this country.
BLACK DOGS, by Ian McEwan. (Nan A. Talese/Doubleday, $19.50.) A short, shocking novel that explores what happens between a husband who thinks a rational society can solve its problems and a wife who believes, through revelation, that evil is alive and busy.
CITY OF LIGHT, by Michael Doane. (Knopf, $22.) Mr.
Doane's ambitious, topical novel takes the international political thriller into a whole new landscape -- the innards of a computer network.
A DUBIOUS LEGACY, by Mary Wesley. (Viking, $21.) This generous British country-house novel, which concerns love and friendship and how to live, shows again how smart one can become by paying attention for a long time (the author is 80 now).
THE FIRST DISSIDENT: The Book of Job in Today's Politics, by William Safire. (Random House, $23.) With clarity and verve, Mr.
Safire renders Job as the matchless investigator of innocent suffering and the prototype of resistance to authoritarian rule.
THE CALL OF THE TOAD, by Gunter Grass. (Helen and Kurt Wolff/Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, $19.95.) Mr.
Grass returns to his own Danzig/Gdansk for this novel whose endearing exemplary couple (he German, she Polish, both widowed) keep on keeping on.


Heather Beldon, Mark Rosenker
Mr. and Mrs.
Harry P. Beldon of Mendham, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Heather Beldon, to Mark Victor Rosenker, the son of Maj. and Mrs.
Stanley Rosenker of Baltimore.
A February wedding is planned.
Miss Beldon, 34 years old, is a consultant to the White House Council on Environmental Quality in Washington.
She graduated from the University of Denver.
Her father is a lawyer in Millington, N.J.


Brunch With Boomer: Who's Going to Pay?
It has been almost three years since Bruce Coslet left Cincinnati, where he was the Bengals' offensive coordinator, to come to New York and coach the Jets.
As it turned out, his first game was against the Bengals and his emotions were soaring before the kickoff.
When the Jets (2-7) and the Bengals (4-5) meet this afternoon for the first time since that game, Coslet's emotions won't be as strong as they were then.
Still, the game, which will be at Giants Stadium, will have particular meaning for him.


Martha Evans, Geoffrey Morris
Mr. and Mrs.
Donald J. Evans of Cohasset, Mass., have announced the engagement of their daughter Martha Cunningham Evans to Geoffrey James Morris, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert J. Morris of Mantoloking, N.J.
A February wedding is planned.
Miss Evans, 25 years old, is an assistant to the director of marketing for the Library of America, a publisher of classic books in New York.
Both she and her fiance graduated from Hobart &amp; William Smith Colleges.
Her father is a senior partner in the Boston law firm of Goodwin, Procter &amp; Hoar.


That Twang You Hear Is Here
Eight signs that citified folk aren't ignoring the country music craze:
1.
January 1992: The KLF, a British dance-music group, releases the single "Justified and Ancient," with lead vocals by Tammy Wynette.


Trina Pew, Matthew Gandal
Mr. and Mrs.
George L. Pew Jr. of Villanova, Pa., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Catherine Douglas Pew, to Matthew David Gandal, a son of Alvin Gandal of Washington and Gabriele Gandal of Chevy Chase, Md.
A June wedding is planned.
Ms.
Pew, 26 years old, is known as Trina.
She is a second-grade teacher at St.
Patrick's Episcopal Day School in Washington.
She and her fiance graduated from Trinity College in Hartford, Conn.
Her father is the vice chairman of the Philadelphia Maritime Museum.


Public &amp; Private; Good Causes, Bad Money
The Coalition for the Homeless doesn't take money from the tobacco industry anymore.
Mary Brosnahan, the executive director, didn't like it when a public relations firm representing the industry asked her to help kill a bill mandating anti-smoking ads by writing to demand the City Council focus on more important issues, like her own.
But there's a more personal explanation for why she won't be applying for any more grants like the $100,000 Philip Morris once donated.
"I prefer to seek support elsewhere," she said.
"I watched my father die a slow and painful death of lung cancer."


Three Rich Repositories
EUROPE's specialized cartographic shops, drawing on a century and more of experience, furnish the best of maps with which to inform any trip.
Just selecting from the dazzling choice can transport the visitor a world away.
The following three shops in London, Paris and Vienna, with their knowledgeable staffs, handsome surroundings and vast selection of modern and historical maps, are among the grand map stores of Europe.
Stanfords
Stanfords in London advertises itself as "the world's largest map shop," a claim I have never had reason to challenge.
In a turn-of-the-century building commissioned by the second Edward Stanford in Covent Garden's Long Acre, the business dates to 1852.
Its two sales floors lined with neat banks of wooden racks offer some 25,000 titles.


Get Into the Kitchen
The kitchen is a fairly static landscape, laid out around the classic triumvirate: range, refrigerator and sink.
Everything else in that setting -- cooking gadgets and gizmos -- is a minor scenic attraction, like shrubbery.
According to many architects, the design of the kitchen is an exact science, calculated to a number of standards that include the size, weight and culinary habits of the cook.
It also boils down to common sense, according to John Canner, who teaches at the Culinary Institute of America in Hyde Park, N.Y.


Top Bush Aide Denies Approving State Dept. Search of Clinton File
In the latest example of finger-pointing over the search of Bill Clinton's passport files, a top State Department official, John F. W. Rogers, denies that he approved the search, conducted in the midst of the Presidential campaign.
Mr.
Rogers, the Under Secretary of State for Management, has told Federal investigators that he reported the search to Lawrence S. Eagleburger, the acting Secretary of State, on Oct. 1, just a day after it began, and that he was concerned about how the search would be viewed.
Contradicts Former Official
His assertions directly contradict statements by a former department official, Elizabeth M. Tamposi.
Ms.
Tamposi, the former Assistant Secretary of State for Consular Affairs, was dismissed on Tuesday by President Bush after being accused of authorizing the search.
She has told investigators that the search was approved by Mr.
Rogers and begun by one of her assistants, Carmen DePlacido, acting director of the passport office, without consulting her.
She has also said that she told Mr.
Rogers that the passport files had been tampered with.


Army Secret Weapon Counters N. Illinois
Army 21, N. Illinois 14
Army's little-known sophomore quarterback, Rick Roper, outshone the heralded Northern Illinois running back, LeShon Johnson, today.
Roper ran for 109 yards and passed for another 63 to lead the Cadets to a 21-14 victory over the Huskies.


Charting the Future Of the Waterfront
IN subtle ways and sweeping ones -- like a clock face 120 feet wide -- the future of New York City's waterfront will be charted in coming months, even though its actual rebuilding may be many years away.
Prospects for a major renascence in the near future grew much dimmer on Election Day, when voters rejected a bond act that would have authorized New York State to borrow $800 million for public works.
Tens of millions of dollars were earmarked for projects along the city's 578-mile shoreline.


Lawrence Taylor Is a Hero
To the Sports Editor:
I take exception to Ira Berkow's recent pronouncement upon the injured and disabled Lawrence Taylor ("The Great Flawed Warrior," The Times, Nov. 10) as unworthy of the title of hero because "He fought no fires, defended no innocents, performed no surgery."


Commercial Property: Real Estate Lawyers; As Construction Ebbs, Rental Scrutinies Quicken
THIS is a painful time for commercial landlords and a great time for tenants and their sublessees.
But it's a truly superb time for some real estate lawyers.
What they have lost in work from builders and developers they have more than made up for in leasing work.


And Not Always That Expensive
To the Sports Editor:
Pete Bodo's enjoyable "Not Quite Golf and Not Quite Hunting, but a Little of Each" (The Times, Nov. 8), recognized the growing popularity of sporting clays, but may have given some readers the impression that the sport is rather elitist.
Bodo mentions courses that charge $50 a round.
In the three years I have been participating, I have shot clay targets at eight sporting clays courses in three states and have never paid more than $15 for a full round of 50 targets (I bring my own ammo; $10 for two boxes of 25 shells).


In Tunisia, a Mosaic of Art
THERE is very little gray in Tunisian art, I discovered on a trip there to look at ancient ceramics.
Almost from the beginning, when Phoenician sailors founded Carthage in 846 B.C., building surfaces have been enlivened by color, texture, light and shadow.
Recent excavations have unearthed the world's earliest terra cotta mosaics, made there in the fifth century B.C.
Destroyed by the Romans in 146 B.C. at the end of the Third Punic War, and rebuilt by them, Carthage guarded the narrowest straits between Africa and Europe and was the capital of Rome's African Province.
The rich grain merchants of Carthage supported local ateliers that created mosaics for the Mediterranean world until the Arab invasion, which brought a new kind of decorative art and a new capital city, Tunis, 11 miles from Carthage.


A Brother's Sadness Turns to Anger
In a small paneled room, Norman Rosenbaum rummages furiously through his archives, marshaling his evidence like the Federal prosecutor he once was in Australia.
His yarmulke slightly askew, he is looking for the newspaper article that appeared after a black man was killed by a white mob in Bensonhurst, the one that quoted David N. Dinkins, then a candidate for Mayor, as saying, "The tone and climate of this city does get set at City Hall."
Then he searches through his collection of Mayor Dinkins's press releases to find the one that was issued late last month after a jury acquitted a black teen-ager of murdering Mr.
Rosenbaum's brother, Yankel, during the racial violence in Crown Heights.


Streetscapes: 40 Wall Street; A Race for the Skies, Lost by a Spire
"IT'S great to be alive" runs the unusual advertising campaign for 40 Wall Street.
And indeed, although the 71-story building is in financial difficulty, the lobby still looks smart and neat, with elevator starters and other attendants at their stations.
Opened in 1930, 40 Wall has seen disappointment before: foreclosure, a plane crash and the unexpected loss of its title as the tallest building in the world.


Journey to Isolation
As our caravan of air-conditioned tour buses lumbered into Chongjin, a port town in the barren northeast corner of North Korea, housewives and schoolchildren -- most of whom had apparently been ordered off the streets before we arrived -- stared in amazement from their windows and schoolyards.
For the inhabitants of the world's most hermetically sealed nation, we were, without doubt, an odd sight: a hundred or so Japanese businessmen, a few American academics and journalists, even a couple of South Korea's leading industrialists thinly disguised as "academics" and "consultants." But the biggest oddity was not us.
It was our buses.
North Korea is so broke these days that buses are rarely seen.
Not only are there virtually no tourists, but gasoline is so scarce there are few moving vehicles.
Furthermore, conditions in the last few years have deteriorated so much that this notoriously secretive nation is doing the unthinkable.
It is welcoming its traditional enemies, urging them to build megaports and factories in areas they would have been shot for entering a year ago.


Sound Bytes; Here Comes Comdex/Fall Again, With Thumbs Up
COMDEX/FALL is the mother of all trade shows.
This year's five-day personal computer extravaganza, which opens tomorrow in Las Vegas, is expected to attract 130,000 buyers, sellers, manufacturers and journalists, who come to make deals and see the latest technologies.
Sheldon G. Adelson, chairman and chief executive of the Interface Group in Needham, Mass., an operator of computer trade shows and vacation companies, started the Comdex show in 1979, in a hotel ballroom.
Now he owns, among other things, the Sands hotel and casino.
Question: What is the industry's current financial and emotional health?


With Sleight of Hand, C.E.O.'s Turn Heads
AS tricks go, turning Manny Fernandez into an instant magician would seem to be no easy feat.
After all, Mr.
Fernandez is a corporate executive from Wilton with no background in the art of legerdemain.
But a few weeks ago, to the astonishment -- and amusement -- of about 200 analysts for Gartner Group Inc., an information technology research company of which he is the chief executive, Mr.
Fernandez deftly performed two magic tricks which, (a) made points relevant to the company's business and, (b) clearly demonstrated that Bill Herz is a master at teaching corporate top brass how to do what he likes to call "participatory illusions."


SCARY MONSTERS
The idea that the "keep 'em barefoot and pregnant" denomination of the right wing is energized by displaced fears of being abandoned by nurturing Mom makes sense (Hers: "Scary Monsters," by Tamar Lewin, Oct. 18).
Might not the flip side of this psychopolitical coin be some vestigial fear, on the part of "government is the solution to all problems left wingers," that authoritative Dad will go away and leave us at the mercy of the bigger kids, who break rules and get extra portions at lunch?
D.
F.
MURRAY
New York, N.Y.


The Great Pumpkin
For anyone who grew up near Circleville, Ohio, the possibilities of pumpkin are a measure of one's maturity, one's level of sophistication, the depth of one's world view.
There, in a town that would otherwise be unknown, is the Circleville Pumpkin Show -- four days of unabashed Americana that, since 1903, have featured seven parades each year and a range of pumpkin contests to rival the Olympics.
The medium is accorded such respect that the farmer who produces the largest pumpkin is considered agriculture's own Einstein.
The premier pumpkin carver is accorded an awe worthy of Michelangelo.
And Miss Pumpkin.
Well, the real mystery about Marilyn Monroe is how she became an American icon without ever being crowned with pumpkin vines and riding astride the float that looks like Cinderella's carriage, far above the rest of us.
There we were: hundreds of June and Ward Cleaver couples, holding the hands of little boys who harbored ideas of planting firecrackers inside jack-o'-lanterns and little girls like me, who were worried about slipping knee socks and the possible consequence of a brisk fall wind under our pleated skirts.
We all cheered Miss Pumpkin.


November 8-14: Supreme Court; Employers Allowed to Drop Benefits for Sick Workers
The Supreme Court turned down an opportunity last week to protect the insurance benefits of many workers who develop costly illnesses like AIDS or cancer.
By a vote of 7 to 2, the Court declined to hear an appeal by the estate of a man whose health benefits were cut to $5,000 from $1 million after he developed AIDS and filed his first insurance claims.
The man, John W. McGann, who worked at a music store in Houston, died in June 1991.


100,000 in Bonn Protest Plan to Limit Asylum
More than 100,000 Germans demonstrated peacefully here today to protest right-wing violence against foreigners and plans to limit the constitutional right of asylum that has brought so many refugees flooding into the country.
Skinheads and neo-Nazis stayed away from the demonstration, sparing Germans a repetition of the disruption that marred a similar, larger demonstration in Berlin last Sunday and forced the country's President behind a phalanx of anti-riot police.


You Can Go Home Again, Even to China
"My son, are you from this village?" Liu Jiuyou asked Henry Doong as he walked toward the village's ancestral hall.
"Come. See how we've expanded."
Stooped and fragile, the 87-year-old Mrs.
Liu walked slowly with the help of her cane and pointed to a small clump of homes whose wobbly walls seemed in far worse condition than she.
Her pride in this insignificant accomplishment reminded Mr.
Doong that if history were slightly different he could have been standing in her place, barefoot with muck between the toes, pointing to the same cluster of mud huts.


Difficult First Step
Since the moment Bill Clinton won election, gay groups have been pressing the President-elect to move quickly on his campaign pledge to improve gay rights.
But little did they know just how quickly he would move.
In his first specific policy decision, Mr.
Clinton focused on a gay issue, affirming his commitment to reverse the ban on homosexuals in the military.
His decision, which touched off a cry of protest from military leaders, presents the first clash between his campaign promises and the reality of running Government.
It also shows how especially difficult steps on gay rights will be for the President-elect, who supported gay rights as the Democratic candidate and who received wide support, both financially and in votes, from gay Americans.
The gay vote, some poll takers said, accounted for at least 4 percent of the ballots cast nationwide, making it equal to the Jewish vote.


Residential Resales
Closings in the week ended Oct. 31  MANHATTAN  Carnegie Hill 1.25 million
1220 Park Avenue (95th St.)  3-bedroom, 4-bath, 3,500-sq.-ft. duplex co-op in a prewar building; 24-hr. doorman, 2 maids' rooms, dining room, den, fireplace, terrace; maintenance $2,641, 43% tax-deductible (Brokers: Olshan Realty-Corcoran Group)  East Midtown 577,500
860 U.N.
Plaza (49th St.)  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,600-sq.-ft. postwar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, concierge, manned elevator, dining area, 3 exposures, East River view; maintenance $2,120, 41% tax-deductible (Broker: Corcoran Group) Greenwich Village 355,000
165 Perry Street  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,500-sq.-ft. co-op in a loft building; 14-ft. ceilings, study, marble bath, Jacuzzi, original moldings and detail; maintenance $808, 70% tax-deductible (Broker: Debra Kameros Co.)  TriBeCa 672,000
178 Franklin Street  1-bedroom, 1-bath, 2,750-sq.-ft. co-op in a loft building; elevator, 12-ft. ceilings, private roof deck, 2 exposures; maintenance $1,330, 45% tax-deductible (Broker: Eychner Associates)  West Midtown 305,000
100 Central Park South  (Trump Parc)  1-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 654-sq.-ft. condo in a 5-year-old building; 24-hr. doorman, concierge, laundry room, Central Park view; common charge $426, taxes $5,068 (Broker: Marilyn Weigner Real Estate)  BRONX  East Gun Hill Road Area 195,000
711 Bartholdi Street  2-family detached frame house; 2 baths, dining area in primary unit; 1 bath, eat-in kitchen in other; 3 bedrooms, enclosed rear porch in each; finished basement, 25- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,600 (Broker: Highland Real Estate)  Riverdale 145,000
3226 Tibbett Avenue  4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, one-family detached brick Tudor; dining room, eat-in kitchen, finished basement, 1-car garage, 29- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,816 (Broker: Trebach Realty)  BROOKLYN Clinton Hill 147,500
127 Willoughby Avenue  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,500-sq.-ft. duplex co-op in a brownstone; dining room, 2 marble fireplaces, original parquet floors, 800 sq. ft. of private roof rights; maintenance $575, 50% tax-deductible (Broker: Eva M. Daniels Realty)  Park Slope 226,100
606 Carroll Street  2-family attached brick Federal town house; 4 bedrooms, 2 baths, rear deck in primary duplex; 1 bedroom, 1 bath in other; dining room in each, 20- by 73-ft. lot; taxes $1,754 (Broker: Aguayo &amp; Knox)  Sheepshead Bay 219,000
2231 East 24th Street  2-family semi-attached brick and stucco house; 3 bedrooms in primary unit; 2 baths in other; 1 bath, eat-in kitchen in each; suite in finished basement, 25- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,500 (Broker: Maryl Real Estate)  QUEENS  College Point 190,000
23-48 124th Street  2-family detached frame house; 2 bedrooms, 1 bath, dining room, eat-in kitchen in each unit; finished attic, 2-car garage, 50- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,100 (Broker: Century 21/ Weber &amp; Rose)  Forest Hills 198,000
95-20 72d Street  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, one-family detached frame house; dining room, finished basement, 1-car garage, 30- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,200 (Broker: Dix Realty)  STATEN ISLAND  Grimes Hill 150,000
12 Woodside Avenue  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, one-family detached Colonial; dining room, fireplace, finished basement, 50- by 188-ft. lot; taxes $1,158 (Broker: Salmon Realty)  Princes Bay 220,000
21 Terrace Avenue  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, one-family detached Colonial; dining room, study, family room, screened rear porch, 46- by 152-ft. lot; taxes $1,100 (Broker: RE-MAX Preferred)


In the Region: New Jersey; Recent Sales
Edison 195,000
743 Grove Street  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 23-year-old split level; finished basement, underground sprinkler system, new water heater; taxes $3,961.
Howell 168,000
107 Salem Hill Road  4-bedroom, 3-bath, 26-year-old ranch; 2-car garage, c/a, heated pool; taxes $2,734.
Jackson 116,000
26 Aldrich Road  4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 27-year-old bi-level; in-ground pool, fenced yard, c/a; taxes $3,055.
Lakewood 165,000
116 Glen Avenue South  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 3-year-old colonial; full basement, two-car garage, c/a; taxes $3,204.
Millburn 163,000
36 Ocean Street  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 45-year-old colonial; 2-car garage, eat-in-kitchen, h/w floors; taxes $2,698.
Piscataway 129,500
4 Joyce Drive  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 14-year-old ranch; patio, newly painted interior and exterior, new water heater; taxes $3,041.
OTHER AREAS North Haven, Conn. 335,000
13 Cromwell Heights  4 bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, newly built colonial; palladian windows, whirlpool tub, oversized kitchen, 0.5 acre; taxes not yet available.
Briarcliff Manor, N.Y. 342,500
155 Holbrook Lane  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 31-year-old ranch; foyer, fireplace, dining room, den; taxes $7,628.
Bethpage, L.I. 150,000
340 Martin Place  4-bedroom, 1-bath, 42-year-old Cape Cod; dining room, 1-car attached garage; taxes $3,300.


Taliesin West's Desert Hikes
Visitors to Taliesin West, the home built by Frank Lloyd Wright in Scottsdale, Ariz., in the late 1930's, are being encouraged to immerse themselves in the surrounding Sonoran Desert, as well as Wright's architecture.
This month the Frank Lloyd Wright Foundation, which oversees the property, began offering guided desert hikes for the first time.
The group said it wants to familiarize visitors with the interplay between architecture and its natural setting, the native building materials, landforms and vegetation that became elements in Wright's design, and with the desert environment that he called a "spiritual cathartic many people need."


Istanbul
To the Editor: Having recently returned from a five-week trip that included a 10-day visit to Turkey, I feel compelled to advise your readers, particularly your female readers, about my experience in Istanbul.
First, let me say the city is an exciting one, with much to offer the curious traveler.
Unfortunately, my friend and I were frequently so annoyed by relentless and obnoxious solicitations from Turkish men that we could not enjoy the sights.
Despite modest dress (long skirts and pants) and well-honed looks of indifference, (perfected in New York City), we were pursued and questioned by men throughout the city.
Though we never felt physically threatened, we both felt that our privacy was perpetually being violated by men who wanted to see if the rumors about "Western women" were true.


'Sound and Fury'
To the Editor:
While it is perfectly within The Book Review's rights to assign my book to a reviewer who would very likely be wholly out of sympathy with its thesis, I am nevertheless convinced that Adam Platt should have had the honor and grace to disqualify himself from reviewing "Sound and Fury: The Washington Punditocracy and the Collapse of American Politics" (Oct. 4).


Debate Over Moving Yonkers Welfare Site
A PROPOSAL to move the offices of the County Department of Social Services to the waterfront on this city's west side has angered some city officials and local organizations and puzzled county officials and minority leaders.
The proposal has environmentalists citing the dangers to welfare clients and county employees of possible ground contamination from previous business activity.
And city officials are talking about how their plans for the future of the waterfront as Yonkers's main asset might be stymied.
Some businessmen have expressed concern about safety issues.


'Women Exist Only Marginally'
To the Editor:
Suzanna Andrews's article is a start, but it fails to get at the heart of what is indeed a grave problem for women vis-a-vis the film industry: in the world of American movies, women are barely there -- pun intended.


New Acquisition


Corrections
A report in Styles of The Times last Sunday about the wedding of Daryl Lynne Teicher to Alan Edward Eisenberg referred incorrectly to Dr.
David L. Globus.
He is the bride's stepfather, not the bridegroom's.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
TELLERS OF TALES
"Tellebration," or Night of Storytelling for Adults, will take place Friday at more than 90 locations in 35 states.
One of five New York State venues is the United Methodist Church of Ossining, at the corner of Emwilton and South Highland Avenues, beginning at 8 P.M.
Organized in cooperation with the National Association for the Preservation and Perpetuation of Storytelling, the Ossining program is in its second year, presented by the Gather Round Storytellers of Ossining.


Malcolm X: The Facts, the Fictions, the Film
He was Malcolm Little when he was born on May 19, 1925, in Omaha, and El-Hajj Malik El-Shabazz when he fell in a fusillade of bullets on Feb. 21, 1965, in New York City.
In the relatively few years in between, he was Detroit Red, Satan and Malcolm X. Now, 27 years after his assassination, his complicated life has been refracted through the prisms of history and myth, confirming him as a compelling political presence but leaving conflicting interpretations of his legacy.
In his new film "Malcolm X," which opens on Wednesday, the director Spike Lee traces the black leader's dramatic evolution, from impoverished child, hustler and thief to convict to angry spokesman of the Nation of Islam contemptuous of "blue-eyed white devils" and, finally, after a pilgrimage to Mecca, to the powerful humanist who used his rhetorical gift to repudiate racial exclusivity before being gunned down at the age of 39.
The film stars Denzel Washington as Malcolm X, Angela Bassett as his wife, Betty Shabazz, and Al Freeman Jr. as Elijah Muhammad, leader of the Nation of Islam.


Corrections
A listing of Caribbean resorts on Nov. 1 misstated the telephone number for the French West Indies Tourist Board.
The board, which represents Guadeloupe, Martinique, St.
Barthelemy and St.
Martin, can be reached at (900) 990-0040. (The call costs 50 cents a minute.)


Heather R. Rogoff, W. T. Angstreich
Mr. and Mrs.
Harvey L. Rogoff of Roslyn Heights, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter Heather Robin Rogoff to William Tracy Angstreich, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Arthur Angstreich of Syosset, L.I.


Righteous Indignation
UNDUE PROCESS
A Story of How Political Differences Are Turned Into Crimes.
By Elliott Abrams. 243 pp.
New York: The Free Press. $22.95.


The Game of Outwitting Uninvited Munchers
AT the risk of being tarred and feathered, or worse, run out of town, an important question needs to be asked: Has the time come to talk about coexisting with wildlife?
There have been many encounters with uninvited furry creatures.
Rabbits, mice, chipmunks, skunks, moles and deer have uprooted, eaten, nibbled or destroyed many a fine garden display.
Notice, the adjective peaceful was not joined with coexistence as this may be too much to ask.
Most reactions from gardeners are far from friendly.
The results of the damage done are usually heartbreaking, and often costly.


Drivers Drawn To Branson, Mo.
Branson, Mo., which presents performances by country and western music stars in more than two dozen theaters, is the year's most popular auto vacation destination behind the perennial favorite, Orlando, Fla., according to the American Automobile Association.
Branson and the Ozark Mountains' Silver Dollar City amusement park nearby are expected to attract about 4.5 million visitors in 1992.
After Orlando and Branson, the A.A.A's auto travel counselors rated Yellowstone National Park third among auto vacation destinations.
San Diego and Lancaster, Pa., tied for fourth place, were followed by Williamsburg, Va.
The ratings are based on the number of inquiries about various destinations received by the A.A.A. from members.


Neither Dracula Nor Rumor Frightens Coppola
Francis Ford Coppola once offered to share a waffle with a friend.
Then he cut the waffle into the shape of a bow tie and tried to divide up the pieces.
"That's the trouble with you," the friend said.
"You can't just cut the thing in half." It is still the trouble with Mr.
Coppola, or at least an example of his chronic inability to do anything simply.
Asked to devise a "Dracula" with mass appeal, he has come up with the fanciest, most faithful Dracula movie ever made.
"Bram Stoker's Dracula," an extravagant parade of strange visual effects and stunning costumes starring Gary Oldman, Winona Ryder, Anthony Hopkins and Keanu Reeves, is the work of a man who could make an interesting-looking movie out of a menu.
But why not "Francis Ford Coppola's Dracula"?
"Because
I
don't think of stuff like this," said the director with a little laugh. Ensconced in a hotel tower on the Upper East Side of Manhattan last week, Mr. Coppola was preparing for a screening that would unveil the film to visiting journalists and would perhaps silence the cynics who have been calling it "The Bonfire of the Vampires." He appeared remarkably unworried about what might happen next.


Making Thanksgiving More Nutritional
AS with most holiday meals, the traditions of Thanksgiving are decidedly durable.
But this year, with the publication of the nutritional pyramid that recommends from 6 to 11 servings of bread and grain, 3 to 5 of vegetables and 2 to 4 of fruit each day, the many side dishes that accompany turkey have assumed even greater importance.
And it may be time to consider revising recipes for classic accompaniments.


CURRENCY
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen
124.08
123.40
130.38
per Dollar
German Mark
1.5505
1.5980
1.6745
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar
1.2645
1.2641
1.1308
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound
1.5505
1.5280
1.7637
U.S. Dollar per British Pound
Gold
$335.30
$335.80
$353.80
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


Mr. Pearce's Growing Domain
Seven years ago, the General Motors Corporation's legal department recruited an obscure trial lawyer from Bismarck, N.D., named Harry J. Pearce, who knew G.M. vehicle technology, having defended many product liability cases for the company.
Two weeks ago, in the G.M. shake up that elevated John F. (Jack) Smith Jr. to chief executive and John G. Smale to chairman, Mr.
Pearce, 50, was the surprise choice to become the executive vice president in charge of G.M.'s two huge nonautomotive assets -- the Electronic Data Systems Corporation and the G.M.
Hughes Electronics Corporation.


One-Woman Voyage
IT takes courage to perform a one-character full-length play.
Every flaw is apparent when the entire audience is focused on one person for an entire evening, and if the performance drags there is no one else to blame.
Fortunately there are no flaws or drags in the sterling production of "Shirley Valentine" at the Theater Three in Port Jefferson.
The one-woman play by Willy Russell and directed by Jerry M. Friedman features Marci Bing as a bored British homemaker who travels to Greece and along the way discovers her long-lost confidence and self-esteem.


Making a Difference; A Writer Is a Writer Is a ... Software Producer?
BEN CAHAN and Marc Madnick moved to Los Angeles two years ago to write programs.
They had television in mind, not computers.
As it turned out, however, they've sold more software than sitcoms.
Frustrated by the dearth of good computer programs designed for scriptwriting, they created their own, calling it Final Draft.


A Brother's Sadness Turns to Anger
In a small paneled room, Norman Rosenbaum rummages furiously through his archives, marshaling his evidence like the Federal prosecutor he once was in Australia.
His yarmulke slightly askew, he is looking for the newspaper article that appeared after a black man was killed by a white mob in Bensonhurst, the one that quoted David N. Dinkins, then a candidate for Mayor, as saying, "The tone and climate of this city does get set at City Hall."
Then he searches through his collection of Mayor Dinkins's press releases to find the one that was issued late last month after a jury acquitted a black teen-ager of murdering Mr.
Rosenbaum's brother, Yankel, during the racial violence in Crown Heights.


In a Harried Push-Off, a Lifesaver May Have Been Overlooked
The two weeks before Mike Plant left on his trans-Atlantic voyage, he hardly had time fora cup of coffee.
His efforts to please sponsors, as well as his frantic, last-minute pitch for additional funding, left Plant with little energy for more important matters -- such as getting his boat ready.
"It was like there was a cast of thousands every time you went out to sail the boat," said Rick Viggiano, an electronics expert who set up Plant's new 60-foot yacht, Coyote, with an array of navigational and computer equipment.


November 8-14: Iraqgate; The Attorney General Accedes to an Investigator's Prodding in Bank Case
When Frederick B. Lacey was named four weeks ago to investigate whether the Government bungled a politically sensitive bank fraud case involving large loans to Iraq, skeptical Democrats in Congress said he could not be independent.
After all, they said, the former Federal judge and corruption-busting prosecutor from New Jersey must regularly advise Attorney General William P. Barr on the investigation, even though the conduct of Justice Department officials and the prosecutors in Atlanta is at issue.


Syracuse Can Drop the Miami Who?
Finally, after 10 games, 9 victories and the exhilaration of a successful season, Syracuse is free to publicly focus on next week's showdown with Miami.
The Orange performed its final official duty this evening by defeating Boston College, 27-10, on the Eagles' home field.
By improving its record to 9-1, Syracuse clinched the Lambert Trophy, awarded to the best football team in the East.


Opening the Lane Through Fear?
To the Sports Editor:
With all the apparently unwarranted fear by players of contracting the AIDS virus on the courts of the National Basketball Association, I would think that it won't be long before some team devises the effective strategy of proclaiming that half or more of its players have tested H.I.V. positive.
SAM JARKESY Wayne, N.J.


How Very English, Sort Of
"EVERYBODY thinks I'm English because I sound English, but my mother is Sri Lankan," said Serena Blow.
"I don't look English, do I?"
Well, as a matter of fact, with her pale skin and unruly brown hair, Ms.
Blow, a fashion designer, looks as English as she sounds.
Her speech is what you would expect from the daughter of a family that has an estate in Gloucestershire.


BMW Puts a V8 Under the 740's Hood
TRADITIONAL wisdom used to tell us that high-end cars were bulletproof in a recession.
The idea was that folks with money continued to have money, and they didn't worry about where their next Rolls-Royce was coming from.
That notion has had some holes poked in it in recent years, however.
Falling stocks, a Federal luxury tax, the weakening dollar and ever more bearish conditions have made the car business a bit more egalitarian when it comes to taking lumps, and the makers of fancy cars have been hurting just like the rest.


No Canoes, Either
American Indians danced and sang to open a Manhattan exhibit, Nov. 12.


Gang Smashes Window and Grabs Jewelry
With customers and employees milling about inside, a gang of 10 thieves smashed the window of a jewelry store in lower Manhattan with a sledge hammer yesterday afternoon and escaped with $2,000 in jewels, the police said.
Bedros Tek, the owner of the store, Seaport Jewelry at 50 Fulton Street, and one of his workers were helping three customers at 12:30 P.M. when the front display window came crashing in, said Sgt.
Tina Mohrmann, a Police Department spokeswoman.


November 8-14; Gay Sailor Returns to Navy Base


Red Shoes
Like flicks of flame, red slippers, mules and sandals are shooting out from underneath this season's evening hemlines.
Worn with equally incendiary hosiery, this is a look that adds a fiery finish to everything from ball gowns to pajamas.
Not only are red legs and shoes now worn to accessorize matching evening wear, they can also create a blaze of style when teamed with a black, purple or even an ice-white outfit.
But keep in mind that playing with fire requires some caution.
The shoes had better be spectacular in shape and detail, because everyone will notice them.


'Home Alone 2': Sequel Success? Or Pow! Splat!
Family loves boy.
Family loses boy.
Family finds boy.
Film grosses $285 million.
That's the kind of plot that warms the heart of a studio executive.
It has also created a clear mandate for the makers of "Home Alone," the most successful comedy in film history: do it again, only bigger and better.
Twentieth Century Fox, which has barely finished counting the coins from "Home Alone," has every expectation that "Home Alone 2: Lost in New York," which opens on Friday, will be an enormous Christmas present to itself.
Parents loved Kevin, the boy played by Macaulay Culkin, the film's 9-year-old star, and identified with the anguish of two parents who accidentally leave their child behind in the mad rush to the airport for their Christmas vacation in Paris.
Children loved the child and rooted for him as he waged guerrilla war against Harry and Marv, the two inept but persistent burglars played by Joe Pesci and Daniel Stern.


Airport Vans Are Introduced For Disabled
To make bus service to the three major airports serving New York City more accessible to those with disabilities, an airport shuttle service from Manhattan has begun operating two vans with wheelchair lifts.
New York Gray Line said its service was being made available at no additional cost.
But the company requested that reservations be made 24 hours in advance of a flight.
The number: (212) 397-2620.
The new vans are slightly larger than the 11-passenger vehicles that make up most of the Gray Line fleet.
The wheelchair-accessible vehicles will carry 12 passengers in regular seats and two occupying wheelchair lift slots.


This 'Quarrel' Spans Ages
It makes a certain sense that a modest film called "The Quarrel" would set off an immodest amount of arguing -- "no, no, say
discussion
!" amended the Israeli director Eli Cohen. Indeed, the writer, producer, director and actors lined up on opposing sides of the conflict presented by this Canadian film. To complete "The Quarrel," everybody finally agreed just to disagree.
The script's ideological debate even took on a life of its own, with the two leading actors continuing the tug-of-war off-set.
"I would say to them, 'Why are you talking about ideas? Let's talk about the complicated relationships between your characters,' " said Mr.
Cohen, recounting the memory with some amazement.
" 'No, no, let's talk about ideas,' they would say. Can you imagine? From actors to hear such things?"


Sound Bytes; Here Comes Comdex/Fall Again, With Thumbs Up
COMDEX/FALL is the mother of all trade shows.
This year's five-day personal computer extravaganza, which opens tomorrow in Las Vegas, is expected to attract 130,000 buyers, sellers, manufacturers and journalists, who come to make deals and see the latest technologies.
Sheldon G. Adelson, chairman and chief executive of the Interface Group in Needham, Mass., an operator of computer trade shows and vacation companies, started the Comdex show in 1979, in a hotel ballroom.
Now he owns, among other things, the Sands hotel and casino.
Question: What is the industry's current financial and emotional health?


For a Change, Devils Win Two Straight
The Devils' erratic and frustrating pattern of alternating victories and losses came to an end tonight.
They defeated the Capitals in overtime here, 4-3, after a 3-0 triumph in New Jersey 24 hours earlier to post two consecutive victories for the first time since the first four games of the season.
Bobby Holik's eighth goal of the season 2 minutes 9 seconds into the overtime improved the Devils' record to 10-7-0 and moved them a second-place tie with the Rangers in the Patrick Division.


NORTHEAST NOTEBOOK: Ogletown, Del.; An Office Park Just for Credit
A CREDIT-CARD company that began modestly 10 years ago in a converted strip-shopping center here has bought a 235-acre office park in nearby Stanton for its expanding business.
The company, MBNA Corporation, calls itself the nation's third-largest lender through bank credit cards, after Citibank and Chase Manhattan.


Foreign Affairs; Putting America First
"By bringing to Washington a government determined to
govern
," Arthur Schlesinger Jr. wrote of Franklin Delano Roosevelt, " [ he ]  unlocked new energies in a people who had lost faith, not just in government's ability to meet the economic crisis, but almost in the ability of anyone to do anything."
Voters wanted their faith renewed in 1992.
So, many once again set aside their mounting cynicism about governmental activism and selected Bill Clinton.


Weatherstripping Makes for a Snug Door
ENTRY doors and doors leading to unheated parts of a house need weatherstripping to eliminate drafts around the edges.
Most entry doors have some form of weatherstripping, and often it is a type that can be restored if it has lost its effectiveness.
With other kinds or where no weatherstripping exists, installing new weatherstripping is usually easy.
To test weatherstripping, wait for a windy day.
Then close the door and move a tissue or a lighted candle slowly around the edges of the door on the inside.
Excess movement of the tissue or flame indicates draftiness caused by air leaking past the stripping.


Ski Ticket for Olympic Slopes
Skiers visiting one of the French Alp resorts where the last Winter Olympics were held will be able to test slopes at the other sites by buying a new six-day lift pass.
The ticket, known as the Forfait Olympique, will be sold at Les Trois Vallees, Val d'Isere-Tignes (also known as L'Espace Killy) and La Plagne-Les Arcs for about $175 to $190, depending on the resort where it is purchased.
Skiers can ski for up to six days at the resort where they buy the ticket and for one day at each of the other two major Olympic sites.
The three sites were the scene of the men's and women's Alpine, Nordic and freestyle events.


Sally C. Wofford, Mark A. Girand
Sally Cotton Wofford, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Allen H. Wofford of Plandome, L.I., was married yesterday to Mark Andrew Girand, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles A. Girand of Dallas.
The Rev.
Kurt Von Roeschlaub performed the ceremony at St.
Stephen's Episcopal Church in Port Washington, L.I.


HOME ON THE RANGE
I was struck by the way Molly O'Neill makes meat-eating sound daring and romantic (Food: "Home on the Range," Oct. 18).
Slaughter is "sacrificial slaying." Meat satisfies "the passion for freedom and self-determination." Words can distance us from reality, but a few images from the slaughterhouse would show that O'Neill's cowboy romance is based upon pain and terror.
CAROL HEE BARNETT
Rush, N.Y.


Keeping the Moat, but Putting Out the Welcome Mat
The notion that a work of architecture could symbolize a corporation -- that it could give concrete meaning to a company's image, its aspirations, its role in the community -- suffered a major blow with the announcement last month that CBS was looking for outside tenants for its celebrated Manhattan headquarters.
The company that made "total design" a byword when its Eero Saarinen skyscraper was finished in 1965 now wants to turn 20 floors of its building over to others, and has hired an architect to change the interior of the building to make it more palatable to the rental market.
This $20 million renovation is no routine updating of a 1960's building.
It represents nothing less than an attempt to convert one of the great modern buildings in New York into an ordinary speculative office tower.
In a sense, you can't blame CBS.
Who needs a monument like this today?
Certainly not the stripped-down CBS of the Laurence Tisch era.
The CBS building was built for another kind of company altogether.
It was conceived by the legendary chairman of CBS, William S. Paley, and the company's president, Frank Stanton, as a structure that would stand as tangible evidence of the quality of the so-called Tiffany network.
Paley and Mr.
Stanton hired Eero Saarinen and made it clear to him that they wanted a special kind of building, a skyscraper that would bespeak strength, power and, above all, dignity.


Perspectives: Property Taxes; A Sale Underscores the Market's Decline
WITH his client at his side, the sales broker was explaining last week how a Korean clothing company had come to buy the 12-story office building at 1270 Broadway, on the southeast corner of 33d Street.
It seems that the S.B.
Cambridge clothing affiliate of Sampoong Company Ltd. of Seoul wanted to sell its Cambridge Members brand in the retail market in Manhattan.
It needed a store.
What better location than 33d and Broadway, a shopping hub near Macy's, A.&amp; S., Toys 'R' Us et al?


The Bulldozer of Desire
THE SAMURAI
By Julia Kristeva.
Translated by Barbara Bray. 341 pp.
New York: Columbia University Press.


The Game of Outwitting Uninvited Munchers
AT the risk of being tarred and feathered, or worse, run out of town, an important question needs to be asked: Has the time come to talk about coexisting with wildlife?
There have been many encounters with uninvited furry creatures.
Rabbits, mice, chipmunks, skunks, moles and deer have uprooted, eaten, nibbled or destroyed many a fine garden display.
Notice, the adjective peaceful was not joined with coexistence as this may be too much to ask.
Most reactions from gardeners are far from friendly.
The results of the damage done are usually heartbreaking, and often costly.


Susan Forbes, Bruce Williams
Mr. and Mrs.
William J. Florence Jr. of Bedford, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Susan Forbes, to Bruce Williams, the son of Fernando H. Williams of Houston and Jane Voulgaris of Fredericksburg, Tex.
A January wedding is planned.
Ms.
Forbes, 34 years old, is an investment banker with the Texas Commerce Bank in Houston.
She graduated from Smith College and received an M.B.A. from Rice University.
Her father is the corporation counsel for the City of Peekskill, N.Y.
Her mother, Judith Florence, is an independent college admissions adviser.
Ms.
Forbes's first marriage ended in divorce.


'THE BUSY, BUSY WASP'
Your article states that an Oxford degree earned with second-class honors is, in Oxford parlance, "a bad degree." An Oxford second, which I am proud to have been awarded, is no more a "bad" degree than a degree earned magna cum laude is, in the parlance of Harvard, Yale or Princeton.


Dale Givan, Brent Kynoch
Dale Anne Givan, the heart transplant liaison at the Washington Hospital Center in Washington, was married yesterday to James Brent Kynoch, the president of A.A.S.
Environmental Inc., an environmental-engineering concern in Bethesda, Md.
The Rev.
Thomas C. Starnes performed the ceremony at the Chevy Chase (Md.) United Methodist Church.
Mrs.
Kynoch, 33 years old, graduated from Vanderbilt University, as did her husband.
She received a master's degree in nursing from Columbia University.
She is a daughter of Sheila Givan of Cold Spring Harbor, L.I., and the late Dr.
Thurman B. Givan Jr.
The bride's father was a pediatrician in Huntington, L.I., and a chief of pediatrics at Huntington Hospital.
Her paternal grandfather, the late Dr.
Thurman B. Givan Sr., was a president of the New York State Medical Society.


Jamine Shechter, Daniel Sterman
Dr.
Jamine Lee Shechter, an ophthalmologist in Valley Forge, Pa., was married in Philadelphia last evening to Dr.
Daniel H. Sterman, an attending physician in emergency medicine at the Hospital of the University of Pennsylvania in Philadelphia.
Rabbi Sharon Stiefel performed the ceremony at the Sheraton Society Hill Hotel.
Dr.
Shechter, who is 29 years old and is keeping her name, also is a clinical associate professor of ophthalmology at the University of Pennsylvania, where she received a medical degree.
She graduated magna cum laude from Haverford College.
She is the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Harold Shechter of Columbus, Ohio.
Her father is a professor emeritus of chemistry at Ohio State University in Columbus.


Equity, Plus or Minus
When Sandee Hill whispers, "Gender equity," she notices that the hairs on the back of the neck of strong men stand straight up.
When Donna Lopiano roars, "Gender equity," everyone notices that strong men head for the storm cellars.
As you might guess, "gender equity" is the hot buzz phrase in athletics these days.
The N.C.A.A. has a Gender Equity Task Force, and there is the hope/fear that college sports is finally moving toward a real enforcement of Title IX, the laws that bar sex discrimination at institutions that receive Federal aid.
Some people think gender equity will lead us to that sweaty Nirvana, the Fair Shake Athletic Club.
Some people think gender equity will destroy college sports as we know it.
Sandee Hill does not think it will do either.
Donna Lopiano thinks it will do both.


POSTINGS: F.D.I.C. Auction; 270 Properties Going on Sale
Seeking buyers for the properties it has inherited from failed banks, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation is putting 270 office buildings, shopping centers, apartments, hotels and industrial buildings on the auction block next month.
The nationwide auction, to be held Dec. 1 and 2, will be conducted in Dallas with hookups, via two-way satelites, to bidders in Boston, Los Angeles and Miami.


Megan Roberts, Robert Gabriel
Mary Megan Roberts, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
T.
Patrick Roberts of Shaker Heights, Ohio, was married there yesterday to Robert Paul Gabriel, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
K.
Georg Gabriel of Washington.
The Rev.
Robert Wenz, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated at the Church of St.
Dominic.
The Rev.
Dr.
John C. Harper, an Episcopal minister, took part in the ceremony.
Mrs.
Gabriel, who is 27 years old, is known as Megan.
She was until recently an intern in the furniture and decorative arts division of Adam A. Weschler &amp; Son, an auction house in Washington.
She graduated from Marymount College of Virginia.
Her father is the founder and chairman of Roberts Advertising, an advertising agency in Cleveland.
Her mother, Kathleen A. Roberts, is a jewelry designer in University Heights, Ohio.


Finding the Best Judges In Nassau County
In judicial races, name is everything.
Any article on this subject is inherently biased for those mentioned.
In this case, candidates with multiple endorsements were mentioned, while those with single-party affiliations were not.
This, of course, falls right into the trap set by Mr.
Mondello, who refuses bipartisan endorsing in favor of the power of the Nassau Republican machine.


All About Yves
YOU SEE, I HAVEN'T FORGOTTEN
By Yves Montand with Herve Hamon and Patrick Rotman.
Translated by Jeremy Leggatt.
Illustrated. 463 pp.
New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $25.


Trooper's Fall Shakes Both Police and Public
In the days before his crimes unraveled his life, David Harding was a rising star in the elite criminal investigation arm of the New York State police: intelligent, recruiting-poster handsome and marked for great things.
Now, after admitting that he faked fingerprint evidence in four sensational crimes in this hilly central region of New York, the 34-year-old Mr.
Harding has shocked, angered and embarrassed the 4,000-member state police force.
And a special prosecutor is now digging into dozens of closed cases to find out if Mr.
Harding used his forensic skills to frame other defendants.


Arlene Katz, Jeffrey Spitzer
Arlene E. Katz, a lawyer, was married last evening to Dr.
Jeffrey A. Spitzer, an ophthalmologist.
Rabbis Melvin Sirner and Arnold Turetsky performed the ceremony at the Beth El Synagogue in New Rochelle, N.Y.
Mrs.
Spitzer, 32 years old, is a staff lawyer in the juvenile rights division of the Legal Aid Society in the Bronx.
She graduated from the State University at Albany and received a law degree from Emory University.


A Telephone Visionary Who Is Cutting the Cords for Consumers
As with most things with Craig O. McCaw, there was no high-voltage epiphany, no eureka, no heartbeat-skipper that he can point to in 1979 when the realization that changed his life and the course of an industry began to take hold.
It was merely a gradual dawning that came as he drove around the streets of Seattle in his 1974 Pinto station wagon with the most advanced car telephone then available, dialing 10 times, sometimes 20 times, even 30 times, just to complete a single, scratchy, disconnects-if-you-turn-the-wrong-way phone call.


Corrections
A map on Nov. 1 with two articles about Costa Rica omitted a label on the country bordered by Mexico and Guatemala.
It is Belize.


Taxpayer Revolt in Colorado Vote Raises Alarm About Lost Services
It was potentially the most radical change in any state government this year, and it did not involve a candidate.
Colorado voters approved a measure that stripped the power of state and local governments to increase taxes.
Any increase in taxes -- from the state income tax to a school district's mill levy -- now requires approval of the voters.


Profile/Marvin Runyon; 730,000 Employees and a Challenge
The JOB has been called Mission Impossible, and the list of particulars is daunting.
The work force is bigger than the American payrolls of G.M. and I.B.M. combined.
The unions are powerful.
The pay is modest.
Costs are rising.
Service is patchy.
The customers are grumbling.
Rivals are nibbling away more of the business.
Meddling politicians are an ever-present threat.
No wonder the previous occupant of the office said the job was like being a "public whipping boy."
The job title that comes with this litany of headaches?
Postmaster General of the United States.


What's Next for Holyfield?
It was a little after midnight this morning when Evander Holyfield, now a former champion, made it to the post-fight party at the Mirage.
Onlookers rose to their feet to applaud him for the courage he had shown in a losing effort against Riddick Bowe.


South Carolina Settling Catawba Claim
This state is close to settling the land claim of the Catawba Indian tribe.
If the settlement is approved by Congress, the claim will raise the total Federal Government payments to Indian tribes east of the Mississippi River to nearly $200 million in the aftermath of landmark Supreme Court decisions since 1975.
In return for $30 million from the Federal Government and $20 million from South Carolina and local public and private sources, the Catawbas will relinquish claim to 144,000 acres surrounding and including this picturesque college town of 42,000 people 35 miles south of Charlotte, N.C.
The land now includes such valuable property as Winthrop College and Heritage USA, the Christian theme park built by the disgraced evangelist Jim Bakker.


Stacy Keach Plays Pac-Man In a Gadget Play
"Solitary Confinement" is one of those theatrical thrillers about which little can be said without divulging the surprises that are its only reason for being.
But I guess I'm not spilling any beans by noting that the work (at the Nederlander Theater) is a piece of state-of-the-art junk.
The set, which represents the aerie of the reclusive billionaire Richard Jannings in Albuquerque, N.M., comes equipped with the latest in video technology, computer-run security systems, electronically activated wall safes and paper shredders and I can't begin to tell you what else.
If the Sharper Image is your favorite store, you will take instantly to William Barclay's scenery, which performs as industriously as any actor in the cast, including Stacy Keach, its hard-working star.


The Riot's Ashes/A special report.; Separateness Grows in a Scarred Los Angeles
Among the lasting casualties of the Los Angeles riots is Julius Butler's faith in the future, his belief that with good will and hard work the competing ethnic groups of this fast-changing city could find a road to harmony.
"We've been saying for years to the younger generation, 'Hold on, there's hope,' " said Mr.
Butler, a 60-year-old black lawyer who is active in church affairs and youth counseling.
"What do we tell them now?


This Week's Numbers
Consensus
Last Period
Estimates
(I.D.E.A. Inc.)
Monday
Oct. industrial production, percent change
0.2
0.1
Oct. capacity utilization, percent
78.4
78.3
Oct. business inventories, percent change
0.3
0.2
Wednesday
Oct. trade deficit, billions
-$9
-$8.5
Thursday
Oct. housing starts, millions annual rate
1.26
1.26
Oct. housing permits, millions annual rate
1.12
1.16
Monday: Treasury refunding settlement  Tuesday: Federal Reserve Open Market Committee meets *
European Community budget ministers meet *
Johnson-Redbook retail survey results  Wednesday: Treasury announces two- and five-year auctions  Friday : Federal Reserve releases minutes of Open Market Committee meeting for October


Geraniums, Too, Have Odd Relatives
Robin Parer, who runs a little specialty nursery in Kentfield, near San Francisco, has collected her geraniums at 14,000 feet in Peru, where they were being eaten by llamas, as well as down in the crater of a Hawaiian volcano and in a leech-filled swamp in Australia.
"The lure of the chase," she said with a smile.


The Romance of Boston
CITYSCAPES OF BOSTON
An American City Through Time.
By Robert Campbell and Peter Vanderwarker.
Illustrated. 220 pp.
Boston: A Peter Davison Book/ Houghton Mifflin Company. $35.
PLANNING THE CITY UPON A HILL
Boston Since 1630.
By Lawrence W. Kennedy.
Illustrated. 314 pp.
Amherst: University of Massachusetts Press. $27.50.


Corrections
An article on Oct. 18 about the artist James McMullan, author and illustrator of a children's book, "The Noisy Giants' Tea Party," with his wife, Kate McMullan, misstated his relationship with Giraffics, an art gallery in East Hampton.
The gallery represents him; he does not own it.


A Preview of a Kanaga Retrospective
"THE Family of Man," the exhibition assembled by the photographer Edward Steichen at the Museum of Modern Art, took place 37 years ago.
Its catalogue, however, is still very much in print.
And a frustrating document it is: no information about the photographers included in the show and too many images reduced to the size of a commemorative stamp.
A picture that gets a page to itself, however, is one of a turbaned woman standing with two children in Florida sunlight.
She is obviously as poor as migrant laborers come, yet her stance is as elegant as any to be seen on a couturier's runway.
Of all the photographs in the show, this was Steichen's favorite, and it was he who supplied the title, "She Is a Tree of Life to Them."
The photographer was Consuelo Kanaga (1894-1978), whose first major retrospective is scheduled for the Brooklyn Museum in February.
Those unwilling to wait that long can get a foretaste of her work in the display organized by Kristina Amadeus for the Museum Gallery at the public library here.
They can also obtain, from Brooklyn, "Consuelo Kanaga: An American Photographer," the catalogue-biography that goes with the retrospective.


Susan Kingsolver and Dean Maltz
Susan Lynn Kingsolver, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James K. Kingsolver of Tryon, N.C., was married last evening to Dean Ivan Maltz, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Douglas Maltz of Woodmere, L.I.
Rabbi Judith Lewis performed the ceremony at the University Club in New York.
Mrs.
Maltz is a first vice president and a securities broker at Smith Barney, Harris Upham &amp; Company in New York.
She graduated from the University of California at Berkeley.
Her father, who is retired, was a divisional manager in Chicago for Reynolds Metals.


Speaking the Language of Business on Behalf of the Mayor
After nearly two years of negotiations, the Dinkins administration had by last spring offered the Morgan Stanley Group what even the investment bank called very attractive incentives to keep it from moving its headquarters to Stamford, Conn.
But to the frustration of city officials, Morgan Stanley held out throughout the summer.
Staying might be too big a gamble, given New York's long history of raising business taxes, its leaders said.


Nature's Mystical Poetry, Written in Paint
More than 15 years ago in this newspaper, Hilton Kramer began a review of Agnes Martin's work by lamenting that no New York museum had seen fit to do a retrospective of her art.
Well, it has finally happened.
There have been shows across the country and throughout Europe.
But only now, at the age of 80, is the Canandian-born Martin being honored in the city where she established herself as one of the most remarkable artists in a generation of remarkable artists.
The show at the Whitney Museum of American Art, through Jan. 31, is a welcome event, long overdue.
You can see from this display, nonetheless, why a museum might pause before undertaking a Martin exhibition.
Since at least the early 1960's, she has been exploring the same territory, conceiving 6-by-6-foot canvases distinguished from one another by significant but sometimes almost imperceptible differences, not radical changes.
Her mature art is radical in its simplification.


Paying Customers
To the Editor:
Women don't like to look at men's bodies?
Tell that to me and my friends when we go to see Mel Gibson or Patrick Swayze.
My sister and I were very happy to see Julian Sands completely naked in "A Room With a View." Women like gorgeous male bodies and will pay to go see them.
JOANNE SWARTZBERG Madison, Wis.


Tech Notes; Technology Speaks, Gods Obey
In a Las Vegas mall, Bacchus materializes in a drunken stupor, his stomach rising and falling.
Stirring, he beckons Apollo, Plutus and Venus to life, and they genuflect in greeting.
Apollo plucks the strings of a lyre, then sweeps his hand overhead to summon the dawn, and Venus follows by commanding the constellations to move.
Bacchus' belly shakes when he laughs, and he raises a goblet in a toast.
A reveler's wild daydream?
No, just a host of technologies enlisted in the service of exuberant fancy.
And this fancy from Roman mythology is stopping a lot of 20th-century traffic.


A la Carte; Two Major Events for Wine and Food Tasters
TWO of the largest food and wine events to be held on Long Island will take place within a four-day period.
One is the third annual "An Autumn Evening's Wine and Food Tasting" and the other is "The Great Chefs of Long Island, " and both include innovative touches.
The "Autumn Evening's Wine and Food Tasting," which has been compared to the highly popular "Windows on Long Island" in Manhattan, features a wine auction of 70 bottles, many from prestigious wineries.
"Great Chefs of Long Island" has invited 30 of the Island's leading chefs to create a signature dish using an Island wine.


Remaking Spaces
To the Editor:
I read with special interest your "Remaking Spaces for Public Use" on Sept. 27, particularly your mention of the removal of the 54 chairs and 17 tables from the public atrium area of the Hotel Parker Meridien, since I was the original complainant to the Department of Buildings in that matter.
It has been a long and frustrating process.


Surge in Home Foreclosures and Evictions Shattering Families
The number of homes in foreclosure in New York, New Jersey and Connecticut has almost doubled since the middle of last year, rising to levels not seen in decades.
The sudden surge in foreclosures, after a steady climb since the late 1980's, reflects the region's job losses, falling real-estate values and a growing backlog of cases that have clogged the courts, delaying some foreclosures for months and even years, lenders and lawyers say.


Port Chester Seeks An Earlier Last Call
AT 2:10 A.M., traffic inches south on Route 1 heading into this village on the border with Connecticut.
Just 15 minutes earlier, "Last call" had been issued in bars throughout Connecticut, and now hundreds of cars were joining the Sunday morning exodus to Westchester, where bars remain open until 4 A.M.
On summer nights and during holidays, the police say they have often counted more than 2,000 cars coming down Route 1.
These young, affluent residents of Stamford and Greenwich are heading for places like Marty's, the Beat and 7 Willow Street, already filled with Westchester County residents.
In 7 Willow Street, which throbs to the melodic funk sound of the Groove Tubes, strobe lights sweep over a bar dispensing Jell-O shots, a mix of vodka and Jell-O.
A barmaid here, wearing a skin-tight outfit revealing her midriff, pours Jack Daniels over a three-foot-long "ski bar," or slide, made of ice.
Patrons waiting with cups below receive a whisky slush.
Like Fort Lauderdale in Spring
But now, the village that claims both the highest number of bars and the most drunken driving arrests per capita in the county wants to call a halt to the party scene, which the police say has turned downtown Port Chester into a scene reminiscent of spring break in Fort Lauderdale, Fla.


Dance in Review
Mariko Sanjo  Tenri Cultural Institute SoHo
Youthful energy and high spirits are a fine thing, but there is nothing quite like the burnished eloquence of a mature modern dancer.
And Mariko Sanjo proved that on Saturday night.
The Japanese choreographer-dancer performs rarely in New York and that is a great pity.
Her new reworking of "Bird," a signature solo set to taped repetitions of a hauntingly simple Catalan tune played by Pablo Casals, is as much a small miracle of expressive distillation as ever.


Philip Glass to Open Lincoln Center Talks
The composer Philip Glass is to open the 1992-93 Lincoln Center Off Stage series tonight at 6 o'clock with a discussion of his opera "The Voyage," which had its premiere last month at the Metropolitan Opera.
The conversation, questions and answers will be followed by an informal wine-and-cheese reception in the Stanley H. Kaplan Penthouse, on the 10th floor of the Samuel B. and David Rose Building, 165 West 65th Street.
Other scheduled artists in the series are the actress Jane Alexander (Dec. 10), who will talk about her role in Wendy Wasserstein's play "The Sisters Rosensweig"; Alexandre Rockwell, the director of "In the Soup," and Jennifer Beals, a co-star of the film (Jan. 19); and the pianists Misha and Cipa Dichter (Jan. 28), who are celebrating the 20th anniversary of their first joint performance.


New Russian Calendar Looks Oddly Like Old
To the Editor:
For some reason your Moscow correspondents did not report on the new, supposedly post-Communist holidays decreed by the Russian Supreme Soviet on Sept. 25.
According to the Moscow news agency Interfax not much has changed: while introducing two new public holidays -- Old Style Christmas on Jan. 7 and State Sovereignty Day on June 12 -- the solons kept all the old Soviet holidays.
Thus, May 1 remains the workers' day, and Nov. 7 continues to celebrate the "Socialist Revolution."


Fire In Brooklyn Causes 100 Residents to Be Evacuated


Review/Pop; Gilberto Gil on Pleasure, Fate and Other Things Worth Dancing About
"Parabolicamara," the song behind the title of Gilberto Gil's new album "Parabolic" (Tropical Storm/ W.E.A.), is about the way modern communications have shrunk the world.
But when Mr.
Gil performed it on Friday night at Town Hall, the last twanging notes came from a berimbau, the one-stringed percussion instrument that is synonymous with Bahian tradition.
Mr.
Gil's music dances in the space between local and international, between home-grown tradition and global information.
As his lyrics ruminate over history, pleasure and the fate of the poor, his mastery of rhythm invents and reinvents the groove.
Mr.
Gil knows how to put together a vamp that repays countless repetitions.
He can write the kind of serpentine harmonies that bossa nova borrowed from jazz, but he's more likely to work wonders with two or three chords and as many riffs.
Starting with funk, reggae or one of Brazil's local rhythms, he adds twists and quirks that personalize the music and make each reiteration a surprise.
At Town Hall, his version of a Jimi Hendrix song, "I Just Wanna Talk to You," used a sparse, syncopated four-note rhythm, picked out on acoustic guitar, that invoked its own hypnotic realm between Brazilian music and Hendrix's blues, as Mr.
Gil's singing drifted from a spooky low register to a weightless falsetto.


New Equity Issues Expected This Week
The following equity offerings are expected this week:
Arrow Electronics Inc., $75 million of convertible subordinated debentures due 2002, B-2/B+.
Salomon Brothers.
Baybanks Inc., 2 million common shares. Morgan Stanley.


Review/Pop; Al Jarreau's Night of Equal-Opportunity Joie de Vivre
"Look at you! It kind of resembles the United Nations!" Al Jarreau exclaimed to the upscale, interracial audience near the start of his concert at the Paramount at Madison Square Garden on Friday evening.
The pop-jazz singer went on to point out that he was "an equal-opportunity employer with women in key places." He was alluding to the fact that in addition to two female backup singers, his ensemble included Teri Lyne Carrington on drums.
The upbeat cultural ecumenism that Mr.
Jarreau celebrated extended to his music, which infused a basic pop-funk style with Brazilian and Afro-Cuban inflections.
Throughout the concert, which opened with an elaborately ornamented rendition of Elton John's "Your Song" and closed with a stomping sing-along "C. C. Rider," he kept the mood almost giddily upbeat.


Turning the Issue Around: How Politics Has an Affect
AN intensely discussed subject during the Presidential race was the pervasive influence of consumer advertising, Madison Avenue style, on politics.
But consider the reverse: the impact of politics on consumer ads.
An agency executive who has done just that is Craig Middleton, worldwide executive vice president and director of marketing and planning at McCann-Erickson Worldwide Interpublic Group in New York.
The result is an intriguing white paper called "Different Reasons, Same Conclusions," in which he asserts that consumer-product marketers hoping to achieve dominance for their brands could profit from studying how candidates for office vie for votes.


Piano Series at the 92d St. Y
The pianist Jeffrey Siegel is to present the second in his four-part Keyboard Conversations series at 8 P.M. on Dec. 1 at the Tisch Center for the Arts of the 92d Street Y, 1395 Lexington Avenue, on the Upper East Side.
The program is entitled "Robert Schumann: Musical Love Letters." The two other presentations will be "The 20th Century's Three Great B's: Berg, Bartok and Barber," on Feb. 9, and "A Chopin Showcase," on April 21.
Tickets are $15.
Information: (212) 996-1100.


No Headline
"I planted and they died; I planted and they died. We had no rain. We were waiting for God." -- NUR IBRAHIM OMER, a destitute Somali.  [ A6:2. ]


Argentina Amid Crisis Over Economic Policies
Argentina's economic adjustment plan is suffering the most serious crisis since it was put into effect 19 months ago, bringing remarkable stability to a country famous for hyperinflation.
The plan also attracted billions of dollars in foreign investment, balanced a budget chronically in deficit, brought almost two years of economic growth and became a model for the rest of Latin America.


The Can't-Miss Knicks? Not Exactly
There is no question that it was a big victory for the Knicks.
They played the Celtics at home the night after a painful loss to the Washington Bullets, and the day before leaving for their first West Coast trip of the season.
It was ugly, sloppy and won on defense alone, but after the Knicks finished off Boston, 85-80, at Madison Square Garden Saturday night there was a palpable feeling of relief in the New York locker room.
"This was an important win for us," Charles Smith said.
"There's no doubt about it -- you definitely want to go out on the road on a positive note. You don't want to dwell on the negative past if you lose a tough game before the road."


A Landmark For Families
The Revenue Act of 1992, which President Bush vetoed the day after the election, included a provision to begin the measurement and possibly the end of welfare dependency.
This act marked the first occasion ever that Congress declared a national policy regarding children and families.
The act said, "It is the policy of the United States to strengthen families." It provided for an annual report on welfare dependency and for annual numerical goals for recipients and outlays.
It established an interim goal of reducing dependency to 10 percent of families with children. (Last year's level was 13.5 percent.)


Don't Blame Croatia for Limiting Refugees; Don't Punish Serbians
To the Editor:
In "Stop Serbia. Bomb Serbia." (Op-Ed, Oct. 13), Don M. Snider speaks blithely of punishing and isolating Serbia's leaders.
But what Mr.
Snider demands is much more than this and should not be hidden by euphemisms.
His proposals would be more accurately depicted if their true consequences were described:


Central Asia's Drug Bazaar
In at least one area, the move toward a free market in the former Soviet Union may be succeeding.
But this is hardly good news for the West.
The new states, especially those in Central Asia, have been nurturing two of the most profitable capitalist activities: organized crime and narcotics trafficking.
Unfortunately, the Bush Administration has largely ignored these disturbing developments.
President-elect Bill Clinton would do well to make their containment part of his policy toward the former Soviet Union.


Pistons-Wolves Trade
The Minnesota Timberwolves have traded forwards GERALD GLASS and MARK RANDALL for center BRAD SELLERS and guard LANCE BLANKS of the Detroit Pistons.
The trade, announced yesterday, also gave the Timberwolves a conditional second-round pick in the year 2000.


BRIEFS
Debt  *
Chase Manhattan Corp., New York, is offering $200 million of 7 1/2 percent subordinated notes due 1997 at 99.92 to yield 7.518 percent through Merrill Lynch.
The noncallable notes are rated Baa-3 by Moody's and BBB by S.&amp; P. *
Western Co. of North America, Houston, an oilfield service company, is offering $100 million face amount of 12 7/8 percent 10-year unsecured senior notes due 2002 at a price to yield 13.33 percent through Salomon Brothers.
The issue is rated B-1 by Moody's and B+ by S.&amp; P. Ratings  *
GPA Group's commercial paper rating has been reduced to B from A-3 by Standard &amp; Poor's, which also cut the senior unsecured debt rating of GPA Leasing USA 1 Inc. and GPA Leasing USA Sub 1 Inc. to B+ from BBB.
At the same time, Moody's cut GPA's commercial paper to Not Prime from Prime-3 and the guaranteed senior unsecured debt of its subsidiaries to Ba-2 from Baa-3.
GPA, an airline leasing company, is based in Shannon, Ireland.


Bridge
An annual game in memory of two great American players, Harold Ogust and Howard Schenken, always attracts a good field.
Winners on Saturday at the Young Men's Philanthropic League, 9 East 80th Street, were Jill Blanchard and Jon Greenspan.
Runners-up were Billy Rosenbaum and Nancy Kalow, in a fine performance by a long-shot partnership.
Rosenbaum has given many years of service to the Greater New York Bridge Association and is likely to be chosen next month to serve his second year as president.
On the diagramed deal on Saturday he held the South cards and opened one heart.
Most North players would raise one heart to two hearts, but one spade was the choice, with a preference to two hearts to follow.


Brown Retaining Ciba-Geigy Work
Earle Palmer Brown/New York said Friday that it had retained the Ciba-Geigy animal health division account, with billings estimated at $10 million to $15 million, after a two-month review that also included Long, Haymes &amp; Carr Inc. in Winston-Salem, N.C., and Charles Tombras Advertising in Knoxville, Tenn.


PERU COUP REPORT IS NOW QUESTIONED
Two days after President Alberto K. Fujimori disclosed a failed coup and assassination attempt, the details remain so sketchy that there is growing skepticism about the veracity of the official account.
The debate over what happened early Friday morning came as terrorist groups appeared to step up their activity around the country.


Newsweek to Be Issued Quarterly on CD-ROM
Can a weekly newsmagazine sell a quarterly version of itself on a special compact disk that is part of an emerging technology?
Newsweek is taking on the challenge, saying last week that it would be the first general-interest magazine on CD-ROM, or compact disk-read only memory.


Capriati Reroutes Her Career Path
At first it seemed like a generic fairy tale, the swift ascent of the ultimate tennis ingenue, affable but acerbic-stroking Jennifer Capriati: in 1990, she reached the final of her debut tournament; she cracked the Top 10 in her first year on the Kraft Tour; she guaranteed herself and her family financial security with the smorgasbord of endorsements she received before she had even hit a ball on the professional circuit.
There she was, proof positive that you could laugh, chew bubblegum, survive eighth grade and bank a million at the same time.


BRITON DENIES ROLE IN SALES TO IRAQ
Faced with growing questions about his role in Britain's apparent violation of its own ban on military exports to Iraq, Prime Minister John Major denied over the weekend that he had taken part in any cover-up of the decision to sell sensitive machinery and technology to Baghdad in the late 1980's.
Mr.
Major's statement was issued late Saturday in response to criticism from the political opposition based on evidence that the Government of former Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher had knowingly helped to arm Iraq during its war with Iran and in the period leading up to the Persian Gulf war.


Robbery Arrest in Bronx
A 23-year-old man already facing trial on charges of robbing several elderly people at a Bronx apartment complex last summer was arrested again Saturday night and linked to the robbery of more than 20 other elderly residents at the complex in recent months, the police said.
The police said that the man, Chad Jamel Irish, preyed on the elderly at the 171-building Parkchester apartments in the south-central Bronx to support a crack habit.
Mr.
Irish's mother lived in the complex and he often stayed with her, the police said.
Mr.
Irish is a suspect in more than 100 assaults and robberies going back several years.
The victims, who ranged in age from 65 to 90, were often roughed up, the police said.


Oilers Defeat Vikings, But Victory Has a Cost
Ending their tailspin before they could be flattened under a crush of scrutiny and criticism -- much of it spilling from within -- the Houston Oilers rallied for a spirited 17-13 victory over the Minnesota Vikings this afternoon before 56,726 fans in the Metrodome.
And before the Oilers could hardly begin celebrating, they were crushed, anyway.


No Sign of Plant
The search for MIKE PLANT, the solo sailor who is missing at sea, continued yesterday in the Atlantic Ocean without success.
A United States Coast Guard C-130 plane and a Canadian C-130 were looking for Plant's 60-foot sailboat, Coyote, which left New York Harbor for France on Oct. 16.


Constitutional Change Losing in Panamanian Vote
Panamanians who cast ballots today were voting decisively against a package of constitutional changes that included one prohibiting Panama from having an army, partial returns indicated.
Leaders of those opposing the package of 59 amendments said voting trends in the referendum amounted to a blunt rejection of the Government of President Guillermo Endara, which was installed in the midst of the American invasion of 1989.


Car Thefts Decreasing In Newark
Stealing cars and showing them off here with automotive derring-do is becoming passe, say many young people, some of whom had once cheered for the car thieves or driven the stolen cars themselves.
And statistics compiled by the police in Newark and neighboring communities also suggest that the deadly fad may be fading.
"They're getting time now for stealing these cars," said Darryl Gibbs, 27 years old, who over the weekend stood with friends outside the Felix Fuld housing project where a few months ago stolen cars roared by like low-flying rockets.


Coslet Huddles, but Not for Warmth
After he heard a weather report, Coach Bruce Coslet told his Jets on Saturday night that it would be cold and windy for their game today against the Bengals.
Coslet stressed that the running game would be especially important.


It Isn't Easy, but the Jets Find The Stars to Conquer the Stripes
The Jets were faced with a familiar scenerio against the Bengals here this afternoon.
Leading by 17-0 going into the fourth quarter, New York allowed Cincinnati to score two touchdowns, on runs of 5 and 17 yards by Derrick Fenner, and get within striking distance.
But instead of rolling over, the Jets showed some killer instinct, staved off the Bengals' rally and held on for a 17-14 victory.


Nankan Journal; Such Stories to Tell, but He's 91 and in No Hurry
is 91 years old now, his fingers so stiff that he says it is hard for him to pick up his biwa, the battered wooden lute that he carried for decades through farming villages across Japan's southern reaches.
Bent by age, Mr.
Yamashika tells visitors that he can barely step out of the old thatch-roofed house where he was born, a ramshackle place of some odd beams and rusted metal siding that stays vertical mostly by force of habit.


Nancy Vogelbaum, Barry Hochhauser
Nancy Vogelbaum, the daughter of Dr.
Alfred and Rosalind Vogelbaum of Hillsdale, N.J., was married yesterday to Barry M. Hochhauser, a son of Stanley and Sheila Hochhauser of Wantagh, L.I.
Rabbi Loel Weiss performed the ceremony at Temple B'nai Sholom in Rockville Centre, L.I.
Mrs.
Hochhauser, 27 years old, is an account supervisor with Sacks &amp; Rosen Advertising Inc. in New York.
She graduated from Ohio Wesleyan University.
Her father is a dentist in Westwood and Hightstown, N.J.
Her mother is an executive secretary at Amerex of U.S.A.
Inc., an apparel wholesaler in New York.


Germany Blocks a Big Neo-Nazi Rally Near Berlin
In a demonstration of force intended to show that the authorities are actively confronting right-wing violence, 1,500 federal and local police officers prevented a planned march by neo-Nazis today in Halbe, a village 25 miles south of Berlin.
The police blocked entry to the town, searching autos and questioning passengers on roads leading into Halbe and blockading the local railroad station to prevent non-residents from leaving trains.


Pro Football; All the Kid Wanted Was to Stay Calm
Until John Elway wobbled to the sideline with a bruised right shoulder tonight, 21-year-old Tommy Maddox, who would have been a U.C.L.A. junior this season if he had not applied for the National Football League draft, was the Broncos' mopup rookie quarterback.
"I didn't have time to think," Maddox said after the 27-13 victory over the Giants.
"My job was to go in there, be calm, make the plays and get the job done."


In Washington: What Before Who
Bill Clinton has less than 1,000 working hours left in which to put together his Administration.
Judging by his first post-election news conference, he has his priorities well ordered, working first on goals and organization and only then deciding who is right for each job.
The decisions that the President-elect makes during these 70-plus days are keys to the next four years.
Yet he is under enormous pressure from eager office-seekers and policy advocates who have been shut out of the White House for 12 years -- the longest absence for either party since the Republican drought of 1933-53.


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Monday  Capacity Utilization . . .
Oct.
Industrial Production . . .
Oct.
Business Inventories . . .
Sept.
Tuesday  None  Wednesday  Merchandise Trade . . .
Sept.
Thursday  Housing Starts . . .
Oct.
Weekly Jobless Claims Friday  None


INSIDE
A Free Trade Victim
Canada's Parliament is taking up the repeal of a law that has helped keeped its drug prices well below levels in the United States.
Page D1.
Israel Steps Back From War


The Uncommon Cold
It started, as usual, with itchy eyes and an itchy nose.
Then it moved to the chest, where it produced deep seal-like barks.
Then it moved to the throat, where it produced a possible approximation of hellfire.
Finally, it traveled to the head, where it produced a profound pain in the sinuses and an even more profound depression.
Now it is breaking up, which means that it's producing rather a lot of phlegm.
And nobody will believe it's a cold.


'Greening' of the Business Magazine
"Save the Planet" may well be the rallying cry of the 90's.
But sorting through and making sense of the avalanche of trade publications, legislative proposals, new technology and "greenie" rhetoric is becoming a nightmare for corporate America.
So a group of magazine executives and environmentalists, convinced that no one has produced a publication that falls between advocacy magazines and trade books, is starting a magazine that will cover industry's environmental problems from the business point of view.
Titled ECO (pronounced echo), the publication will have a controlled circulation and be sent directly to 80,000 government officials, chief executives and top financial officers at large and midsize corporations.


Review/Television; Elizabeth II: Pageantry, Small Talk, but No Gossip
I cannot say with certainty that "Elizabeth R: A Year in the Life of the Queen" is the most boring two-hour BBC import ever to make its way to American public television, since I wore out after about 30 minutes.
But it must be in the running.
The pageantry in this authorized tour, which can be seen tonight on PBS (at 9 P.M. on Channels 13 and 49 in New York), may remind you of the sets of postcards available around Piccadilly Circus; there are also statistics of the mildest interest (368 people work at Buckingham Palace), glimpses of the royal family, but no gossip, and snatches of conversation, official and less official.


Ex-Aide Said to Tie White House To Pressure to Search Clinton File
The State Department official dismissed last week by the Bush Administration for her role in the search of Bill Clinton's passport file says she acted at the behest of a colleague who told her the request had come from a White House official, a person with firsthand knowledge of the matter said today.
The newest account of the actions taken by the ousted official, Elizabeth A. Tamposi, who was the Assistant Secretary of State for Consular Affairs, was first reported in Newsweek magazine, which interviewed Ms.
Tamposi.According to both accounts, Ms.
Tamposi said the request had come on Sept. 28 from Steven K. Berry, the Assistant Secretary of State for Legislative Affairs.
Implicates White House
She said Mr.
Berry told her that conservative members of Congress were eager to learn during the Presidential election campaign whether there was anything in Mr.
Clinton's file that might suggest that as a young man he had considered giving up his American citizenship.
There was nothing in the file to indicate that.


Don't Blame Croatia for Limiting Refugees
To the Editor:
Re "The U.N.'s Bad Example on Bosnians" (editorial, Nov. 5), which condemns Croatia for turning back Bosnian refugees with help from United Nations peacekeeping forces:


Treasury to Auction Only Bills This Week
Treasury financings this week are confined to the bill market, beginning with the regular auction of three-month and six-month bills normally held each Monday.
Tomorrow the Government will auction a 52-week bill.
Traders said that by late in the day Friday, the rate on the three-month bill outstanding was 3.05 percent and the six-month bill, 3.33 percent.
For the 52-week bill, the rate was 3.51 percent.


Review/Music; A Cello Rarity by Britten
The five great cello works Benjamin Britten wrote for Mstislav Rostropovich are a daunting legacy.
Performers have been hesitant to take them on, and composers have rarely followed Britten's lead in writing for cello solo.
In her recital on Tuesday night at Alice Tully Hall, Hai-Ye Ni filled the gap, pairing Britten's neglected sonata with the world premiere of "A White Light Still and Moving," by Bruce Adolphe, for solo cello.
With the sound-world of Britten's three suites as his point of departure, Mr.
Adolphe established an independent voice through the sinuous manipulation of semichromatic motives.
Ms.
Ni, who plays with a softly colored, expressive tone, made a strong case for the score.
But the Britten did not quite cohere: the Scherzo and Marcia needed a more acerbic touch, the opening movement more nervous tension.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-9  VIETNAMESE EXODUS APPEARS OVER
After 17 years in which more than 1.5 million people fled Vietnam, the exodus appears to have ended, and refugee experts say they believe that the catastrophe of the "boat people" is winding to a close.
A1  Vietnamese find more reasons to remain in their homeland.
A8


Prisoners, and Prisons, Gain From Drug Therapy
Until Alex Maldonado was arrested a few weeks ago, his life was dominated by crack.
It was on his mind when he awoke around noon, and it was behind one of his first decisions of the day: Should he go shoplifting or break into a car to get money for the drug?
Either way, after smoking for a couple of hours he would need more crack and "go out and steal something else."
The first time he tried a bigger target, a Park Avenue apartment, he was caught and sent to Rikers Island, New York City's sprawling prison colony in the East River.
But instead of idling away the time while his case meandered through the courts, the 25-year-old Mr.
Maldonado joined 1,200 other prisoners in a schedule of 13-hour days of group therapy and classes intended to end drug addiction.


Critic's Notebook; Art and Science Politely Disagree On an Architectural Jewel's Fate
A ground-breaking was held on Thursday on a plot of land that many architects hold sacred: a grove of 67 eucalyptus trees in La Jolla, Calif.
What's so special about this place?
By itself, the grove is nothing much to look at: just some dirt and trees and the pathways through the empty space around them.
But walking through this porous barrier prepares the senses to be stunned by what lies beyond.
The Salk Institute for Biological Studies, designed by Louis I. Kahn between 1959 and 1965, has probably inspired more effusive praise -- and even more awestruck silence -- than any American building of this century.
Kahn's two laboratory buildings, of poured concrete fitted with panels of weathered teak, are as ruggedly handsome as the coastal terrain from which they rise.
The courtyard between them, a radiant void overlooking the ocean, sculptures form out of light and space.


The Marketing of a Cause Celebre
Donna Tartt's first novel, "The Secret History," the story of a group of classics students at a New England college who become involved in one ritualistic Dionysian murder and another murder to cover their tracks, was a cause celebre way before it was a best seller.
Ms.
Tartt's agent is Amanda Urban of International Creative Management, one of the most powerful literary representatives; her publisher is Sonny Mehta, head of Alfred A. Knopf, and her editor is Gary Fisketjon -- the "Tinker to Evans to Chance" axis in the publishing world.


Review/Music; New Look at the 'Emperor' is Offered by Emanuel Ax
"I tried very, very hard to develop a convincing rationale for the 'Emperor' Concerto," Glenn Gould wrote in one of many thought-provoking diatribes against Beethoven.
Emanuel Ax's inspired performance of the "Emperor" on Thursday night at Avery Fisher Hall might have won Gould over, at least for a moment.
Mr.
Ax, celebrating the 15th anniversary of his debut with the New York Philharmonic, did not merely circumvent the structural oddities that sometimes make this work sound clunky in performance; he confronted those pitfalls, emerging with a fresh and powerful vision of the whole.
The principal challenge of the "Emperor" comes in the first movement, where a heroic tone is rent by abrupt contrasts.
Few pianists can avoid seeming to run aground in the sullen development section.
Mr.
Ax judged those contrasts superbly; the clipped anger of the scales melted dreamily away in the upper registers.
Throughout the Concerto, he effortlessly segued from proclamation to meditation, allowing the widest possible space for the drama to thrash about.
His phrasing of the finale's opening measures was improvisatory, yet decisive -- more Beethovenian paradoxes resolved.
In the past several years, this pianist has come into his own as a passionate exponent of 19th-century classics; his ovation was well deserved.


Mexican Accounting
To the Editor:
A variety of objections, speculation really, is readily at hand for those who sense danger and worse in the prospective North American free trade agreement.
For example, while those on both sides tacitly assume that Mexican demographic and economic data are reliable, the assumption can in no way be justified.


Dance in Review
Sandra Rivera  St. Paul the Apostle Church Columbus Avenue and 60th Street
Sandra Rivera was one of the fieriest principal dancers in Ballet Hispanico.
And so the lyricism and lightness of "Ancestral Spirits," a program of three dances Ms.
Rivera presented on Friday night, was a surprise.
Now a solo performer and choreographer who also dances with the Omega Dance Company at the Cathedral of St.
John the Divine, Ms.
Rivera moves with something of the pulled-up litheness of a ballet dancer.


Review/Theater; When an Old Friendship Is More Than It Seems
As "Joined at the Head" begins, Maggie Mulroney is in Boston on a book tour for her new best-selling novel when she gets a telephone call from her old high school boyfriend.
But what happens next in Catherine Butterfield's play is not the standard "Peggy Sue" look back at the 1960's.
"Joined at the Head," which opened yesterday at the Manhattan Theater Club, is a jaunt into the writer's mind, a vibrant reflection on life, art and friendship.
In this, her first full-length play to be presented in New York, Ms.
Butterfield is revealed as a playwright with a refreshing talent for probing the reality of relationships.
The play is filled with inner voices and second thoughts.
In a manner related to that of Tom Stoppard and John Guare, the work deals enticingly with truth and fiction.
Whenever things threaten to become too literary, the playwright quickly edits herself.


Review/Music; Philip Glass Shows Another Side
At the end of the concert played by the Brooklyn Philharmonic Orchestra on Friday night at the Brooklyn Academy of Music, that rocker of many roles, David Bowie, joined the Minimalist composer Philip Glass onstage, to the acclaim of a standing ovation.
The occasion was the unveiling of a new stylistic persona for Mr.
Glass, heard in the haunting and enchanting strains of his "Low" Symphony in its American premiere -- a work based on themes that Mr.
Bowie and Brian Eno used in their 1977 album, "Low." The symphony's title was also surely meant as a contrast to the notion of the symphony as "high." It signaled another turn in the confluence of musical streams, blending vernacular forms with the aspirations of art music.
This was a piquant and often lovely hybrid, given an impassioned performance, with Dennis Russell Davies leading the orchestra.
It was a result of decades of mutual influence.
Mr.
Bowie has clearly been attracted to the rhythmic experiments of Mr.
Glass ("Weeping Wall" on "Low" is almost Glassy in its percussive patter).
Some of Mr.
Glass's music (notably the score to the film "The Thin Blue Line") also seems indebted to Mr.
Eno's use of electronics to create a state of anxious attentiveness.


Dividend Meetings


New Views on Life Spans Alter Forecasts on Elderly
If the Census Bureau is right, the number of people aged 85 or older will grow from 3.3 million today to 18.7 million in 2080.
But if a Duke University demographer working with the National Institute on Aging is correct, the number of these oldest old in 2080 could actually be 72 million, a figure nearly four times as great as the Census Bureau's projection.
This striking disparity involves a fundamental disagreement about the nature of aging.


Sports of the Times; Life Without L.T. Begins, and Giants Find It a Struggle
AGAINST the Denver Broncos last night, the Giants' defense appeared to be out here hunting in the Rockies without a trigger in their rifle.
In the Giants' first game since Lawrence Taylor ruptured the Achilles' tendon in his right ankle, 24-year-old Corey Miller was seldom visible at right outside linebacker, the position that L.T. defined.
Near the end of the 27-13 defeat, Jeff Hostetler also departed with damaged ribs, the latest Giants casualty.


Home Is a Bit Less Humble, So Fewer Leave
Vietnamese officials and foreign diplomats stationed in Hanoi agree that the exodus of illegal emigrants is slowing because of changes in the Vietnamese economy, a growing awareness that there is no opportunity for them to resettle in other countries and the end of financial incentives to leave from the United Nations.
Few here doubt that the Vietnamese who braved the seas in unsafe boats in the mid-1970's were fleeing mostly from a fear of political persecution in a newly reunified nation.


Gay Soldiers See Hope And Fear in Ban's End
For years, they have carried the burden of double lives, existing behind the cover of fictitious girlfriends and boyfriends and marriages of convenience.
Behind their crisp salutes and the don't-mess-with-me swagger, they hide the fear of being discovered and thrown out of the service.
Now, gay and lesbian soldiers look forward to the day when President-elect Bill Clinton will lift their veil of secrecy by following through on his promise to overturn the ban on homosexuals in the armed forces.
But they are also anxious, fearing that a darker, more troublesome time looms as the tradition-bound military braces for one of its greatest cultural changes.


Canadians See Rise in Drug Costs
Canada's Parliament will open debate this week on the repeal of a law that has kept prices for prescription drugs far lower than prices in the United States.
The repeal is required by a little-noticed provision of the North American Free Trade Agreement initialed by the United States, Canada and Mexico last month.
The law currently limits patent protection on drugs to 7 to 10 years, and its repeal would bring Canadian patent protection in line with that of the United States and other industrialized countries, which allow drug companies to produce a drug exclusively for 17 to 20 years.
After the patent expires, competitors are able to make and sell generic copies of the drug, and such competition can sharply reduce prices.


Brister (Remember Him?) Leads Steelers
Steelers 17, Lions 14
PITTSBURGH, Nov. 15 (AP) -- Bubby Brister, playing for the first time all season, threw a 1-yard touchdown pass after Detroit's fifth and most costly turnover, and Pittsburgh rallied today for a 17-14 victory.
It was Pittsburgh's seventh straight victory at Three Rivers Stadium, a place the Lions have yet to win in three attempts.
Barry Foster became the first running back in the National Football League to gain 1,000 yards this season with 1,048, and tied a team single-season record with his seventh 100-yard game.
But Foster was nearly upstaged by All-Pro Barry Sanders, whose 1-yard run gave the Lions a 14-10 lead in the fourth quarter.


Books of The Times; Stephen King Peeks Beneath the Simple Horrors
Dolores Claiborne  By Stephen King Illustrated. 305 pages. Viking Penguin. $23.50.
In his new thriller, "Dolores Claiborne," Stephen King continues the artistic journey away from the stock horror novel that began with his previous book, "Gerald's Game," which explored childhood sexual abuse and the subjugation of women.


CHRONICLE
Subtract one name from the brigade of British editors at the helm of American magazines: that of ANTHEA DISNEY, editor in chief of TV Guide.
Last week, Ms.
Disney, who has lived in this country for almost 20 years, became an American citizen, along with her husband, PETER HOWE, a photo editor who has been here for 14 years.


Young Does His Montana Imitation
49ers 21, Saints 20
SAN FRANCISCO, Nov. 15 (AP) -- Steve Young did what Joe Montana has done so many times.
And what Bobby Hebert couldn't do six weeks ago.
As a result, San Francisco is back at its accustomed spot atop the National Conference West.


Schott Accused of Bias
The Cincinnati Reds' chief executive, MARGE SCHOTT, is going to court this week to try to counter allegations that she runs her team in a racist manner.
The former team controller, TIM SABO, has sued Schott for $2.5 million, claiming she discriminates against minorities.
Schott denied the allegations Saturday.
Sabo also claims Schott fired him for giving damaging testimony last year as part of a lawsuit filed by the club's minority partners.


Piggott Goes Home
British jockey LESTER PIGGOTT returned to England yesterday, saying he was making a good recovery from injuries sustained Oct. 31 in a fall at the Breeders' Cup in Florida.
Piggott, who has won Britain's jockey championship 11 times during a 38-year career, walked unaided through the arrival hall at London's Heathrow airport after a flight from Miami.


World Economies


Train Crash in Germany Kills 11


Patents; New Way to Create 3-Dimensional Images
AT night, Robert G. Batchko scrapes together a living playing jazz saxophone in Chicago clubs.
By day, he works out of a one-man workshop on his other passion: producing what he calls "real" three-dimensional images that actually occupy space and can be viewed from any side.
Three-dimensional pictures have been something of a Holy Grail in imaging technology, and scores of different approaches have been tried over the decades.
These range from those briefly popular 3-D movies in the 1950's, in which viewers wore special glasses that gave the images on the screen apparent depth, to systems that bounce light off multiple surfaces or produce something analogous to rainbows.


Effort Renewed in Trenton To Allow Sports Betting
Three New Jersey lawmakers revived the battle over casino betting on sporting events with the announcement this week that they would try to put a pro-betting constitutional amendment on the ballot.
An attempt to push such an amendment died earlier this year amid strong opposition from both sports officials and political figures like United States Senator Bill Bradley, a former National Basketball Association star for the New York Knicks.


Too Many Achilles' Heels for Giants
What an opportunity the Giants had.
They could have won their fourth straight game.
They could have moved into a second-place tie in their division, an amazing turnaround for a team that had been playing so erratically.
Their task should have been easier because John Elway, the Broncos' marvelous quarterback, sat out the second half with a bruised right shoulder and was replaced by Tommy Maddox, a 21-year-old neophyte who should really be a junior at U.C.L.A.
So what did the Giants do?
Not enough.
Their defense allowed the Broncos to score two touchdowns in the first 10 minutes of the game, and the offense dissipated too many good chances.
It all added up to a 27-13 victory for the Broncos and a wasted night for the Giants.
Hostetler Is Hurt
It could be worse than a wasted night.
Jeff Hostetler, the Giants' quarterback, was sacked five times.
The last sack came from Greg Kragen, the Broncos' nose tackle, with 3 minutes 24 seconds remaining, and it left Hostetler with injured ribs.
He was taken from the field on a stretcher.
X-rays did not show any break, but there was no indication if he would have to miss any games.


Offering Boston's Gangs Alternatives to Violence
When 13-year-old Dominic Mount was shot to death in Dorchester last month, Rodney Dailey's phone started ringing with calls for help to bring calm to the Boston neighborhood.
One mother even came to his door with a special request to help protect her son, who she believed had been wrongly targeted as Dominic's killer and could be the next to die.
Mr.
Dailey urged her son to stay out of sight while he spread the word about the boy's claim of innocence.


Wendy M. Kass, Michael Niceberg
Wendy Mara Kass, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Gerald H. Kass of Ramsey, N.J., was married yesterday to Michael W. Niceberg, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
David M. Niceberg of Syosset, L.I.
Rabbi Ezra Finkelstein performed the ceremony at the Lotos Club in New York.


A Vietnamese-American Becomes a Political First
His motto was "Tax Fighter, Crime Fighter," he had the endorsements of the police, the Mayor and local mobile-home owners, and his campaign posters were a bold red, white and blue.
It would be hard to be more all-American than Tony Lam, described by national officials as the first Vietnamese refugee to win elective office in the United States.


How One Somali Family, Some of It, Survives
By traditional Somali standards, the family of Nur Ibrahim Omer and his wife, Fatima, was well-to-do.
They herded livestock over vast and empty spaces, drank camel's milk and celebrated with singing and dancing when the seasons were good.
They were entirely self-sufficient, living a pastoral existence that had changed little for centuries.
Modernity arrived about three years ago when men from a rival sub-clan armed with assault rifles, instead of the usual spears, swept in and stole their camels, cattle and goats.
Bereft of their wealth and the means to recreate it, the once-proud family began a steady slide into destitution.


Porter Homes In: 3-3-3-3-3-3-3
Never has TERRY PORTER been so accurate from so far for so long in a game.
Nor has any other National Basketball Association player.
Porter went 7 for 7 from 3-point range to set a league record while matching his career high with 40 points in the Portland Trail Blazers' 130-116 victory Saturday night over the Golden State Warriors at Oakland, Calif.


Is Mayor Held to Different Standard?
THE Mayor doesn't get it.
Why, he bristles, is the same question raised again and again?
Why keep asking whether he is being held to a different standard because he is black?
All his public life, David N. Dinkins has been a voice of moderation.
He played by the rules of the traditional political system in which he was reared.
He walked a racial tightrope.
He helped avoid violence.
Even before he was Mayor, as New York City's highest black elected official he was called on routinely to answer for every outrageous remark or action by a fellow black -- denouncing the Rev.
Louis Farrakhan, condemning the suspects in the Central Park jogger case as "urban terrorists" and repeatedly having to justify his association with the Rev.
Jesse Jackson.


THE TRANSITION: The New Team; Clinton's Aides Search For Options and Offices
President-elect Bill Clinton's transition team was in transition this weekend, moving from the Clinton-Gore campaign headquarters in the shell of a dead newspaper to the more modern, but empty, top floors of a half-dead skyscraper.
The White House it's not.
While a guard on loan from an Arkansas maximum-security prison showed guests that if he quickly put his hand through the metal detector his metal watch would not set it off, members of Mr.
Clinton's transition staff stepped around him toting cardboard boxes stuffed with files.


Downward Spiral Has Rangers in a Spin
Homemade remedies abound.
Perhaps, harder work is all that is needed.
Or a change of lucky ties.
A big trade.
Rest and relaxation.
Eventually, the Rangers will probably try all of the above.
Yesterday, they began with a day off from practice.
They won't play again until Thursday night, in Philadelphia against the Flyers.


For Afro-Amerasians, Tangled Emotions
When Luong Hung looks in the mirror, he says, shame ripples through his body.
His sad-eyed visage, his tightly curled dark hair, are daily reminders of the relationship between his Vietnamese mother, a waitress in Saigon during the war, and his father, a cargo pilot he knows only as John.
"I feel ashamed that my mother was with a black man, and now I have to carry that," said the slender 26-year-old refugee, his knees almost touching his chest as he perched atop a child-sized plastic chair in his Bronx apartment.
"I wish I were a white Amerasian."


CHRONICLE
It was not on her schedule, but BARBARA MADRA, a Polish soprano, made her American debut Saturday night in the title role in the Washington Opera's production of "The Czar's Bride" by Rimsky-Korsakov.
She was rewarded by cheers from the audience at the Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts.
Ms.
Madra was performing in Verdi's "Ballo in Maschera" with the Brussels National Opera when she received a telephone call last week from MARTIN FEINSTEIN,the Washington Opera's general director, who asked if she could replace the scheduled singer, RACHEL GETTLER,who had become became indisposed, as they say in the opera line.


Krieg Is Half Good. Chiefs Not Half Bad.
Chiefs 35, Redskins 16
KANSAS CITY, Mo., Nov. 15 (AP) -- At least Dave Krieg was half good.
The Kansas City quarterback emerged from a two-game slump with 232 passing yards in the first half today, then returned to mediocrity with a 70-yard second half in a 35-16 victory over Washington.


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Saturday about the closing of the First New York Bank for Business by Federal regulators misidentified the bank that acquired its deposits.
It is the Merchants Bank of New York.


Petty's Career Comes To a Crashing Halt
Richard Petty's reign as stock-car racing's king ended today in a sudden explosion of steel and flame.
But like any really good monarch, he came through the crucible stronger and sharper -- in one sense, anyway.
In this case, it forged a better appreciation for what his greatest triumph was in a career that started in 1958.


Abroad at Home; Cold War Wreckage
The Soviet Union and the United States waged the cold war in large part through surrogates in the third world, supporting local leaders who would offer their loyalty to one side or the other.
Many of them used the aid they got to build their own tyrannical power.
And some remain to plague their unfortunate people.
Fidel Castro is the outstanding example on the Soviet side.
He began as a genuine indigenous revolutionary but survived for decades on Soviet aid.
Now that that is gone, it seems only a matter of time until Cuba is free of his dictatorship.


Iran Resurgent
Iran, once the dominant military power in the Persian Gulf, now races to reclaim supremacy.
No longer distracted by internal turmoil or endless war with Iraq, Teheran is using its oil wealth to buy weapons systems from the East and sophisticated technologies from the West that can be used to build nuclear bombs, ballistic missiles, advanced aviation and germ warfare weapons.
In the hands of a regime that still sponsors international terrorism and exports Islamic revolution, this dramatic buildup could develop into a world-class problem.
Better to take preventive action now, with an international agreement to regulate the most dangerous transactions.


All We Can Know Is That We Pay for It
To the Editor:
"Spy-Satellite Unit Faces a New Life in Daylight" (news article, Nov. 3) could leave the impression that the National Reconnaissance Office has become accessible to public scrutiny.


Merkin Concert Hall Has a New Director
Vicki Margulies has been named director of Merkin Concert Hall, it was recently announced by executives of the Elaine Kaufman Cultural Center.
She replaces Andrew Berger, who is currently the artistic administrator of the Lincoln Center Institute.


Taming Inflation, and Its Impact
When inflation in the United States is out of control, as it was in the 1970's and early 80's, it is the talk of the land and topples Presidents.
When it is under control people just don't seem to notice it.
Well, for the record, inflation in the United States should dip this year to its lowest sustained level since the beginning of the 1970's.


EARLY RETIREMENTS TO REDUCE BUDGETS COST STATES MONEY
Early-retirement programs for state workers, adopted in recent years as cost-cutting measures in 19 states, are actually costing millions of dollars, fiscal experts and state officials say.
The experts said many of the programs had been poorly planned and had failed to cut workers whose jobs were no longer needed, forcing states to hire replacement workers at the same time they were paying retirement benefits to those who had just left.


A Rush Is On to Put the Hit on Bowe
Busy, busy.
That's how it is going to be for Riddick Bowe, boxing's new heavyweight champion, in the weeks ahead.
On Saturday morning, after his unanimous decision over Evander Holyfield on Friday night in Las Vegas, Nev., Bowe conjured up an idler's couple of months at his home in Fort Washington, Md., playing with his three children.


A Minority Contractor Builds Upon His Dream
"I'm still here" is how Leslie Levi Jr. answers the phone.
No small achievement.
A prolonged construction slump has made builders an endangered species hereabouts.
But at age 65, this lifelong plumber, who worked for years as a subcontractor, is finally realizing his dream of becoming a general contractor and developer.


THE TRANSITION: The President-Elect; CLINTON DISCUSSES LEGISLATIVE MOVES WITH CONGRESSMEN
President-elect Bill Clinton met tonight for three hours with three top Democratic Congressional leaders to begin setting a legislative agenda to get his Administration off to a fast start, beginning with an economic stimulus package.
Mr.
Clinton sought advice from the leaders, Speaker Thomas S. Foley of Washington, Senator George J. Mitchell of Maine, the majority leader, and Representative Richard A. Gephardt of Missouri, the House majority leader, on what obstacles they thought his economic package and legislative program might face in Congress, a Congressional aide said tonight.


Cuomo Gives Dinkins Role New Support
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo yesterday strongly defended Mayor David N. Dinkins, who has been sharply criticized in recent weeks for his handling of the racially charged tensions in Crown Heights.
And, as Mr.
Dinkins prepared to embark on his effort to win re-election next year, the Governor offered the Mayor warm words of praise, saying, "We are fortunate to have him."


Rams Expose Cowboys' Defense
Rams 27, Cowboys 23
IRVING, Tex., Nov. 15 (AP) -- Jim Everett and Cleveland Gary made the National Football League's best defense look like one of the worst.
Everett's precision passing, Gary's determined, fumble-free runs and two late field goals by Tony Zendejas today carried the Los Angeles Rams to a 27-23 victory over the Dallas Cowboys.


Hillside Woman Missing
The police are looking for a Hillside, N.J., woman who was last seen on Friday getting into a car on her way to her job as a hairdresser in Newark.
Isabel Simoes, 21 years old, has been missing since 9:45 A.M.
Friday, said Detective Bill Kurzweil of the Hillside police.
"She was leaving in her vehicle to go to work, never showed up, and hasn't been seen since," he said.
The police asked anyone with information about the case to contact them at (201) 928-5800.


U.S. Panel On Arts May Be Revived
As plans take shape for revamping Federal support of the arts under the Clinton Administration, some of those on the transition team or close to it say President-elect Bill Clinton may revive the dormant Federal Council on the Arts and the Humanities and name its chairman even before selecting a new head for the National Endowment for the Arts.
Theodore W. Striggles, a former executive director of the New York Council on the Arts who has advised the Clinton campaign on arts policy, said on Friday that while it was obvious that economy-related and cabinet-level jobs must be filled first, the relatively prompt appointment of a new Federal council chairman "could solve two problems at once."


Cuomo Defends Dinkins on His Handling of Crown Heights


Don't Blame Croatia for Limiting Refugees; Churches Speak Up
To the Editor:
Re "Silence of the Churches" (letter, Oct. 29) by Carlo Valone:


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  Southern League
CHATTANOOGA LOOKOUTS -- Named Pat Kelly manager.


Corrections
A music review on Thursday about a recital of Kurt Weill songs by the mezzo-soprano Barbara Hess on Nov. 7 misidentified the site.
It was CAMI Hall, 165 West 57th Street, not Weill Recital Hall.


Deutsch Adopts A New Name
Deutsch Inc. in New York is being renamed Deutsch/Dworin Inc. to reflect contributions made by Steve Dworin, president.
"The change signifies the real partnership at the agency," said Donny Deutsch, executive vice president and creative director at Deutsch/ Dworin, which was founded in 1969 as David Deutsch Associates by Mr.
Deutsch's father, who continues as chairman.


U.S. Opens a MASH With a Difference in Croatia
The United States Army opened a 60-bed mobile hospital here today to provide emergency care for the 20,000 United Nations peacekeeping troops in war-torn regions of Croatia and Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The unit begins operations just as 6,000 United Nations troops from Britain, Canada, Spain, the Netherlands and France are preparing to begin escorting food and medical convoys through war zones to Bosnian towns and villages.
Thousands of civilians in the devastated republic are threatened with malnutrition and disease.


Orane Bowl Loses, Too, Because of Upset
Presumption is a dangerous quality in college football when November rolls around.
The underdogs slink out of the weeds and take bites in the most surprising places.
Ames, Iowa, was one of those places on Saturday when Iowa State, a modest team that had won only three games, took down mighty Nebraska.
The fans also took down the goal posts at Cyclone-Jack Trice Field after the 19-10 victory over the Cornhuskers, which put a different look on the post-season bowl games.


Stresses of Unity -- First of two articles.; Europe Copes With Details of Unity
For Philips Electronics, a single European market means the Dutch company can ship compact disk players from Belgium to Spain without the need for its trucks to stop at customs.
For American Express, the unified market means it can sell financial products like mutual funds throughout Europe for the first time.
But for farmers, it means new rules, including one that allows the sale of cucumbers only if they meet certain standards for length and curvature.
And for other individuals, companies and nations, there is fear that old tensions and old nationalism will still, somehow, dampen the single market's positive economic effects.


Gambling Stirs Rhode Island Debate
Gambling ventures like video poker, off-track betting and scratch-off card games are increasingly being introduced in Rhode Island as a way to supplement declining government revenues.
Now officials are considering proposals to establish casino gambling in downtown Providence, angering residents and gambling opponents.
The state introduced video poker this fall in two cities, despite residents' protests and a lawsuit seeking to block it.
The state lottery commission recently added several new games, and off-track betting on horse races began a year ago.


Sugar Is Sweet, but So Are Division III Playoffs
Division II and III teams finished their football seasons on Saturday but New Haven, Rowan, Ithaca, Merchant Marine and Wagner will play on.
Those five were among 40 teams chosen yesterday to participate in playoff games on Saturday.
Rowan, the former Glassboro State of Glassboro, N.J., will host Worcester Tech in a first-round game of the National Collegiate Athletic Association's 16-team Division III tournament.


Parks Workers Challenging Stereotype of Public Jobs
George Marchese and two co-workers needed less than 90 minutes the other day to cut down and remove a dead silver maple tree in front of Teresa Mele's house in Bensonhurst.
Two men would return later to remove the stump and fill the hole with soil.
Before this month, as many as seven workers might have done the same job.
While it hardly mattered to Ms.
Mele how many people disposed of her 50-foot eyesore, how a tree goes in Brooklyn and elsewhere in the city is vitally important to the Parks and Recreation Department, other city agencies and union workers who lost their jobs after recent cutbacks in the city budget.


Hedi Molnar, Michael Curcio Jr.
Hedi Edith Molnar, a daughter of Bela Molnar of Chatsworth, Calif., and the late Ruth Molnar, was married yesterday to Michael Anthony Curcio Jr., the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Curcio of New York.
The Rev.
Guy Vinci, a Roman Catholic priest, performed the ceremony at Old St.
Patrick's Cathedral in New York.
Mrs.
Curcio, 42 years old, is an account executive for Mead Data Central, a computer data base service in New York.
She graduated from City College.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  GIVING WORKERS A SAY IN THEIR WORK
Can unionized city workers perform as well as private contractors?
A new experiment in the New York City Parks Department is trying to answer the question by allowing workers new freedom in planning their own workloads, routes and conditions.
For example, three parks workers in the test recently removed a tree in Bensonhurst, a chore that in fatter times had been performed by as many seven people.
If the approach proves to be more efficient, the department could then cut back on outside contractors and use the money to rehire some laid-off workers.
It could also help break a stereotype that portrays public workers as lazy and inefficient.
B3.
THE MAYOR'S WRESTLE WITH RACE
The Mayor doesn't get it.
Why, he bristles, is the same question raised again and again: is he being held to a different standard because he is black?
All his public life, David N. Dinkins has been a voice of moderation.
He helped avoid violence.
Even before he was Mayor, he was called on routinely to answer for every outrageous remark or action by a fellow black.
His struggle is one most black public figures have faced, one in which Mr.
Dinkins's caution, stubbornness and muted oratory have been both a defense and a handicap.
Metro Matters, B3.


Jane Wasey, 80, Dies; A Sculptor of Animals
Jane Wasey, a sculptor known for her carvings of animals, died on Thursday at Penobscot Bay Medical Center in Glen Cove, Me.
She was 80 years old and lived in Lincolnville, Me.
Ms. Wasey died of cancer, said Priscilla Pattison, an artist and longtime friend.


Israel Thins Forces in Southern Lebanon, Easing Tension at Border
Israel thinned its forces in southern Lebanon today, easing tensions at the border after a week dominated by a steady military buildup and clashes between Israeli soldiers and Iranian-backed Islamic guerrillas.
The fighting in and around a strip of southern Lebanon that Israel controls and calls its security zone created a volatile situation at the border in the last week and cast a pall over the Middle East peace talks in Washington.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
Costs are overwhelming early-retirement programs by states that sought to relieve payroll pressure by letting public employees step down early.
Rather than produce savings, the programs threaten to run up hundreds of millions of dollars in unexpected expenses.  [ Page A1. ]
Gov.
Clinton's investment-tax-credit plan is a powerful tool for giving the economy a jolt forward without dangerously expanding the budget deficit, say economists, who predict that the measure will create up to 500,000 jobs by the end of 1993.  [ D1. ]


Market Place; Euro Disney Faces More Bad News
Few businesses thrive on illusion as much as the Walt Disney Company, which has created magic for years by tapping the dreams of childhood.
The love of fantasy has even infected the company's investors, who have seen their shares soar as almost everything Disney tried -- from movies to merchandising -- seemed to crank out profits.
Then, the company turned its golden touch toward Europe.
And there, Fantasyland finally had an abrupt and unpleasant rendezvous with Reality World.


Don't Blame Croatia for Limiting Refugees; Jewish Aid Efforts
To the Editor:
I applaud "Save Lives in Bosnia" (Op-Ed, Nov. 9), in which Flora Lewis calls upon Jewish organizations to intervene in behalf of Slav and Muslim refugees from Bosnia.
However, the World Jewish Congress has for months been bringing humanitarian and political aid to Bosnia.


Dance In Review
Colloquium Contemporary Dance Company  Merce Cunningham Studio Greenwich Village
The program that the Colloquium Contemporary Dance Company presented on Saturday night resembled a conversation in many choreographic tones of voice.


Breeding a Leaner Duck To Survive in Lean Times
THE newly hatched ducklings at Douglas Corwin's farm on Long Island could well grow up to become a gourmet meal for a sheik in Saudi Arabia or a Japanese tourist in Hawaii.
Mr.
Corwin, whose grandfather started the family duck business at the turn of the century, hopes that his worldwide marketing strategies will enable him to continue to breed and hatch one of Long Island's most singular products well into the next century.
He is one of the few survivors in an industry that has declined precipitously on the island over the last 30 years from 70 duck farms to a precious nine.


Coppola's 'Dracula' A Hit on First Weekend
For months Hollywood has been snickering at "Bram Stoker's 'Dracula.' " The Francis Ford Coppola film was, insiders said, too long, too violent, too dark, too
weird.
Film executives laughed about the film and nicknamed it "Bonfire of the Vampires," after the colossal flop "Bonfire of the Vanities."
No more.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Television; Networks Turning to Old Reliables
Both ABC and NBC, which started the season sworn to a youth-oriented programming strategy have begun to bring in reinforcements that are decidedly gray around the temples: Ben Matlock, Lieutenant Columbo and Perry Mason.
The return of these familiar names is the best evidence that the television season has changed focus.
For the first part of the season, the network sales divisions prevailed.
Now the programmers are taking over.


RESULTS PLUS
N.B.A.
Edwards Strikes Again  Blue Edwards scored a career-high 32 points and rookie Anthony Avent a season-high 28, leading the Bucks to a 115-98 victory over the Denver Nuggets last night at Milwaukee.
Edwards, whose career high in three years at Utah was 30, reached 30-plus points for the third time in six games this season.
Chris Jackson led the Nuggets with 20 points and LaPhonso Ellis, Bryant Stith and Reggie Williams each had 19 for Denver. (AP) Kings 109, Cavaliers 107: Mitch Richmond scored 31 points and Wayman Tisdale led a 10-0 fourth-quarter run that lifted the Kings over Cleveland at Sacramento, Calif.
Rookie forward Walt Williams came off the bench to score 21 points, including 10 in the third quarter, for the Kings.
Lionel Simmons and Tisdale finished with 17 points.
The Cavaliers were led by John Williams with 27 points and 11 rebounds. (AP) N.H.L.
A First for Lindros  Eric Lindros got his first National Hockey League hat trick as the Flyers won their fourth straight game and extended the Ottawa Senators' losing streak to seven with a 7-2 victory last night at Philadelphia.
Just 41 seconds into the game, Lindros gave the Flyers the lead when he put a rebound past Ottawa goaltender Peter Sidorkiewicz.
Lindros scored again at 7 minutes 37 seconds of the second period off a scramble in front of the net, and got his third goal on a power play at 1:53 of the third period off a pass from Mark Recchi in the slot.
Lindros is second among N.H.L. rookies with 25 points, trailing Winnipeg's Teemu Selanne (26). (AP) Blackhawks 2, North Stars 1: Chris Chelios's 40-foot slap shot with 6 minutes 2 seconds remaining in the final period gave the Blackhawks a 2-1 victory over Minnesota at Chicago.
Chelios's goal came after Jeremy Roenick had scored to pull the Blackhawks into a 1-1 tie.
It was their fifth victory in six games and boosted them past Toronto, Tampa Bay and Detroit and into first place in the Norris Division. (AP) TENNIS  Graf Wins, Imperfectly  Steffi Graf talked mostly about mistakes yesterday after winning her fourth tournament in a row, a 6-3, 3-6, 6-1 victory over Arantxa Sanchez Vicarioin the $350,000 Virginia Slims of Philadelphia tournament.
"It was enough to win the match, but it wasn't anything spectacular, not at all," said Graf, the 23-year-old German ranked second in the world behind Monica Seles.
Graf won $70,000.
In addition to taking the $35,000 second-place prize, Sanchez Vicario rose to No. 4 in the ranking, passing Martina Navratilova.
Graf's assessment was that of a perfectionist who had just emerged from a 1-hour-40-minute contest against a dogged fighter.
Graf had 50 unforced errors to Sanchez Vicario's 41.
She only put 71 percent of her first serves into play, compared with 84 percent for Sanchez Vicario. (AP) Krajicek Outslugs Woodforde: Hard-serving Richard Krajicek's power overcame the finesse game of Mark Woodforde in a meeting of giant-killers in the European Community Championship singles final yesterday in Antwerp, Belgium.
Krajicek, a 20-year-old from the Netherlands, had a dozen aces and whipped passing shots by the Australian almost at will to win his second ATP Tour tournament of the year.
The 6-2, 6-2 victory gave Krajicek $144,00 from a $1.1 million purse.
It also moved Krajicek, seeded sixth, into the ATP Tour's top 10 -- at No. 10 -- for the first time in his career. (AP) Breakthrough for Rosset: Marc Rosset of Switzerland won his first tournament in two years by breaking service four times yesterday against Carl-Uwe Steeb of Germany in the final of the Kremlin Cup in Moscow.
In addition to the service breaks, the eighth-seeded Rosset had five aces to beat the fifth-seeded Steeb, 6-2, 6-2, in 1 hour 4 minutes.
Rosset won $45,000 from a purse of $348,000.
The final was played at Olympic Stadium before a crowd of 10,000 fans that included the Russian President, Boris Yeltsin, an avid tennis player. (AP) GOLF  Love's Eagle Does It  Davis Love 3d eagled the par-5 18th hole from 40 feet yesterday to break a tie with Mike Hulbert and win the $800,000 Kapalua International golf tournament in Hawaii.
Love's final round of six-under-par 67 gave him a total of 15-under 275 and the winner's purse of $150,000.
Three times Love has finished second at Kapalua, including last year when Hulbert came from four shots back to catch him in the last round and then beat him with a birdie on the first hole of a playoff.
This time Love turned the tables, coming from four shots behind Hulbert, who finished alone in second at 276 after a closing round of 72 on a windy day at the Kapalua Resort's par-73 Plantation Course.
In addition to being tied at the end of regulation play last year, Love and Hulbert were deadlocked again atop the leader board after this year's first round.
At the end of two rounds, they were still tied, this time one shot off the pace.
And yesterday, with only one hole to go, they were tied again after Hulbert birdied No. 17.
But Love settled the matter with his dramatic eagle on the 18th. 'It feels a lot better than it did a year ago," Love said. (AP)


Fortunate Faith Zips Along
The year's final audition for 2-year-old fillies was passed with flying colors yesterday by Fortunate Faith, who outran the favored True Affair to win the $200,000 Demoiselle Stakes at Aqueduct and place herself into contention for even higher honors in 1993.
Like the colt Silver of Silver, who won the Remsen Stakes on Saturday, Fortunate Faith became the leader of the late-blooming juveniles in her class, the ones who were not ready or were not entered in the Breeders' Cup two weeks ago.


Economists Back Clinton On Investment Tax Credits
The investment tax credit proposed by President-elect Bill Clinton is probably the single most powerful tool for giving the economy a jolt forward without dangerously expanding the budget deficit, economists agree.
Several economic forecasters interviewed said Mr.
Clinton's investment tax credit, probably limited to purchases of equipment, would create 300,000 to 500,000 additional jobs by the end of 1993 while increasing the deficit by just $500 million.


THE TRANSITION: The President-Elect's Wife; Hillary Clinton's New Role: The Job Description Is Open
When it comes to Hillary Clinton's future in the White House, the only nonissue so far is the title.
Except for a few feminist die-hards, no one has argued that Hillary Rodham Clinton should scrap "First Lady" in favor of "First Spouse," or something equally politically correct.


Tax-Exempt Bonds Produce Staggering Additions to the Debt
To the Editor:
"A Referendum on New York Debt" (editorial, Nov. 1), your recommendation to reject the proposed $800 million New York State bond issue on the Nov. 3 ballot, is an excellent expression of fiscal responsibility.
While the bond issue purported to create jobs, a high portion of the proceeds would have been used for the financial costs of issuance, the bureaucratic costs of allocating the funds and for political patronage.


Nets' Bench Rides In to the Rescue
If the New Jersey Nets are going to improve over last season, they're going to need more performances such as the one they put together tonight against the Washington Bullets.
Drazen Petrovic scored 32 points, 16 in the fourth quarter, to lead the Nets past the Eastern Conference cellar-dwelling Bullets, 111-104, in front of 9,589 fans at Meadowlands Arena.


Dentsu Americ Forms a Spinoff
The Dentsu Corporation of America is forming its first spinoff, an agency called Hajjar/Kaufman that opens today with an estimated $10 million account from Dentsu America's oldest and largest client, Canon U.S.A.
Norman Hajjar, who was senior vice president and director of client services at Dentsu America in New York, where he oversaw the $60 million Canon U.S.A. account, was named president and chief executive of Hajjar/Kaufman in Marina del Rey, Calif.
Joining as executive vice president and creative director is Adam Kaufman, who was senior vice president and creative director on the Microsoft account at Ogilvy &amp; Mather Los Angeles.


Flow of Vietnamese to Hong Kong Seems Over, to Hong Kong's Relief
After 17 years in which more than 1.5 million Vietnamese fled their homeland, the exodus appears to have ended, and refugee experts say they believe that the long catastrophe of the "boat people" is finally winding to a close.
The exodus was one of the tragedies of the latter part of this century.
Tens of thousands of Vietnamese were drowned at sea or killed by pirates while trying to escape, and nearby countries sometimes tried to deter the boat people from landing by firing on them as they approached the shore or by towing their rickety boats back out to sea. 12 This Year, 20,000 Last Year
Even for those who landed safely in places like Hong Kong, there has been no quick deliverance.
About 48,000 Vietnamese are still living in bleak camps in this British territory, with some having waited for a decade to be resettled in the West.


A Health Insurance Horror
John McGann had worked for a music store in Houston for six years when he contracted AIDS.
He counted on his employer's health insurance policy to pay his medical bills.
But soon after he filed his first claim, the company set a $5,000 lifetime limit on AIDS-related employee health benefits.
Unjust?
Yes.
Illegal?
No.
The courts upheld the employer and last week the Supreme Court refused to review their decisions.


St. John's Stopped Short by Dartmouth
St.
John's first trip to the National Collegiate Athletic Association Division I soccer tournament came to a quick halt yesterday in Hanover, N.H.
Dartmouth, which is in its fifth such playoff, eliminated St.
John's, 1-0, on David Moran's goal in the 59th minute at Chase Field.
The goal came on a header from close range after a cross from the left side by Justin Head eluded the usually reliable St.
John's defense.


Essay; Rogue White Elephant
Where will the new President turn for vital information to help him make life-or-death decisions on foreign affairs?
To the C.I.A., of course.
His national security adviser will tell him not to curtail that vast establishment.
His new economic security adviser will suggest expanding its reach into the world of economic intelligence.


Helmerich &amp; Payne reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Energy Ventures reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


The Giants Still Have Hope, and Hostetler
Less than 24 hours after Sunday night's loss in Denver, Ray Handley had to look at the brighter side of things today.
He still has a quarterback, and he still has a football team teetering uneasily in contention.
There is not much else.
The Giants returned home this morning to face the most difficult three-week stretch of their season -- Philadelphia, Dallas and Washington await -- after having squandered a chance to improve their position in a division in which every other team also lost on Sunday.


Insurance Bill Moves Ahead In New Jersey
In a step toward major changes in health insurance, the New Jersey Assembly today approved a bill intended to help uninsured people buy private policies.
The measure would require the state's 427 private insurers to enroll all applicants, regardless of their age, sex or health.
If the companies fail to do this, they would be required to help subsidize the cost of policies provided by Blue Cross and Blue Shield of New Jersey, which is currently the only company required to accept all applicants, including those considered high-risk cases.


Kmart Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 28


Challenge of Access for the Disabled at Worship
A new symbol has joined the cross, the crescent and the Star of David on America's houses of worship: a stick figure in a wheelchair.
The emblem, signaling that the building is accessible to the handicapped, reflects a growing debate in churches, mosques and synagogues about how far a congregation should go to make the disabled feel at home.


A Dazed and Drained Toon Is Causing Concern
Al Toon, the Jets' graceful wide receiver who has prided himself on controlling his body and his surroundings, is sitting home these days uncertain about his future after suffering the fifth concussion of his career nine days ago.
"I have some memory loss," he said in a modulated voice last night from his home in Point Lookout, L.I., "but I'd rather not talk about it."


THE TRANSITION: The Republicans; Chastened G.O.P. Leaders, Wary of Intolerant Image, Call for a Party of Inclusion
Seeking to distance themselves from the often fractious Presidential campaign, leading Republicans who assembled here set out today to recast their party as one of inclusion.
Speaker after speaker at the annual meeting of the Republican Governors' Association sought to play down party infighting and sounded nearly identical battle cries: "diversity," "tolerance" and the need for a "big tent."


Hadson Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


TIS Mortgage Investment reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Lawless School Custodians
School custodians in New York City spend precious little time mopping the floors, but a distressing number of them work at private jobs on school time or use school money for their personal expenses.
That shocking indictment of the custodians and of the Board of Education's failure to monitor them is contained in a report issued last week by Ed Stancik, the Special Commissioner of Investigation for city schools.
New York's 915 custodians function as both city employees and independent contractors, at an average annual salary of $58,000.
Each custodian administers an annual budget for supplies, equipment and salaries for a custodial staff.


'Gypsy Passion' Flows From Diplomat's Revolt
Tomas Rodriguez-Pantoja had been a diplomat for years when he decided one day to cast his lot with the Gypsies.
Mr.
Pantoja is the librettist and director of "Gypsy Passion," the flamenco revue that opens tonight at the Plymouth Theater on Broadway.
The show, which played at Town Hall in April to critical and popular acclaim, offers an affectionate overview of the lives, music and dance of the Andalusian Gypsies who perform in it.
It is the work of a man who long admired the Gypsy philosophy of life that inspired his change of heart.
Mr.
Pantoja's moment of truth came when he was sent to South America as a Spanish spokesman for the celebration of the quincentenary of Columbus's voyage to America.
"I was sent everywhere to tell the Indians how good we were," the dapper, soft-spoken Mr.
Pantoja said in a recent interview.
"But I was without any facts."


Sportscene Restaurants reports earnings for Year to Aug 30


Q&amp;A
Microwaved Vitamins
Q.
Does microwave cooking
destroy nutrients in vegetables?
A.
No, and in fact it preserves some vitamins better than other methods of cooking, said Dr.
Gertrude Armbruster, associate professor in the division of nutritional sciences at Cornell University in Ithaca, N.Y.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
Northwest and KLM may function as one airline, the Transportation Department said.
It would be the first time a foreign and a domestic airline can act as one carrier, even though legally they would remain separate companies.  [ Page A1. ]
G.M. recognized in 1983 that its pickups could be made less vulnerable to collisions that might break open their fuel tanks, company files say.
But it waited years to change the designs.  [ A1. ]


A Sure Sign Of Winter: Bills on Top
Seeking to avoid their first sweep by the Miami Dolphins in six years, seeking to avenge an embarrassing 37-10 loss to the Dolphins in Buffalo in Week 5 and hungry for sole possession of first place in the American Conference East division, the Buffalo Bills claimed all three goals tonight, rallying in the second half for a 26-20 victory over Miami before 70,629 fans in Joe Robbie Stadium.
The victory left Buffalo with an 8-2 record as the Bills joined San Francisco and Dallas as the teams with the best records in the National Football League.


U.N. CHIEF DETAILS PLAN ON OVERHAUL
Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali has announced new initiatives in his plan to restructure the United Nations.
In two recent speeches in the General Assembly, the Secretary General outlined measures that would reorganize the senior staff and update hiring and training programs.
Mr.
Boutros-Ghali promised a major overhaul of the organization's administrative machinery when he took office on Jan. 1.


Andreychuk Suspended
DAVE ANDREYCHUK of the Buffalo Sabres was suspended for two non-game days without pay yesterday by the National Hockey League president, GIL STEIN, for cross-checking Rangers defenseman JEFF BEUKEBOOM in the jaw on Nov. 2.
Andreychuk's penalty occurred with 26 seconds left in regulation, giving the Rangers a power play that carried into overtime.
New York scored 58 seconds into the extra period for a 7-6 victory.


Philip B. Hinerfeld, 85, Advertising Executive
Philip B. Hinerfeld, a retired advertising executive for Pepsi-Cola and the Chase Manhattan Bank, died Nov. 11 in Boca Raton, Fla.
He was 85 years old and lived in Boca Raton.
A native of Scranton, Pa., who graduated in 1929 from the Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania, Mr.
Hinerfeld joined Pepsi-Cola in 1959 as director of advertising after working in New York advertising agencies like Kenyon &amp; Eckhardt Inc.


A Good Deed With Its Own Epilogue
IT seems to have started with a Russian massacre that followed a dispute over ownership of a bunch of dead otters.
Then, 208 years later, came a dinner party in Boston.
Nancy Freiheit, a teacher from here, was sitting next to David Brown, a lawyer from Hartford who is intrigued by archeology.
Suddenly, there's a flurry of activity in the basement over at the Hiram Halle Library in this affluent rural Westchester hamlet.
The next thing this mail pilot up in Alaska knows, he's got so many heavy boxes for one isolated fishing village.
But Emily Capjohn is delighted.


Police Officers Mourn a Comrade Killed in Queens


A Soldier in the Data Base Wars
THE MICROSOFT CORPORATION introduced its long-awaited Access data base management program here yesterday, filling one of the last major gaps in the software giant's product line.
In a bold attempt to pre-empt its probable main rival (the Windows version of Borland International Inc.'s popular Paradox program, now not expected until early next year) Microsoft will sell Access for $99 until Jan. 31, 1993, when the full suggested list price of $495 will take effect.
As a relative newcomer to the data base arena, Microsoft is essentially giving away Access in order to gain a share of the market now in the possession of Borland's Paradox and other more expensive data base programs, like Oracle.


Clinton Pronounces an End to the 'Cold War' With Congress


Radiation Care Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Even on a Monday the Clouds Aren't This Low


Thompson Shifts Kellogg Account
J.
Walter Thompson U.S.A. said yesterday that it had shifted responsibility for its Kellogg Company account, worth an estimated $35 million to $40 million, to its New York office after 12 years at its Chicago office.
Spokeswomen for Thompson's offices in both cities confirmed reports of the change this week in Advertising Age and Adweek; they both said the agency had initiated the move, which involved Kellogg cereal brands like Apple Raisin Crisp, Frosted Bran, Mueslix and Nutri-Grain, but declined to discuss it further.
The Chicago spokeswoman said it was too early to tell if layoffs would occur there.


Attorney General Finds Evidence To Further Iraq Bank-Fraud Case
Attorney General William P. Barr told lawmakers today that he would go ahead with the first step toward the appointment of an independent counsel to investigate the Government's role in a multimillion-dollar bank fraud case involving Iraq.
Mr.
Barr's action, a legal finding that there is specific evidence to warrant further inquiry, was expressed in letters to the Senate and House Judiciary Committees.
The move been expected since last week when the Attorney General's decision to proceed with the inquiry was disclosed by Frederick B. Lacey, the retired judge whom Mr.
Barr selected to advise him on the matter.


Blue Jays Staff Intact
The World Series champion Toronto Blue Jays announced yesterday that their entire coaching staff would return for the 1993 season.


Berkshire Hathaway reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Providence Energy Corp. reports earnings for Year to Sept 30


AOI Coal reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Lawless School Custodians
School custodians in New York City spend precious little time mopping the floors, but a distressing number of them work at private jobs on school time or use school money for their personal expenses.
That shocking indictment of the custodians and of the Board of Education's failure to monitor them is contained in a report issued last week by Ed Stancik, the Special Commissioner of Investigation for city schools.
New York's 915 custodians function as both city employees and independent contractors, at an average annual salary of $58,000.
Each custodian administers an annual budget for supplies, equipment and salaries for a custodial staff.


What Galileo Actually Proved and Disproved; Not a Great Conciliator
To the Editor:
Re "After 350 Years, Vatican Says Galileo Was Right: It Moves," (front page, Oct. 31): Observation of the four moons of Jupiter was not sufficient to "explode" the Ptolemaic theory, but was easily accounted for by Tycho Brahe's 16th-century revised geocentric theory that the planets revolved around the Sun as the Sun revolved around the Earth.


Corrections
An article and a caption on Sunday about the relationship between the former Chief Judge of the New York State Court of Appeals, Sol Wachtler, and Joy A. Silverman, an influential Republican fund raiser, misidentified the town in which Mrs.
Silverman's boyfriend, David Samson, lives.
It is Roseland, N.J.


American International Petroleum Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Petroleum Heat &amp; Power reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Prison Terms for 2 Ex-Officers in Drug Ring
Two former New York City police officers were sentenced today to prison terms for their roles in a cocaine ring that prosecutors said also involved other city police officers.
"You're a complete hypocrite," Judge George F. X. McInerney of Suffolk County Court told one ex-officer, Kevin Hembury, at the sentencing.


Onex Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Trump's Riverside West Plan Appears to Be Gaining Favor
As the City Council continues to review Donald J. Trump's plans for a huge development on the Upper West Side, it has become clear that Mr.
Trump still faces significant hurdles but enjoys a strong current of support among many members who see any large development in tough economic times as welcome news.
Mr.
Trump will have to make some concessions in the $3 billion Riverside South project to win Council approval, Council aides said.
Council members have raised questions about whether the city's sewage plant in western Harlem can absorb the 1.3 million gallons of sewage the project will produce each day.
Some advocated asking the developer to build a small plant on the 56-acre site, a requirement Mr.
Trump insists would kill the project. 'Movement for Jobs'
Influential lawmakers are also seeking a public authority to oversee construction of the office and apartment complex, which is expected to take more than 10 years, as well as the creation of a public entity to manage the park, which will be built inside the development.


First Black Candidate Loses In Election for Mayor in Rio
Rio's first black candidate for mayor narrowly lost the race despite a national surge in support for her leftist party, election results showed today.
The candidate, Benedita Souza da Silva, whose candidacy rattled the racial status quo, lost to Cesar Maia, a centrist congressman, in the runoff vote on Sunday.


Teaching About Gay Life Is Pressed by Chancellor
In another round in their battle over whether to teach children about homosexuals, Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez told a defiant Queens school board yesterday that its anti-bias curriculum still did not teach youngsters to respect gay people.
He said he would dispatch an emissary from his office to help the board comply.
But Mary A. Cummins, president of the District 24 School Board, immediately replied that she saw no need to make any further changes in the curriculum, particularly any revisions that might promote the "acceptance of sodomy." 'Real People'
Until last week, the nine-member board of School District 24, which embraces Elmhurst, Middle Village and Maspeth, had refused to submit any teaching guide that would obey a 1989 Board of Education resolution requiring lessons in the appreciation of racial, ethnic, religious and sexual diversity.


Robec Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Classical Music in Review
Durufle Concert  St. Bartholomew's Choir St. Bartholomew's Church
As a composer, Maurice Durufle inspires affection rather than awe.
The works he produced during a career as organist and teacher, though finely wrought, are so few that his achievement is eminently comprehensible on a sheer human level.


4 DETROIT OFFICERS CHARGED IN DEATH
Two Detroit police officers were charged with second-degree murder and two other officers were charged with lesser crimes today in the beating death of a black motorist on Nov. 5.
The Wayne County prosecutor, John D. O'Hair, said two veteran officers, Larry Nevers, 52 years old, and Walter Budzyn, 42, both of whom are white, could face life in prison if convicted of the murder charges.


Cricket's Swan Song
It is built like a cricket's ear.
It even hears like a cricket's ear.
But this ear belongs to a fly.
Researchers have reported that a fly whose young live off the flesh of male crickets has evolved a unique ear that can hear the trilling summer love songs of its prey.
The findings of the study appear in the current issue of the journal Science.


RESULTS PLUS
N.H.L.  Canadiens Stun Bruins
The Canadiens scored five consecutive goals in less than 10 minutes of the second period to overtake the Boston Bruins for a 6-3 victory last night at Montreal.
The Bruins got goals from Steve Leach, Adam Oates and Steve Heinze in the first 2 minutes 35 seconds of the second period to take a three-goal lead.
But Montreal stormed back with goals from Matt Schneider, John LeClair, Gilbert Dionne, Stephan Lebeau and Eric Desjardins in the next 10 minutes.
After the run, Boston Coach Brian Sutter called a timeout to calm the proceedings.
Kirk Muller added an empty-net goal with five seconds left in the game.
Montreal, the Adams Division leader at 13-4-2, has won 9 of its last 10 games and has lost only 1 of its last 14.
Boston, which has only one victory in its last six games, remained third in the division at 9-5-2. (AP)


No Headline
It's been devastating.
I've lost three skating friends to AIDS, and you can safely assume there are others out there who have the disease and aren't talking about it.
TRACY WILSON, -- a Canadian Olympic skater.  [ A1:3. ]


U.S. Joins Airline in Plan for Settlement in 1990 Crash
In its first public acknowledgement of any liability for the Avianca Airlines crash on Long Island that killed 73 people in 1990, the Federal Government today joined Avianca in a preliminary out-of-court settlement intended to apportion financial responsibility.
Details of the settlement were not disclosed, but lawyers involved in the case said the collective damages paid by the Government and Avianca were likely to exceed $200 million.
The case is important because the Federal Government has generally argued that it is not a party to lawsuits stemming from air crashes, even though most of the nation's air traffic controllers are employees of the Federal Aviation Administration.
Attributed to Pilot Error
The settlement could help resolve lawsuits by or on behalf of victims of the crash who collectively are seeking more than $500 million in damages.


Ex-Head of Bloomingdale's Purchases Conran Stores
Almost a year after he retired as chairman of Bloomingdale's, Marvin Traub is back in the retail business, this time as an owner.
An investment fund he formed with his former right-hand man at Bloomie's, Lester Gribetz, has acquired Conran Stores Inc., which operates Conran's Habitat in the United States.
The seller is Storehouse P.L.C., a British retail company that operates British Home Stores and Mothercare.


Transactions
Baseball
YANKEES -- Assigned Wade Taylor, pitcher, outright to Columbus of the International League.
National League
CHICAGO CUBS -- Named Ed Ford scouting supervisor for New York, New England, New Jersey and Canada, and Preston Douglas scout for Northern Florida and Southern Georgia.


Aspirin and Reye's
To the Editor:
"A five-year Government delay in requiring warning labels on aspirin led to the needless deaths of 1,470 children from Reye's syndrome, researchers contend in a new analysis" (news article, Oct. 23).


Kean to Be Host For Soccer Finals
Kean College of Union, N.J., was designated by the National Collegiate Athletic Association yesterday as the host institution for the men's Division III Final Four soccer tournament this weekend.
Kean (17-6-0) will meet Rochester Tech (15-2-1) in the second semifinal Saturday, after a game between Ohio Wesleyan (19-3-0) and Colorado College (19-1-2) that will start at 10 A.M.


Devlieg-Bullard reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


He's Now Knick, but Will He Play?
The Knicks' pursuit of a backup big man ended Sunday when they signed Herb Williams.
But two important questions remain: How much will Williams help, and how much will he play?
It was too early to answer either of those questions today, but Williams participated in this morning's shootaround and was to be in uniform for the game between the Knicks (4-1) and the Portland Trail Blazers (4-0) here tonight.


Salvadoran Government Invents Excuses to Maintain Iron Grip
To the Editor:
"Salvador Leader Suspends Military Cutbacks" (news article Oct. 29) is confusing and misleading.
The basic news, which is never quite stated, is that the rebels of the Farabundo Marti National Liberation Front -- known by their Spanish initials as the F.M.L.N. -- fully agreed to the United Nations Secretary General's proposal for completing the peace process by Dec. 15, while the United States-backed Government rejected the proposal.


Dr. Joseph Druss, 94, Authority on the Ear
Dr.
Joseph George Druss, an ear, nose and throat specialist associated with Mount Sinai School of Medicine for more than six decades, died on Saturday at Mount Sinai Hospital.
He was 94 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died of heart failure, his family said.


Sports of The Times; Hurricanes Seeing Orange
IF we believe everything we hear, then yesterday was the first time that Syracuse University football players and coaches began thinking about Saturday's game at the Carrier Dome against undefeated Miami.
Throughout its 9-1 season, the Syracuse team has recited pat answers to inquiries about its regular-season finale with the Hurricanes: "No, we haven't thought about it," or, "We've got to take one game at a time."


New Catechism for Catholics Defines Sins of Modern World
For the first time in more than four centuries, the Roman Catholic Church today issued a new universal catechism, a massive compendium of its teachings that reaffirms traditional tenets of faith but also identifies a range of new sins that are products of modern-day society.
Among the sins defined in the new catechism are tax evasion, drug abuse, mistreatment of immigrants, financial speculation, abuse of the environment, artificial insemination and genetic engineering.


Imtec Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Bridge
Disguises are appropriate for Halloween trick-or-treaters, for Sherlock Holmes, and, occasionally, for bridge players.
If the declarer makes his plan of play obvious, he will give the opposition a road map for the defense.
Disguise may be called for, and was on the diagramed deal.
South overbid slightly by leaping to four spades when his opening bid was raised.
Most good players would invite by bidding three clubs, and then accept a sign-off by North in three spades.


Living Centers of America Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Aides Say Appointee Urged Searches of Clinton's File
A top political appointee at the State Department encouraged Congressional Republicans to request information from Bill Clinton's passport files in an apparent effort to justify opening them late in the Presidential campaign, Administration officials said today.
The appointee, Steven K. Berry, the Acting Assistant Secretary of State for Legislative Affairs, recommended that Representative Gerald B. Solomon, Republican of upstate New York, and other members of Congress file formal requests for Mr.
Clinton's records before the State Department actually began the search, Federal investigators and aides to Mr.
Berry said.


No Sign of Plant
Four days of intensive searching in the Atlantic Ocean have failed to turn up any signs of MIKE PLANT, the 41-year-old solo sailor who left New York on Oct. 16 on a voyage to France, where he is scheduled to start a round-the-world race next week.
Two Coast Guard C-130 propeller planes scoured a 15,000-square mile area about 750 miles northeast of Bermuda yesterday.
The search, which began last Friday, was prompted by a faint emergency signal received Oct. 27 by the Canadian Coast Guard.
It was not until last Thursday that the signal was linked to Plant's sailboat, the 60-foot yacht Coyote.
The search area has been based on a rough estimate of where Plant might be.


Removal of Drums of Chemicals Ordered at Warehouse Fire Site
City environmental officials yesterday ordered the removal of a large stock of chemicals from a Brooklyn warehouse destroyed in a suspicious, five-alarm fire Sunday night, but said the chemicals were secure in drums, not flammable or especially toxic and posed no hazard to the surrounding Bushwick neighborhood.
The blaze, which engulfed the two-story warehouse at 1094 Hancock Street, near Evergreen Avenue, and spread to nine adjacent row houses, left 100 people homeless and 35 firefighters injured.
The fire's cause was undetermined, but marshals called it suspicious because of the extent of fire when they arrived.
Air Samples Taken
The city's Environmental Protection Department yesterday posted guards at the partially collapsed warehouse and ordered its owner, Louis Twersky, to remove the chemicals -- 30 drums of ferrous sulfate, ammonium thiosulfate and various pharmaceuticals used by veterinarians -- when the building is declared safe to enter.
Inspectors, meantime, said they found no cause for alarm.


Spielvogel Denies He'll Join Clinton
Carl Spielvogel, chairman and chief executive at Backer Spielvogel Bates Worldwide in New York, said yesterday that there was "absolutely no truth" to a front-page report in Campaign, the British trade publication, that he was "standing by for a top job in the incoming Administration" of President-elect Bill Clinton.
The report, which appeared in Campaign Friday, was the subject of an amusingly trenchant column by Richard Morgan this week in Adweek.
Mr.
Morgan called the report a trial balloon floated by executives at Saatchi &amp; Saatchi P.L.C. in London, Backer Spielvogel's parent.


Gloria Glikin Fromm; Professor of English, 61
Dr.
Gloria Glikin Fromm, a professor of English at the University of Illinois in Chicago, died Nov. 12 at Governors Park, a nursing home and rehabilitation center in Barrington, Ill.
She was 61 years old and lived in North Barrington.
She died of complications from lung-cancer, said her husband, Harold.


Cadema Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Schering Work Goes to McAdams
Schering-Plough's health care division said yesterday that it had moved its Gyne-Lotrimin and Gyne-Moistrin accounts, with billings estimated at $23 million, to William Douglas McA dams in New York after two years at Cadwell Davis Partners in New York.
Douglas Petkus, a division spokesman in Liberty Corner, N.J., confirmed reports of the change this week in Advertising Age and Adweek.
He said the company wanted to "create effiencies" by consolidating its feminine-care products at William Douglas McAdams, which also handles Schering brands like Fem Care.


Callon Consolidated Partners reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Janice G. Fulton, A Bridge Champion, Is Presumed Dead
Janice Gilbert Fulton, a bridge expert and game-show personality in the early days of television, was presumed dead after a boating accident last week near her home about 150 miles north of Haiti, her lawyer said yesterday.
The lawyer, Ian Miller, said that Mrs.
Fulton's husband, David Fulton, 70 years old, a mining engineer, was also presumed dead, as was Dan Cooper, 45, a Canadian real estate developer who was a passenger when the Fultons' 22-foot fishing boat capsized in choppy waters on Thursday morning.


New Clue to Vision: People Whose Glasses Must Be Rose-Colored
FRANCES FUTTERMAN'S office has a cozy afterhours feel to it even first thing in the morning.
She keeps the windows shuttered, leaving just a couple of slats slightly agape to let in a dapple of sun.
The lights are turned low, and fuzzy throw-rugs cover floor and furniture alike, to absorb glare and soothe the eye.
Ms.
Futterman herself seems hushed and soft.
She is 52 but she looks at least 20 years younger, with a complexion as smooth as a teacup and hair that has yet to turn gray.
She is vivid testimony to the aging effects of the sun, for Ms.
Futterman has spent much of her life shunning it.
She has had no choice.
Ms.
Futterman suffers from a rare genetic disorder that has stripped her eyes of the power to see unaided in daylight.
If she steps out into the sun without special dark glasses, she turns blind, lost in an explosion of whiteness like a winter traveler staggering through a blizzard.


U.S. Bishops Discuss Women
The nation's Roman Catholic bishops opened a meeting in Washington to take a stand on a long-awaited pastoral letter on women.
Page A16.


Short-Term Stimulus? Long-Term Error.
The country has just endured a wrenching recession, modest growth has resumed but employment remains stubbornly high.
The nation rejects its President in favor of a voice for change.
With inflation seemingly under control, the new occupant of the White House announces a formidable $30 billion program to stimulate the economy.
Sound familiar?
That's what happened in 1976 when Jimmy Carter replaced Gerald Ford, with results that are still all too poignant.
The parallels for Bill Clinton are clear.
While our economy needs lots of attention, new Government spending or tax cuts should not be allowed to further increase the enormous budget deficit.
Even as a Democrat, I can't justify more stimulus -- including lower interest rates -- on the basis of the economic news from Washington.


EnviroSource Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Jordan Arrives in Little Rock


Devils' Brown Waits
DOUG BROWN, the first victim of the Devils' overcrowded roster, is not stepping down willingly.
"They put me on waivers last week, and I wasn't aware of it," Brown said from his Westchester home yesterday after he failed to report to the Devils' practice.
"I wasn't picked up and they asked me to report to Utica. I don't know if that's a good idea."


COMPANY NEWS: Saved by the Click; Telephone Gadget Offers Polite Escape
To Miss Manners, also known as Judith Martin, call waiting is "incredibly rude." To Letitia Baldridge, another etiquette expert, it is "an instrument of the Devil." But to David H. Schmidt, budding entrepreneur, it can be a polite way of easing out of a phone call that has dragged on for too long.
Call waiting is an electronic service that tells a customer and the person on the other end of the phone that someone else is trying to get through.
But to etiquette mavens, it is the equivalent of "last come, first served."


Review/Pop; Exile, Icon And Singer Of Protests With Splash
Mercedes Sosa demonstrated the art of monument making in her Sunday night appearance at Avery Fisher Hall.
Miss Sosa, who is from Argentina, was an originator of nueva cancion, protest music that celebrates opposition movements in Latin America.
Exiled for three years in 1979 for criticizing Argentina's military regime, Miss Sosa became an international icon of the left.
The story of her survival has become as important to her audiences as the sea-deep power of her singing.
Miss Sosa's integrity is unquestionable, but she is not beyond enhancing her image with a few show-biz tricks.
Her electric band sometimes veered toward schmaltz, and smoke pots filled the staid concert hall with the misty glow of the production number.
Moving through her repertory of songs, emoting in Spanish on the subjects of protest, survival and love, Miss Sosa was completely in control of her band and the audience.
Her between-song patter was intimate but studied.


Strober Organization reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


'Cleaner' Dry Cleaning Test
"I would like to air some dirty laundry to the press," William K. Reilly, the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency, told reporters at a news conference today.
And he meant it.
Mr.
Reilly was the first Federal employee to drop off a few dirty clothes at a local dry cleaner that is participating in a test of a new cleaning method based on biodegradable soaps instead of the harmful chemicals normally used to dry-clean clothes.


Acme-Cleveland Corp. reports earnings for Year to Sept 30


Yankees Get Ready to Play A Headache-Sized Shell Game
The Yankees spent yesterday trying to guess which players the Colorado Rockies and the Florida Marlins will choose in the expansion draft today.
Executives in the Bronx pored over lists of available players, including their own, and staged mock drafts so that they would be ready for anything this afternoon in Manhattan.
Well, almost anything.
Part of what the Yankees and the other 25 teams must do is think along with the two expansion clubs, especially after the first round.
Gauging why the Rockies and the Marlins choose certain players will be crucial for the established clubs in their attempts to minimize the damage to their rosters.


Hanoi Backs Study To Trace M.I.A's
Members of a Senate panel investigating the fate of Americans missing from the Vietnam War hailed what they said today was a new spirit of cooperation from Vietnam and suggested strongly that President Bush might soon relax an economic embargo against the Hanoi Government.
The comments by the senators followed a meeting in Hanoi with a senior official who pledged that Vietnam would provide "the clearest possible answers" to questions about the 2,265 Americans still unaccounted for.


Ground Round Restaurants Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 27


Tiffany &amp; Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Lawless School Custodians
School custodians in New York City spend precious little time mopping the floors, but a distressing number of them work at private jobs on school time or use school money for their personal expenses.
That shocking indictment of the custodians and of the Board of Education's failure to monitor them is contained in a report issued last week by Ed Stancik, the Special Commissioner of Investigation for city schools.
New York's 915 custodians function as both city employees and independent contractors, at an average annual salary of $58,000.
Each custodian administers an annual budget for supplies, equipment and salaries for a custodial staff.


Rockies and Marlins Dive Into a 26-Team Pool
The Colorado Rockies began with a list of 3,028 prospective players and have slashed it to under 400.
The Florida Marlins entered the final stage of their strategic planning with a list not half that long.
All of the planning and plotting by the Rockies and the Marlins has been geared toward their choosing the most worthwhile 72 players of the about 2,500 available in today's expansion draft.


THE TRANSITION: A New Generation; A Baby-Boom President Young Enough to Be (Gasp!) Me
There is a moment of panic in every adult's life when suddenly the airline pilot's voice coming over the intercom sounds less like Chuck Yeager than Dennis the Menace, the doctor seems too young to shave, let alone perform surgery, and the police officer looks like a teen-ager wearing a gun and a badge for Halloween.
These intimidations of middle age pale next to the shock of waking up to a Clinton Administration.
Bill Clinton's unlined face and youthful demeanor appear to be particularly unnerving for his baby-boomer contemporaries, particularly the male ones.
As a group, they are obsessed with clinging to the illusion of youth with products catered to their vanity, like relaxed-fit jeans and single-lens bifocals.
Many pride themselves on having made their mark as a generation by rebelling against convention and by postponing all the trappings of adulthood.


Review/Music; Magritte Inspires A Concert Program
The title of the American Symphony Orchestra's first program of the season at Avery Fisher Hall, "Surrealism and Music?," was suitably cautious, and Leon Botstein, the orchestra's music director, began a preconcert talk by stressing the question mark.
The notion of Surrealism sits oddly on an art form little given to realism in the first place.
In fact, an innovation of two composers represented in the program was the use of "real world" sounds not traditionally considered musical.
In John Cage's Concerto for Prepared Piano and Chamber Orchestra (1951), played here by Alan Feinberg, the instrumentation includes a door buzzer and a radio.
Edgard Varese's volcanic "Ameriques," which was bypassed by the American Symphony in favor of his "Arcana," employs a simulated lion's roar and a siren.


A U.S. Spy Satellite May Be Sold Abroad
THE United Arab Emirates is shopping in the United States for a spy satellite, raising tough new questions about the intersection of economic and national security needs at a time when military contractors are hungry for work after the cold war.
The deal would have an American company make, launch and operate the orbiting spy craft for the emirates.
Federal officials, who have wrestled with the proposal for a half year, is said to be bitterly divided on its merits and has not yet issued an export license.


International Telecharge Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Market Place; When a Company Isn't Forthcoming
DESPITE all their efforts at numbers crunching and personal research, investors and analysts are almost slavishly devoted to the public utterings of a company's management.
So, when nothing is said, investors usually believe nothing has happened.
But what if management decides that when a fundamental piece of the company's investment story changes, it is not important enough to tell investors?


New Catechism for Catholics Defines Sins of Modern World
For the first time in more than four centuries, the Roman Catholic Church today issued a new universal catechism, a massive compendium of its teachings that reaffirms traditional tenets of faith but also identifies a range of new sins that are products of modern-day society.
Among the sins defined in the new catechism are tax evasion, drug abuse, mistreatment of immigrants, financial speculation, abuse of the environment, artificial insemination and genetic engineering.


IGI Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Covington Development reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Lomas Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Cousins Property reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Morgan Keegan Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Nationwide Cellular Services reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Executive Changes
BIRD MEDICAL TECHNOLOGIES INC., named John F. Kessler vice president of finance/administration and chief financial officer.
DELL COMPUTER CORP., Austin, Tex., named Thomas J. Meredith chief financial officer and L. Scott Flaig senior vice president of worldwide operations responsible for worldwide manufacturing and materials.


At 36, Navratilova Still Has Fight
In the space of three city blocks, she roamed through myriad subjects, from quitting tennis to campaigning for gay rights to trying out the new hockey skates she received from Rangers Coach Roger Neilson in exchange for a racquet.
Martina Navratilova, like a shark, is never in repose.


Salvadoran Government Invents Excuses to Maintain Iron Grip; Made in the U.S.A.
To the Editor:
"The Mozote Horror, Confirmed" (editorial, Oct. 26) follows upon your Oct. 22 front-page report showing a picture and describing the massacre that befell Salvadorans living in El Mozote and surrounding areas during December 1981.


Digital Microwave reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Review/Theater; Rockettes And Elves: Christmas Is Near
One deer a-sleighing, two skaters skating, three lumpy camels, two mighty organs and one Santa Claus.
Not to mention 60 years' tradition, 72 legs a-kicking, 100 cast members and a horde of happy fans.
Yes, "The Christmas Spectacular" is back, off on a 179-performance run that is expected to pull a million people into Radio City Music Hall before it ends on Jan. 6.
Driven by energy and verve, the 90-minute "Spectacular" is a mad dash through the season, tossing together everything from a Reader's Digest enactment of Dickens's "Christmas Carol" to an abbreviated version of Tchaikovsky's "Nutcracker" performed by humans costumed as various species of bears, to the hard-working, always welcome Rockettes giving new meaning to the word precision with a show-stopping march through "The Parade of the Wooden Soldiers."


New York Specializes in Duplicated Agencies
To the Editor:
Now that the elections are over, it is important that our New York State legislators follow up on promises of change by creating a state constitutional convention.
New York's Constitution has been amended many times since 1777, eight times by constitutional conventions, many additional times piecemeal.


What Galileo Actually Proved and Disproved
To the Editor:
Galileo Galilei, who first incurred the Roman Catholic Church's wrath on March 5, 1616, when he was ordered neither to "hold nor defend" the Copernican theory, did not prove the theory by his observations of satellites circling the planet Jupiter, as you report in "After 350 years, Vatican Says Galileo Was Right: It Moves" (front page, Oct. 31).


Fritz Cos. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


INSIDE
Emirates Seek Spy Satellite
American officials are said to be bitterly divided over whether to sell a spy satellite to the United Arab Emirates.
Science Times, page C2.
New Account on File Search
A political appointee at the State Department encouraged lawmakers to request data from Bill Clinton's passport file, officials say.
Page A16.
New York Slips in Research
New York City's edge in biomedical research is eroding at a worrisome pace, a study says.
Page B1.


THE TRANSITION: The Economy; Liberals Advise Clinton to Raise Deficit Spending
As President-elect Clinton shapes his economic plan, he has had plenty of counsel from supporters of Ross Perot, who are pressing him to cut the budget deficit sooner rather than later.
But today he got a heavy dose of advice from the other side, as a liberal-leaning commission appointed by Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo of New York called for a generous dollop of increased deficit spending to lift the weak economy.


Microsoft and Software's Slow Pace
The slow pace of software design has become a big stumbling block in the personal computer business.
The Microsoft Corporation underscored this problem today when it introduced its first internally developed personal computer data base program at the Comdex computer trade show here.
The giant software publisher acknowledged that it had taken a wrong turn that cost it $20 million and three years before finding the path to its first home-grown commercial data base package.


Tiffany's Sales and Profits Decline Sharply
Tiffany &amp; Company announced yesterday that its sales and profits were sharply lower in the third quarter, and it attributed the declines to the slowing Japanese economy.
Tiffany earned a mere $56,000, less than a penny a share, in the latest quarter, a decline of 99 percent from $8 million, or 51 cents a share, in the third quarter of 1991.
Revenues fell 16 percent, to $106 million from $126 million.


No Contract for Wells
The Fukuoka Daiei Hawks said yesterday they would not renew the contract of GREG (BOOMER) WELLS, who became a force in Japan after not making an impact in the majors.
This season, the 38-year-old Wells led the Pacific League in runs batted in with 97 -- his fourth r.b.i. title in 10 seasons in Japan.
He batted .271 with 26 home runs.


Geodyne Resources reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Commissioner Orders an Overhaul In Fight Against Police Corruption
Stung by an avalanche of criticism over police corruption and the apparently flawed controls for rooting it out, Police Commissioner Raymond W. Kelly yesterday ordered sweeping changes in his department's structure and methods for investigating and exposing corrupt officers.
The changes were the first for the department's internal policing system since it was established two decades ago after the Knapp Commission uncovered widespread police corruption in New York.
In recent years, Mr.
Kelly said, the system had become a bungler's bureaucracy of inexperienced, poorly trained detectives using inferior equipment and ineffective techniques, and closing out cases with sloppy, misleading reports. 'Not Functioning'
The Commissioner did not accuse any investigators or high police officials of wrongdoing, but contended that structural flaws had led to the department's failure to properly investigate the notorious case of a rogue officer, Michael Dowd, despite more than a dozen allegations over seven years that he was involved in drug-trafficking and other skulduggery.


Odetics Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Drafting the 'New Media' Into Public Service Campaigns
"SMOKEY BEAR: concerned citizen or pyromaniacal busybody? On the next 'Donahue.' "
"Litterbugs: vexacious vermin or victims of childhood cleanliness trauma? On the next 'Oprah.' "


Dr. Peter Jepson-Young, 35, Dies; Educated Canadians About AIDS
Dr.
Peter Jepson-Young, a physician who helped fight stereotypes and misunderstandings about AIDS in frank television discussions of his own battle against the disease, died on Sunday in Vancouver.
He was 35 years old.
Dr.
Peter, as he was known to millions of Canadians who saw more than 100 segments of his "AIDS Diaries" broadcast over the last two years, died of AIDS-related complications.
He was considered one of the country's most effective educators on the disease.


Lawless School Custodians
School custodians in New York City spend precious little time mopping the floors, but a distressing number of them work at private jobs on school time or use school money for their personal expenses.
That shocking indictment of the custodians and of the Board of Education's failure to monitor them is contained in a report issued last week by Ed Stancik, the Special Commissioner of Investigation for city schools.
New York's 915 custodians function as both city employees and independent contractors, at an average annual salary of $58,000.
Each custodian administers an annual budget for supplies, equipment and salaries for a custodial staff.


What Galileo Actually Proved and Disproved; An Unnecessary Rift
To the Editor:
In your Oct. 31 article on the Vatican and Galileo you speak of "the conflict between reason and dogma, and science and faith." You are using the words dogma and faith very loosely.
At issue in 1616 and later was not these concepts but the interpretation of Scripture.
Moreover, decisions by the Holy Office are authoritative, but not a matter of dogma or faith.
That is reserved to general councils or infallible teachings of a pope.


Steven H. Sanders; Lawyer, 34
Steven H. Sanders, a lawyer in Washington who was active with AIDS charities, died Nov. 13 at the Washington Hospital Center.
He was 34 years old and lived in Washington.
Mr. Sanders died of complications from AIDS, said Joel Gregorio, his companion.


Spain's Progress Turns to Pain
It was called the Spanish miracle, but might have been more prosaically described as Europe's galvanization of Spain.
For five years after joining the European Community in 1986, the country sped ahead, spurred by huge foreign investment, new competition and a revival of national energy after the long isolation of the Franco years.
The result, between 1986 and 1991, was that Spain grew faster than any country in Europe -- an average of more than 4 percent a year.
The country became stylish and successful, an image embodied by Prime Minister Felipe Gonzalez.
It rapidly modernized, benefiting from billions of dollars in regional aid granted by the community to one of its poorest members and by decisions from the likes of Ford and General Motors to build cars here.


Primark Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Accounts
*
Paddington Corp., Fort Lee, N.J., said yesterday that it had placed in review its Amaretto di Saronno liqueur account, with billings of $3.5 million, confirming reports this week in Advertising Age and Adweek.
A spokeswoman said the incumbent agency, Grace &amp; Rothschild , New York, had been invited to participate, but declined to disclose other participants. *
Virgin Retail, Los Angeles, to D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles , Los Angeles, to introduce the company's first American Virgin Megastore record store, opening in Los Angeles next month.
Billings were not disclosed.


Bluebeard Has His Day in Court: Not Guilty
For generations, if not centuries, the atrocities committed by Gilles de Rais before he was simultaneously hanged and burned in 1440 have served to spook children and to draw tourists to his ruined castles near Nantes in western France.
He was, after all, the original Bluebeard -- or at least that is his nickname in France, even though the Bluebeard of popular legend locked up or killed a succession of wives while Gilles de Rais supposedly sacrificed 150 boys and girls in satanic rituals.


Commercial Programming reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Mets Will Twiddle Thumbs, and Then Pursue an Arm
The Mets, who had reason to believe they could complete a trade for a pitcher before rosters were frozen last week, remain hopeful of sealing one of their potential deals soon after today's expansion draft at the Marriott Marquis Hotel in Manhattan.
Among the clubs the Mets have talked with in their pursuit of a No. 4 or No. 5 starter have been the Expos, the Red Sox and the Royals.
Montreal's Mark Gardner, the right-hander who was 11-10 in 1992, is eligible for salary arbitration and the Expos are reportedly entertaining modest offers for his services.
Boston's second-tier starters -- including Joe Hesketh -- were not protected from the draft, and if they remain with the Red Sox they could conceivably be available.


Classical Music in Review
Thomas Hampson  Baritone Carnegie Hall
The downside of Thomas Hampson's precipitous rise in the singing world is the high expectation his every appearance seems to promote.
And indeed, there were disappointments on Sunday afternoon.
Mr.
Hampson's voice was not in the best repair; the American baritone gave the impression of a man trying to sing over a cold and not quite making it.
Lower options for higher notes were consistently taken and, in terms of pitch and smoothness, not always with consummate grace.
The patches of brilliance tended to be abrupt and musical accents blunt.
The slower songs were slow to the point of mannerism.


Chess
Two senior Russian grandmasters, Yuri Averbakh, 70 years old, and Mark Taimanov, 66, tied with Nenad Vulicevic of Yugoslavia for first place in the international tournament sponsored by Enhance Financial Services and the Marshall Chess Club in Greenwich Village on Oct. 9 to 18.
Each scored 6 1/2-2 1/2, and Vulicevic made his first international master norm.
This competition was basically a confrontation between the two semiretired players and a field of top teen-agers, with a couple of 30-somethings filling out the roster.
The best achiever among the youngsters was Joshua Waitzkin, 15, of New York, who took fourth place with 5-4 in the 10-player invitational round-robin.


Marsh Supermarkets reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 10


New York State Judge Sets Hearing on Clifford's Health
A judge yesterday scheduled a hearing for Dec. 9 to take testimony from doctors before deciding whether Clark M. Clifford, adviser to several Presidents, is too ill to stand trial in New York State on charges stemming from the Bank of Credit and Commerce International scandal.
At a hearing in the State Supreme Court in Manhattan, Justice John A. K. Bradley appeared receptive to a motion by Mr.
Clifford's lawyer, Charles A. Stillman, to dismiss the state charges against his 85-year-old client.
Mr.
Stillman has submitted written statements from several doctors who assert that Mr.
Clifford suffers from heart disease and other maladies and might be killed by the strain of a trial.


Salem Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Black Theater to Resume Production
The Negro Ensemble Company, which announced in July that it would have to close by the end of 1992, has won a reprieve.
The company has raised about $25,000 in small contributions, many of them from previous donors and alumni of the company, said Douglas Turner Ward, the president of the 25-year-old troupe.
The money is enough to keep the company operating in 1993 and to pay for the planning phase of a new production scheduled for March, he said.


2 Retailers Post Gains In Earnings
The Kmart Corporation, the discount and specialty store chain, reported yesterday that a program of renovating and enlarging its discount stores paid off in increases of about 12 percent in profits and sales in its third quarter.
And Toys "R" Us Inc., the specialty toy retailer, said strong sales at its stores in Europe and Japan and its Kids "R" Us apparel chain helped lift profits nearly 15 percent while sales rose more than 14 percent in the quarter.


Grenade Tossed Into Arab Market In Jerusalem Kills a Palestinian
A Palestinian was killed and 11 other Arabs were wounded today when a grenade was tossed into an Arab market in the Old City.
The police said the grenade was apparently thrown from a Jewish enclave overlooking the market.
The incident in the Muslim Quarter was a rare armed assault on Arabs in Jerusalem, and there was immediate speculation that it was the work of Jewish militants.


Rubbermaid Chairman Quits Posts
Rubbermaid Inc., the household products company, said Walter F. Williams, its chairman of 18 months, had resigned over the weekend, citing personal reasons.
Mr.
Williams will be replaced on an interim basis by Stanley C. Gault, who retired as Rubbermaid's chairman last year but later returned to work as chairman of the Goodyear Tire and Rubber Company.
Rubbermaid said Wolfgang R. Schmitt, its president and chief operating officer, would serve as an interim co-chairman with Mr.
Gault.
The company said it was not clear when a new chairman would be named, although it is expected by the middle of next year.


Classical Music in Review
Le Vin Herbe  Goliard Ensemble Merkin Concert Hall
With "Tristan und Isolde," Richard Wagner effectively asserted ownership rights to an ancient Celtic legend that had captured poets' imaginations as early as the 12th century.
But Wagner was neither the first nor the last composer drawn to this tragedy's musical possibilities.
On Sunday evening the Goliard Chorale and Chamber Soloists presented a post-Wagnerian setting, the oratorio "Le Vin Herbe" (1939-41), by the Swiss composer Frank Martin.


Review/Pop; Questioning One's Life While Firmly Cherishing It
From the moment Holly Golightly first had breakfast at Tiffany's, the gamin has been a common stereotype for arty urban women.
The gamin combines sassiness with vulnerability.
Like most cliched roles, this one can be confining, but Shawn Colvin took it in a slightly new direction with her Bottom Line appearance on Thursday night.
Wearing a dress that was half muscle tank and half debutante gown, Ms.
Colvin led her guest roster of male musicians with gentle authority, her steady acoustic guitar anchoring their interplay.
"You could be the woman you need if you just let me be the man that I am," she sang in "Climb On (A Back That's Strong)." Her voice was delicate but not coy, assuming androgyny as the artist's natural state.


Advanced Medical Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


CHRONICLE
Whither the beleaguered Windsors?
In the last week, the London tabloids have had a field day reporting that A) a tape recording has surfaced in which PRINCE CHARLES professes his love for his old girlfriend Lady CAMILLA PARKER BOWLES, B) the PRINCESS OF WALES spent her husband's 44th birthday not by his side but in France and C) the couple have agreed to an informal separation.
Yesterday, the rumor mill continued to run at full tilt, with a report that Charles had told his mother, QUEEN ELIZABETH II, that he wanted to relinquish his claim to the throne.


Data Show G.M. Knew for Years Of Risk in Pickup Trucks' Design
The General Motors Corporation recognized as long ago as 1983 that its pickup trucks could be made "much less vulnerable" to collisions that might break open their fuel tanks, according to company documents that have just come to light.
But the company did not change the trucks' design until the 1988 model year.
The company made its popular Chevrolet and GMC pickups with dual gasoline tanks mounted on the side from 1973 to 1987, and at least six million of them are still on the road.
General Motors notes that the vehicles meet all safety standards.
It says that in 1988 it changed the way the tanks were mounted for reasons of design, not safety.


Patterns
De la Renta: Busy, Busy
It's official.
Oscar de la Renta, who has been showing his ready-to-wear in Paris for the last two years, will design Pierre Balmain's haute couture and ready-to-wear collections.
After three months of negotiations, agreement was reached yesterday, Mr. de la Renta said by telephone in Paris.
His first collection for Balmain will be for spring 1993 and will be shown on Jan. 27.
"I'm coming back to New York on Wednesday," he said, "and will be back in Paris for a few days in December. Then I'll spend the month of January here."


CHRONICLE
In the United States, the infusion of a British presence in the literary world continues unabated.
Over the weekend in Washington, for example, LESLIE and ANDREW COCKBURN, investigative reporters who write books, articles and for television, gave a party at their house in Georgetown for MARTIN AMIS, the British author.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-14  CATHOLICS UPDATE TEACHINGS  The Roman Catholic Church issued a new catechism for the first time in four centuries.
The new version identifies a range of new sins that are products of modern-day society, including drunken driving, tax evasion and genetic engineering.
A1  U.N.
ACTS TO BLOCKADE SERBIA  The Security Council voted to impose a naval blockade on the rump Yugoslavia.
The decision adds enforcement provisions to trade sanctions it adopted against the Serbian-led Belgrade Government in May.
A1


Plants Found to Send Nerve-Like Messages
PLANTS, unlike animals, have no nerves, so scientists have been jolted by the discovery this month that the tomato plant uses an electric signal to alert its defense system against grazing caterpillars.
A team of researchers from England and New Zealand reported in the Nov. 5 issue of Nature that when a leaf on a tomato seedling is chewed by insects it sends out electrical warning signals, alerting the rest of the plant to the danger.
As undamaged leaves receive the signal, they begin producing defensive chemicals that make them difficult to digest.


Ambulatory Medical Care Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Proffitt's Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


U.N. Truck Accident in Bosnia Leaves Bounty Behind


Corrections
A picture caption on Friday with a rock review misidentified the guitarist shown.
He was Marty Friedman of Megadeth.


Baltek Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Nutmeg Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 24


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  CHANGES ORDERED IN POLICE MONITORING
Stung by an avalanche of criticism over police corruption and apparently flawed controls for rooting it out, Police Commissioner Raymond Kelly has ordered sweeping changes in his department's structure and methods for investigating and exposing corrupt officers.
As part of the plan, Mr.
Kelly said the Internal Affairs Division, the department's main anti-corruption unit, would be transformed into a full bureau, equivalent in the hierarchy to patrol forces and detectives.
A1.
SHOWDOWN OVER SCHOOL CURRICULUM
In another round in their battle over whether to teach children about homosexuals, Schools Chancellor Joseph Fernandez has told a defiant Queens school board that its anti-bias curriculum still does not teach youngsters to respect gay people.
He says he will send an emissary from his office to help the local board comply.
B3.


Opponents of Panamanian Chief Say He Must Shift Course or Quit
Panamanians who led the victorious campaign against a series of constitutional changes indicated today that the pressure is now on President Guillermo Endara either to make major changes in his Government or step aside early.
As the two-to-one loss in the referendum voting became apparent Sunday night, Mr.
Endara said he was willing to consider convening a constitutional convention, but a key opposition leader said the real problem is Mr.
Endara himself.


Cold Fusion, Derided in U.S., Is Hot In Japan
HIDEO IKEGAMI was directing a Japanese research project in nuclear fusion in 1989 when news came from the United States that two scientists at the University of Utah claimed to have produced the phenomenon in a jar.
When Japan's Ministry of Education asked him to divert 10 percent of his project's budget to support researchers wanting to explore the new "cold fusion," Dr.
Ikegami refused.
"At that time I thought something like this must be alchemy," he recalled.
But Dr.
Ikegami, a professor at the National Institute for Fusion Science here, eventually agreed to give up 2 percent of his project's budget to explore the new phenomenon.
Now he is doing cold fusion research himself and has become an avid organizer of a Japanese effort that is among the most active in the world.


Bonray Drilling Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


COMPANY NEWS
ELI LILLY &amp; CO., Indianapolis, and Ranbaxy Laboratories Ltd., of New Delhi have signed an agreement to establish a joint venture to sell and market Lilly products in India.


Fund Drive Successful, Morgan Library Says
A four-year, $40 million fund-raising drive by the Pierpont Morgan Library has ended successfully, the library's director has announced.
Charles E. Pierce Jr., the director, said the money raised from trustees, foundations and friends has been used to renovate the library and augment its endowment, as well as to buy and renovate the adjacent Morgan mansion.


Jay Spectre, 63; An Interior Designer Of Luxurious Homes
Jay Spectre, a New York-based interior and furniture designer, died yesterday at his house in New Canaan, Conn.
He was 63 years old.
He died of pneumonia after a long illness, said his brother-in-law, Elliot Marcus.


All Wet on Wetlands
Lame-duck Administrations bear watching in their waning days lest they become careless and even reckless.
As a case in point, Vice President Dan Quayle and his Council on Competitiveness, which oversees Federal regulation, are considering an act of supreme mischief: loosening the rules that prevent landowners and developers from exploiting America's wetlands.
That would be foolish on three counts.
It would repudiate President Bush's campaign pledge to resist further erosion of wetlands.
It would pre-empt an exhaustive study that the National Academy of Sciences is now conducting.
And it would put the Clinton Administration in the awkward position of having to fight a nasty battle all over again.


THE TRANSITION: The President-Elect; Clinton and Top Legislators Pledge Amity on Economy
President-elect Bill Clinton gathered Democratic leaders around him today to pronounce an end to the "cold war" between Congress and the White House.
But Mr.
Clinton quickly confronted the degree to which his campaign pledges strain the coalition he will need to enact his programs.
At a news conference in the Arkansas State House, Mr.
Clinton vowed to press ahead with his pledge to lift the ban on homosexuals in the armed forces, despite complaints from the Pentagon and signs of resistance from an important Democrat in Congress.


Toots Mondello Dies; Swing Saxophonist, 81
Nuncio F. Mondello, a prominent swing-era saxophonist and a composer, died on Sunday at Lenox Hill Hospital.
He was 81 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died of cancer, said his lawyer, Joel Shoobe.


Is He In or Out?
Though Coach JERRY BERNDT has heard a lot about his future, or lack of it, with the Temple Owls next season, it hasn't come from the people who will make the decision.
"I have not been told officially that I am not the coach," Berndt said yesterday.


On My Mind; The Anatomy of Hate
The first conference was held in 1990 in Oslo, a place of peace and civility.
The second was in Moscow a year later, when Communism was in its last few days and hope in its first.
Both times people kept saying to participants, "Who needs such a thing -- a conference on hate?"


Supreme Court Roundup; Hazardous-Waste Ruling Overturned
At the Bush Administration's urging, the Supreme Court today overturned a Federal appeals court's decision requiring cities to treat the ash from municipal incinerators as hazardous waste rather than ordinary waste that can be deposited cheaply in a landfill.
The Justices ordered the lower court to re-examine the issue in light of the Environmental Protection Agency's new policy, announced two months ago, to consider the municipal ash to be exempt from hazardous-waste regulation.


Navy Fails in New Attempt to Exclude Gay Sailor
Four days after being forced by a Federal judge to readmit a sailor it discharged after he declared his homosexuality on national television, the Navy failed today to get the judge to reverse his order and exclude the sailor from duty while his lawsuit against the Navy is pending.
The effort stumbled over procedural snags, and the judge let his preliminary injunction stand in a case that has drawn wide attention.
Soon after the judge's ruling, President-elect Bill Clinton said he intended to rescind the military's ban on homosexuals in uniform.


LITHUANIANS OUST GOVERNING PARTY
Lithuanian voters angry at economic difficulties and cold apartments have repudiated the Sajudis movement that brought them independence, giving a party of former Communists a working majority in a new Parliament.
After a stinging defeat on Sunday in a second, runoff round of elections for Parliament, the bitter leader of the defeated party, Vytautas Landsbergis, who announced independence in March 1990, warned that "we are moving back toward the one-party rule we saw before 1988."


EquiVest Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Observer; By Sex Obsessed
In the military you met all kinds.
That's one of the things that made it such valuable experience.
It was an eye-opener for young people who had never rubbed elbows with any but their own sort.
Gays were accepted as part of the crowd on condition they stay in the closet.
Well, not accepted really.
The military didn't simply accept them, it drafted them right along with everybody else who was warm.
Of course there might be a half-hearted effort to ferret them out.


Israel's Likud Puts Hope in U.S.-Style Changes
Battered at the polls and riddled with dissension, Israel's once-dominant Likud Party began today to try rebuilding itself by openly embracing American-style electoral changes.
In the process, the most "American" of prominent Israeli politicians emerged as the clear front-runner to become Likud's next leader: Benjamin Netanyahu, a 43-year-old former delegate to the United Nations who is solidly backed by American contributors and who beats all rivals in using television to maximum advantage.


Total Research reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


By Design; New Way With Pearls
Along with the Republican Administration, chokers of Barbara Bush-size pearls are on the way out.
But pearls are definitely still in.
For spring, many designers have accessorized their collections with multitudes of long, swinging necklaces, many made of pearl-like beads as small as seeds.
The idea is to toss them on in a degage manner.


Top Yield Is 6.35% For Connecticut
A $200 million tax-exempt issue of Connecticut general-obligation bonds is being offered to investors through underwriters led by Paine Webber Inc.
The bonds are tentatively priced to yield a maximum 6.35 percent for an issue due in 2012, with another issue due in 2008 priced to yield about 6.20 percent.
For shorter maturities, serial bonds yield from 3.60 percent in 1994 to 4.75 percent in 1997, 5.70 percent in 2002 and 6.05 percent in 2005.


Classical Music in Review
David Holzman  Pianist Kathryn Bache Miller Theater
"This program is not well balanced," David Holzman acknowledged in program notes for his recital on Thursday evening, and the listener was not disposed to argue.
Noting the predominance of intensity in the music, Mr.
Holzman felt constrained to point out the few moments of relaxation to help allay "the extreme demands it places upon the listener."


Will Coleman Star as Mailman II?
At Byrne Meadowlands Arena tonight, Derrick Coleman will get his first chance of the season to show Karl Malone that he is developing a new standard by which to judge the power-forward position in the National Basketball Association.
Malone, who will lead the Utah Jazz (3-2) against the Nets (3-3), is the current standard: a ferocious package of power and speed, relentless from 15 feet and always a threat to beat the defense down the floor for a slam dunk.


Endosonics Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


I.B.M. Introduces Its Series Of Voice-Activated Products
I.B.M. moved a step closer yesterday to a time when humans and computers will converse by announcing a series of products that allow people to operate computers by speaking to them rather than typing in commands or moving a mouse.
The International Business Machines Corporation thus becomes the first major computer maker to introduce affordable speech recognition abilities across its entire line of personal computers -- a potentially powerful appeal to users.
Converts Speech into Text
Speech recognition is a complex science that combines software programming with linguistics and voice patterns to allow a computer to convert human speech into text that can be displayed and stored.
At the Comdex exhibition in Las Vegas, Nev., I.B.M. introduced four speech recognition products including two developed at I.B.M.'s Thomas J. Watson Research Center and two developed by Dragon Systems Inc., a Newton, Mass., company that builds PC speech recognition systems.
I.B.M., through a licensing and distribution agreement with Dragon, will sell Dragon Dictate-7K, a dictation system with a 7,000-word vocabulary that allows users to control DOS-based applications by voice rather than by typing.
The system sells for $2,295 and will be available in March.
I.B.M. will also sell Dragon Talk To Plus, a $149 software program that allows users of I.B.M.
PC's running Microsoft's Windows operating system to manipulate files by using simple voice commands.
I.B.M. also introduced its Speech Server series, a system with a 20,000-word vocabulary that accepts dictation at up to 70 words a minute.
One version, the AIX Server program, will be available in December at a cost of $6,950.
And the company's Continuous Speech Series Developer program will allow other companies to create speech recognition applications for I.B.M.
PC's and work stations.


GATT Chief in U.S. Talks
Arthur Dunkel, the Secretary General of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, the 105-nation group that sets international free-trade rules, met here today with Agriculture Secretary Edward R. Madigan and Carla A. Hills, the United States trade representative, to review ways to revive world trade talks aimed at lowering global trade barriers.
The main obstacle to completing the talks lies in farm subsidies, particularly European subsidies for the production of soybeans, rapeseed and sunflower seeds.


Clues Etched in Bone Debunk Theory of a Plague's Spread
AMONG human bones from pre-Columbian America and Europe, scientists are finding distinctive scars, some like the patterns in worm-eaten wood, that could be decisive clues in one of the enduring mysteries of medical history: Where did syphilis originate, and how and why did it erupt with epidemic virulence in Europe at the end of the 15th century?
The latest clues are etched in bones discovered in the cemetery of an ancient Greek colony in southern Italy.
These bones, and two other skeletons examined recently in England, could be the first unequivocal evidence of the presence of the organism causing syphilis in Europe before Columbus.


Plan to Abandon New Jersey Network Dies
Stunned by an outpouring of support for the New Jersey Network's preservation as the voice of the state and the realization that turning it over to another operator would be fiscally unsound, the New Jersey Assembly voted overwhelmingly today to scuttle a plan to abandon the television system, and restored most of its financing.
By a 70 to 2 vote, the Republican-dominated Assembly approved a bill to reinstate $3.5 million of the $4.2 million it cut from the network's $8.2 million appropriation.
In exchange, the network pledged to gradually become more self-sufficient.


Jacobson Stores reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 24


Defense Presses Hard In the Glen Ridge Case
The four defense lawyers in the Glen Ridge sex assault trial are working as a team, but when they take on prosecution witnesses, each attacks from a different angle.
Thomas Ford picks and picks at the answers witnesses give to prosecutors' questions, looking for weakness and exaggeration.
Michael Querques returns again and again to the past sexual activities of the mildly retarded woman who the state contends was assaulted in March 1989.


Irish and British Report the Collapse of Talks
Irish and British officials today acknowledged the collapse of nearly two years of talks aimed at a peaceful settlement of the 23 years of civil war in the British province of Northern Ireland.
The talks, a major British initiative started in early 1991, were held intermittently until last week by the two Governments and the political leaders of the Protestant majority and the Roman Catholic minority in the North.


U.S. BACKS MERGER OF NORTHWEST AIR AND DUTCH CARRIER
In a thrust aimed at opening the skies above the United States and Europe to more international competition, the Transportation Department yesterday approved a request by Northwest Airlines and KLM Royal Dutch Airlines to merge and function as one airline and to cooperate in crucial areas like pricing and strategy.
Although the order approving the application was preliminary and other carriers can file objections in the next 14 days, the agency has rarely reversed itself.


Natural Alternatives International reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Business Scene; Clinton Faces Deflation Worries
GLEAMING, frostless refrigerators are a staple in millions of American homes.
So are modern cooking ranges, dishwashers and air-conditioners.
Yet the prices of these ubiquitous household appliances have been falling since 1989, reversing a decades-old trend toward higher prices -- and creating one of the pockets of deflation that keep appearing in these hard times.
Deflation can be dangerous.
Nothing so characterized the Great Depression as the phenomenon of falling prices, falling real estate values and falling wages, snowballing across the nation.
The pockets of deflation that exist today are only a shadow of that 1930's experience, and almost certain to remain so.
But they are helping to gradually reshape the national outlook.


Bonn Hopes to Act More Quickly on Asylum
The main opposition party tonight dropped its opposition to a change in the Constitution that would allow Germany to rule on applications for political asylum in weeks instead of years and to expel rejected applicants swiftly.
Officials of Chancellor Helmut Kohl's Government criticized the decision, by the Social Democratic Party, as not going far enough to halt a spiraling rise in applications by refugees from Eastern Europe, Asia and Africa that has led to outbreaks of violence by xenophobic right-wing groups.


Critic's Notebook; With a Nip and a Tuck, TV Imitates Life
Based-on-fact movies have become a television hazard, generating a legal mini-industry skilled at scouring headlines and securing exclusive story rights.
Apart from the moral questions of sometimes rewarding criminals with lucrative contracts, the genre has encouraged artistic laziness.
Creativity has given way to paint-by-the-numbers reality rip-offs, pieced together from news articles, interviews and court transcripts.
The formula has already become numbing.
There are several problems, not least the pointless duplications arising from intense competitions.
The "fatal attraction" story of Carolyn Warmus, for instance, was dramatized on two networks this season, with one movie hardly improving on the other.


Avoiding Gridlock by Wooing Both Sides of Aisle
When President-elect Bill Clinton promised today to cooperate with Congress, saying "Pennsylvania Avenue will run both ways again," his hopes were grander than mere cooperation with the Democratic leaders standing behind him.
He wants Republican votes for his proposals, too.


Corrections
A picture caption on Friday about a City Council hearing on the killing of Yankel Rosenbaum last year in Crown Heights, Brooklyn, misidentified the man at the center.
He was Councilman Stanley E. Michels.


Tanker Splits, Spilling Acid on New Jersey Highway


CHRONICLE
MAGIC JOHNSON, who quit the National Commission on AIDS in September, saying that President Bush had "dropped the ball," said during appearances in New York yesterday that he was considering rejoining the commission under the Clinton Administration.
According to Reuters, the President-elect has indicated several times that he would like to bring Mr.
Johnson back to the commission.


U.N. Tightens Curbs on Belgrade By Authorizing a Naval Blockade
The Security Council voted tonight to impose a naval blockade against Yugoslavia, for the first time adding enforcement provisions to trade sanctions that were adopted against the Serbian-led Belgrade Government in May.
The United States was among 13 nations voting in favor.
The Council's other two members, China and Zimbabwe, abstained.


Foxmoor Industries Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


End Is Urged To Duty on Flat Screens
The only American company actively selling an advanced type of flat-panel computer display screen has abruptly reversed its position and asked the Commerce Department to cancel immediately the nation's punitive taxes on imports of the screens.
The department imposed the tax 14 months ago after concluding that Japanese companies were selling the displays at unfairly low prices.
The decision was made in response to a complaint by American manufacturers of active-matrix liquid-crystal displays, including OIS Optical Imaging Systems, the company that is now asking for the taxes to be dropped.


DAIMLER-BENZ ANNOUNCES ADDITIONAL LAYOFFS
Daimler-Benz A.G., Germany's largest industrial group, announced yesterday a steep drop in earnings and thousands of new layoffs.
Daimler, the maker of Mercedes-Benz cars and trucks, announced that its earnings were likely to drop by about $253 million to about $949 million this year.
The company also said it plans to eliminate an additional 7,500 jobs by the end of 1994.
Combined with previously announced measures, that would bring total job losses to 27,500.
At the end of 1991, Daimler had 380,000 employees worldwide.


Police Groups Assail Release Of Statements on Slain Officer
After a slain police officer was buried yesterday in Queens, the head of a police fraternal organization criticized the Police Department for releasing information at a news conference last week indicating that the officer had had sex shortly before her death with one of the men accused of killing her.
Detective Robert Rivers Jr., president of the Guardians Association, a black officers' group, contended that a police official had "maligned" the character of the slain officer, Milagros T. Johnson, who was black, by saying that she had engaged in "consensual sex" with one of the two suspects.
Detective Rivers was joined yesterday by officials of the Patrolmen's Benevolent Association and the Policewomen's Endowment Association.


Athletic Director Moves
After dropping out last week as a candidate at New Mexico, RUDY DAVALOS did an about-face, resigning his post as Houston's athletic director and taking the same job in Alburquerque, N.M.


AIDS Deaths Tear at Figure-Skating World
In the last 12 months, three world- class Canadian figure skaters have died of AIDS.
Another Canadian skater, Dennis Coi, a former junior world champion, died in 1987 of the same disease.
John Curry of Britain, a former Olympic champion also suffering from AIDS, returned last month to his home in England to spend the remainder of his life.
The sport has been rocked hard by the illness, in stoic silence, in an Olympic year usually reserved for gold medals and triumphant tours that showcase nothing more controversial than triple jumps.
So now figure skating is left with the task of educating its anxious athletes and avoiding the publicity that might damage this theatrical, marketing-driven sport.


A Book, of Sorts, in Your Pocket
IMAGINE a device that weighs less than five ounces, slips into a shirt pocket and contains the equivalent of two books, each of which can be as long as 10 Bibles.
This is not a science-fiction movie prop.
It is the Digital Book System from Franklin Electronic Publishers of Mount Holly, N.J.
The two books in it at the moment are "Merriam-Webster Dictionary Plus" and "Video Companion." From the dictionary comes this definition for "computer": "electronic data processing machine." A moment later, the other book produces a list of movies featuring computers, including "2001: A Space Odyssey."


Philip Morris Plans to Buy Cereal Unit
The Philip Morris Companies said yesterday that it planned to acquire RJR Nabisco's North American cold-cereal business for $450 million.
With its cash bid, which some analysts had predicted, Philip Morris hopes to catch the Nabisco division on the rebound from a planned sale to General Mills for the same price.
That deal was scrapped two weeks ago because of concern over possible regulatory hurdles.


Designs Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Healthvest reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Buenos Aires Journal; The Days Dwindle Down to Poverty and Suicide
In the early morning of Aug. 20, an impoverished 73-year-old woman hanged herself from a tree outside the University of Buenos Aires Law School.
Since then, the police have reported a series of suicides among those 65 and older in and around the capital, with many leaving notes behind saying their economic condition was so bleak they could not cope.
In this country where Government statistics are scarce and often inaccurate, no one knows with certainty whether the suicide rate among the elderly people is increasing dramatically.
City officials say it is unchanged.
Retiree groups say they see a growing number.


Addington Resources reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Under Wide Reproach, Serbs Assert Their Culture
Religion and culture are undergoing a renaissance here as Serbs throw off the legacy of Tito's era and reach for the sense of nationhood that has repeatedly been denied them over the centuries.
Fresh gilt glistens on the cross atop the cupola of St.
Sava's, a mammoth Serbian Orthodox church that began rising in the 1930's but was never completed because of the war and the Communist Government that followed.
Religion is booming, and many adults brought up under Communism are seeking baptism.


Repaired Masterpiece Redisplayed
After a cleaning disputed by art experts and a dramatic accident that left five gashes in its canvas, Veronese's "Marriage at Cana," one of the Louvre's greatest treasures, was returned to public display yesterday.
It is now the centerpiece of a Veronese exhibition that the unveiling inaugurated with much fanfare.
The damage caused when the colossal Renaissance masterpiece fell in June is no longer visible to the naked eye.
The painting spent much of the summer undergoing restorative surgery as specialists glued, pressed and retouched the rips, three of which were about a yard long.
But "Marriage at Cana" does look dramatically different, thanks to a painstaking cleaning that lasted two and a half years, twice as long it took Veronese to paint it.


Amstar Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Knicks Starting to Discover Tiny Problem: Too Few Points
The Knicks may have traveled across the country, but they did not leave their offensive problems behind.
Failing to reach 100 points for the fourth time in six games, the Knicks opened a three-game West Coast trip by losing to the Portland Trail Blazers, 109-94, tonight at Memorial Coliseum.


Classical Music in Review
'The Gondoliers'  Village Light Opera Group Fashion Institute of Technology 227 West 27th Street Chelsea Through Sunday
Dedicated Savoyards in New York willingly put up with a great deal in exchange for evenings with Gilbert and Sullivan.
And it's a good thing, because the companies that specialize in this repertory are shoestring outfits that depend on the enthusiasm of amateurs and the eagerness of young professionals.


Why Exempt Police From Residency Law?
To the Editor:
In "But Why Single Out Police for Residency" (letter, Oct. 26), Joe Lisi, a retired New York City police officer, complains that only the police are being asked to live in the city.
He asks, Why not all city employees?


CNN News Co-Anchor To Be '20/20' Reporter
Catherine Crier, a co-anchor of CNN's evening news, will join the ABC News program "20/20" as a correspondent in early 1993, it was announced yesterday by Roone Arledge, the president of ABC.
Ms.
Crier joined CNN in October 1989 as a co-anchor of its evening news program, with Bernard Shaw, and was also a co-anchor of CNN's "Inside Politics '92." She was also the host of "Crier and Company," a live half-hour talk show featuring a panel of female experts discussing national and international issues.


HAL Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Emerson Radio reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Rexene Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


The Economy Still Needs a Prod
With an uptick here and a rosy look there, the economy gives faint signs of revival, raising sensible doubts.
If things are looking up, should the new Clinton Administration continue to plan for a temporary burst of Federal stimulation?
The answer, in a word, is yes; the signs of revival may be, in a word, false.
A year ago the economy was staggering along, threatening to plunge back into recession.
Short-term spending hikes and tax cuts seemed like a sensible way to ignite recovery without worsening the long-term deficit.


Colorado Issue By Power Agency
The Platte River Power Authority in Colorado is offering $114.53 million of tax-exempt power revenue bonds priced to yield a maximum 6.33 percent for an issue that matures in 2018.
For investors in a 28 percent tax bracket, the equivalent taxable yield would be about 8.79 percent, and for those in the 31 percent bracket, 9.17 percent.
The lead manager, Smith Barney, Harris Upham &amp; Company, said the issue was rated Aa by Moody's Investors Service and A+ by both the Standard &amp; Poor's Corporation and Fitch Investors Service.


Guides Set For S.&amp; L. Officials
Savings and loan regulators issued guidelines today governing the responsibilities of savings and loan officers despite the objections of enforcement officials who fear the new rules will make it harder to recover damages from negligent executives and directors.
The guidelines of the Office of Thrift Supervision are meant to outline the fiduciary duties of savings and loan officials and were developed in response to industry concerns about the risk of being sued.
T.
Timothy Ryan Jr., the departing director of the agency, called it "a road map that will help directors and officers make the decisions necessary in carrying out their responsibilities."


Care Enterprises Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Time Inc. Names New No. 2 Editor
Continuing the transition to a new generation of leaders, Time Inc. yesterday named Henry Muller, managing editor of Time magazine, to the No. 2 editorial management position in the company.
The announcement followed by five months the appointment of Don Logan as president and chief operating officer, the second-highest post on Time Inc.'s business side.


Todd Shipyards reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 27


Short-Term Treasury Prices Fall
Prices of Treasury bills and notes took a beating yesterday in thin but volatile trading as investors and traders continued to sell shorter-term maturities.
The heavy selling by traders moving from shorter to longer maturities, which began at the end of last week, has lifted the 30-year bond's price and even provided a little support for the 10-year note.


Comarco Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 1


M.D.C. Holdings reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Sewage Bacteria in Food Chain
SCIENTISTS have found evidence that organic material from sewage sludge dumped in the deep sea off New Jersey has entered the food chain of bottom-dwelling animals.
The dumping was permanently halted in July because of concern for the environment.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
7.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
4.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.25
2.85
4.75
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.13
3.05
4.59
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.37
3.33
4.63
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.50
6.44
6.94
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.56
7.57
7.84
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.50
8.50
8.85
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.46
6.46
6.85
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


From Karan, Underwear to Be Seen
Bras, which were erroneously reported burned during the women's liberation movement of the 1960's, are in the fashion news again.
A few years ago, Madonna began wearing Jean-Paul Gaultier bras as outerwear.
Now, in the fashion collections for spring 1993, shown earlier this month, as fabrics have grown thinner and more transparent, undergarments have become almost an obligatory part of the fashion picture.
They are increasingly designed to serve more than a supporting role -- they are meant to be seen.
Under suit jackets, for example, they are taking the place of blouses or sweaters.


Ditka: That Lovable, Sensitive Radio Host
So, which is more unsettling: the behavior of MIKE DITKA during a game, or that of the Bears' coach the day after?
During his morning radio show on WGN in Chicago yesterday, Ditka again became agitated, saying that "malcontents and the lousy media" can "quit watching me, quit writing about me or get rid of me."


Anger Yields to Resignation Over Proposed Toll Increase
As a light mist brushed his windshield, Samuel Feldman nudged his gray Lexus along the twisting line of vehicles outside the Queens-Midtown Tunnel last week and pondered the likelihood of a toll increase.
"Oh, I just love paying more to commute," said Mr.
Feldman, of Forest Hills, Queens.
"But there's not a thing I can do about it."


Analyst and Blow-by-Blow Man: Mismatch Outside the Ropes
One of the weirdest aspects of TVKO's 19-month existence -- from Evander Holyfield versus George Foreman to Holyfield versus Riddick Bowe last Friday -- has been the regular announcing team chosen by HBO, the parent of the pay-per-view boxing service: Len Berman of WNBC-TV and trainer Joe Goossen (brother of Greg, the former Mets catcher).
Neither is a distinguished boxing commentator, nor is either the caliber of Jim Lampley and Larry Merchant, who call HBO's regular slate of bouts and quite clearly belong on TVKO's schedule.
Papa HBO wanted to create a separate identity for TVKO, but doing so with a team that lags so far behind Lampley and Merchant is an odd strategy.
For Holyfield-Bowe, promoter Dan Duva's arrangement with TVKO permitted him to replace Goossen with ESPN's Al Bernstein.
Hallelujah!
But who knew that Bernstein would virtually make Berman disappear?
Pfffft.


3 Shot in Grocery Holdup
The owner of a Harlem grocery was shot to death last night and two of his customers wounded in what police described as a botched holdup.
Detective Joseph K. McConville, a police spokesman, said the three were in the store at 139th Street and Edgecombe Avenue about 9:10 P.M. when two gunmen wearing ski masks burst in and announced a robbery.
When the owner, Henry A. Medina, 48 years old, of Teaneck, moved toward the cash register, the intruders fired, killing him instantly.
The two wounded men were taken to Harlem Hospital, where a spokeswoman said one victim underwent surgery last night.


How to Protect Baltic Minorities
President Boris Yeltsin of Russia has renewed "unequivocally" his pledge to withdraw all Russian troops still based in the Baltic republics.
That's welcome news if it is not undercut by two other developments.
Mr.
Yeltsin has left standing his decree to suspend the withdrawal until accommodations for the troops can be found in Russia.
Meanwhile, nationalists in Russia are trying to use the plight of the Russian minority in Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania as a pretext for keeping the Red Army in the Baltics.


Classical Music in Review
New York Festival of Song  Weill Recital Hall
For the past 60 years or so, a community of American composers has managed to sidestep ideological conflicts of style and language and draw its music from Broadway entertainment, urban poetry and popular song.
The New York Festival of Song gathered a lot of their music together on Friday night and used "A Picnic Cantata" by Paul Bowles and James Schuyler as an anchor.


Intertape Polymer Group reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Charter Medical Corp. reports earnings for Year to Sept 30


New York Slips in Medical Research, Study Says
New York City's competitiveness in biomedical research -- a segment of the health-care industry that provides thousands of highly paid, highly skilled jobs -- is eroding at a worrisome pace, according to a new study and government and private experts.
New York is still a national leader in the field, with private nonprofit medical schools and hospitals like Mount Sinai, New York Hospital, Albert Einstein and Montefiore and those at Columbia, New York University and Rockefeller University.


Jack Praver; Psychiatrist, 62
Dr.
Jack Praver, a psychiatrist and former official of the Queens Children's Psychiatric Center, died on Sunday at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in Manhattan.
He was 62 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died of cancer, said a daughter, Leslie.


Holnam Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Sharpton Appeal Rebuffed
The Supreme Court refused today, without comment, to hear a challenge by the Rev.
Al Sharpton to his prosecution on charges of state tax fraud and failing to file New York State tax returns.
Mr.
Sharpton was acquitted of related charges by a New York City jury in a 1990 trial, but he faces a trial in Albany.
He has failed to persuade a series of state and Federal courts that the second prosecution violates his Fifth Amendment protection against double jeopardy.


Toys 'R' Us Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Sea Containers reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


BISHOPS MAY AVOID STAND ON WOMEN
The nation's Roman Catholic bishops gathered here today to take a stand on a long-awaited pastoral letter on women in society and the church, but it was far from certain that the document they have been working on for nine years will actually come to a vote.
Rather than trying to achieve consensus on a sweeping document that has caused them only strife so far, the bishops may decide to have various committees develop positions on narrower questions that concern women.


McNeil Stuns Graf In 2 Sets
Lori McNeil fastened onto an old cue from Shakespeare last night -- she was true to herself -- and with that small piece of stage business she turned an opening-round tennis match into theater as she delivered second-ranked Steffi Graf the most stunning defeat of her career.
The come-from-behind 7-6 (7-1), 6-4 victory fashioned by the 28-year-old underdog sent Graf, who recently purchased a Manhattan apartment and had hoped to stick around to decorate it, crashing out of the Viginia Slims Championships and onto the first flight home to Germany.
The loss was the first time since October 1985 that Graf had been beaten before the quarterfinal round of any Kraft Tour event, and it marked her earliest exit in 100 tournaments.


King World Productions Inc. reports earnings for Year to Aug 31


Policing The Police: No Scarcity Of Ideas
In the beginning -- or at least before the Knapp Commission focused the spotlight on rampant police corruption -- there were the confidential squads.
On the theory that police departments, including New York's, were hopelessly corrupt, the safest thing commissioners believed they could do was to surround themselves with a few trusted chiefs who, if they could not root out the crooks within the ranks, could at least keep the scandals from becoming public through the confidential squads they controlled.
When wrongdoing was uncovered, the officers would be quietly dismissed or transferred.


CHRONICLE
ARLO GUTHRIE wanted to hold a Thanksgiving fund-raising dinner cooked by ALICE BROCK, the inspiration for his 1967 song "Alice's Restaurant," but he canceled it Monday when not enough people made reservations for the $1,000-a-head feast.
"It's like the Grinch that stole Christmas," the folk singer and son of Woody Guthrie said yesterday. 'We only started thinking about it three weeks ago and that was not enough time."


Report from the chili capital
Photo: Chilies drying on an adobe house in Hatch, N.M. (Bruce Berman for The New York Times) (pg. C3)


Peter P. Smith 3d, 57, a Lawyer; Started Partnership for Homeless
Peter P. Smith 3d, who founded an organization to help New York City's homeless and helped to set up the city's Green Thumb urban gardens program, died yesterday.
He was 57 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died of complications from AIDS at the New York University Medical Center in Manhattan, his family said.


CV Reit reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Bills Seem on Road To a 3d Super Bowl
On the Miami Dolphins' first possession at Joe Robbie Stadium on Monday night, Dan Marino shredded the Buffalo Bills with shrewdness and with brilliant execution.
On a beautiful mix of seven runs and five passes, the Dolphins covered 75 yards in a blink and led, 7-0.
After the Dolphins went on a 66-yard drive on their next possession for a 14-3 lead and with Marino connecting on his first 11 passes, it looked as if the Bills' offense was required to produce at least 40 points for Buffalo to have any chance of winning.


While We're Waiting For a Firearms Policy
To the Editor:
Your concern with the epidemic of firearms violence in "Mowing Down Our Children" (editorial, Nov. 9) is on target, and so are your remedies.
This issue merits urgent attention on the Clinton Administration agenda.
The remedies should be a coherent, comprehensive policy respectful of the rights of all Americans, those who own guns as well as those who do not.
Action should not be seriatim -- first one measure, years later another -- stirring doubts about the ultimate goal, hence fears among law-abiding gun owners of the real motives of gun-control advocates.
The gun-control movement has a credibility problem in this regard.


Screening of Pregnant Women Urged to Find a Common Germ
Doctors are urging wider screening of pregnant women for a common bacterium that has become a main cause of life-threatening infections in newborns.
After years of questioning the incidence and seriousness of the problems caused by the bacterium, called group B streptococcus, doctors and expectant parents are becoming more concerned.
The infections afflict 12,000 babies a year.


Money Fund, C.D. Yields Are Mixed
Yields offered on bank money market accounts and certificates of deposit are slightly higher than a week ago at 20 leading banks nationwide but mixed in the New York area, according to The Bank Rate Monitor.
Analysts at The Monitor said that the number of banks raising rates was just slightly larger than those lowering rates.


Impact of Death-Penalty Amendment Appears Limited
Though voters have overwhelmingly approved a state constitutional amendment that, on its face, should put more convicted murderers on death row, prosecutors and defense lawyers say the change is unlikely to increase the number of death-penalty trials in New Jersey dramatically.
"It will be a ripple on a pond," said Dale E. Jones, the assistant state public defender who supervises death-penalty cases.


Joseph L. Block Is Dead at 90; Chief Executive of Inland Steel
Joseph L. Block, the chief executive of the Inland Steel Company in the 1950's and 60's and a prominent Chicago civic leader for more than five decades, died early today at the Northwestern University Hospital here.
He was 90 years old.
His family said he died from congestive heart failure, according to a company spokesman.
Mr.
Block was the grandson of Joseph Block, one of the founders of Inland, and the son of Leopold E. Block, who was chairman of the company from 1919 to 1940.
Mr.
Block's involvement with the company began in 1922, when he joined it as a trainee, and lasted until last April, when he attended his last meeting as a nonvoting honorary director.


Latino? Hispanic? Quechua? No, American; Take Your Pick
To the Editor:
Earl Shorris (Op-Ed, Oct. 28) argues that the term Latino is better than Hispanic because "Latino/Latina has gender, which is Spanish, as against Hispanic, which follows English rules." If the original language determines the name of a group, we must stop using all English names for ethnic groups such as Chinese-Americans, Haitian-Americans and Japanese-Americans.


Review/Television; When the Actor Goes, Whither the Character?
Cast changes on successful television series have their reasons.
Some stem from the sudden death or lingering illness of an actor.
Or, more rarely, an actor may simply decide that a steady and usually substantial weekly paycheck is not enough to justify a nagging feeling of career rut.
Whatever the reason, one fact of television life quickly becomes clear: The show, the series, the concept must go on.
We're talking big bucks here.
At the moment, no fewer than three network series are undergoing major cast adjustments:


New Charge Emerges in Tyson Case
The teen-age beauty pagaent contestant raped by MIKE TYSON was infected with venereal disease in the attack, her attorney said yesterday.
DESIREE WASHINGTON, 19 years old, of Providence, R.I., is undergoing treatment for a sexually transmitted disease she contracted when she was raped by Tyson in July 1991 in Indianapolis, said attorney DEVAL L. PATRICK of Boston.
He declined to say what disease his client has.


Line-Item Veto: No Hope, or Help
Ever since U.S.
Grant, Presidents have asked for the right to veto individual items in spending bills.
Advocates for this "line-item veto" assert it would yield big savings and slow down wasteful spending on pork-barrel projects.
In fact, it is an illusion and a distraction that would save little.
Yet it would have a serious unbalancing effect, enhancing Presidential power.
For both reasons it won't happen, and the sooner officials stop blathering about it, the sooner they can go from gimmicks to governance.


Raven Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Gerald O'Driscoll, 84, President of Ferry Line
Capt.
Gerald P. O'Driscoll, president, chief executive and part owner of the Circle Line-Statue of Liberty Ferry Inc., died Saturday at his home in Brooklyn.
He was 84 years old.
The company said he died of a heart attack.


Say 'White House!'


Jack Praver; Psychiatrist, 62
Dr.
Jack Praver, a psychiatrist and former official of the Queens Children's Psychiatric Center, died on Sunday at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in Manhattan.
He was 62 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died of cancer, said a daughter, Leslie.


New York Area Burger Kings Join
The owners and operators of Burger King restaurants in metropolitan New York are having it their way, forming an autonomous marketing association and hiring an agency to create local promotions aimed at increasing sales.
The new association, called the Burger King New York Marketing Advisory Council, represents 245 company-owned and franchised restaurants in the region.
The agency it hired is the Hadley Group in Stamford, Conn., which will coordinate the local promotional projects it creates with D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles in New York, which handles the Burger King Corporation's national image account.
Billings were not disclosed.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
7.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
4.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.00
3.28
4.68
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.14
3.13
4.54
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.36
3.37
4.57
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.44
6.50
6.96
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.53
7.56
7.91
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.48
8.50
8.90
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.45
6.46
6.87
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Sharing a Bit of Winter in the Fall


Review/Film; 'Malcolm X,' as Complex as Its Subject
Malcolm X lived a dozen different lives, each in its way a defining aspect of the black American experience from nightmare to dream.
There was never any in-between for the man who was initially called Malcolm Little, the son of a Nebraska preacher, and who, when he died, was known by his Muslim name, El-Hajj Malik El-Shabazz.
Malcolm traveled far, through many incarnations to become as much admired as he was feared as the black liberation movement's most militant spokesman and unrelenting conscience.
Malcolm was already something of a myth when he was assassinated at the Audubon Ballroom in New York on Feb. 21, 1965, just three months short of his 40th birthday.
The publication later that year of "The Autobiography of Malcolm X," his remarkably vivid testament written with Alex Haley, eventually consolidated his position as a great American folk hero, someone whose life speaks with uncanny pertinence to succeeding generations, white as well as black.


A Dismayed Historian of the Gallows
Cornelius Singleton, convicted of the rape and murder of a nun when she went to pray at another sister's grave in a deserted cemetery, is scheduled to be electrocuted by Alabama this month.
Few state residents expect executive clemency, least of all Watt Espy, a historian of capital punishment who sees a record tide of executions waiting to sweep the nation in the next decade.
"Most awful," says Mr.
Espy, appalled at the very viciousness of the nun's murder, the kind of savagery that makes most Americans favor capital punishment to the point where 2,636 convicts await execution, more than at any one time before.


Review/Music; When an Absence Becomes a Presence
The Orpheus Chamber Orchestra maneuvers with some skill between modern convenience and antique reproduction.
The principal gimmick over the last 20 years has been its conductor-free status.
Most 17th- and 18th-century orchestras were also self-propelled.
With music of uniform metric design and shared vocabularies, the small adjustments between phrases and sections could just as easily be worked out from the concertmaster's chair.
So at least a quarter and perhaps half of the group's Saturday night concert at Carnegie Hall evoked the uses of the past, certainly in the Haydn symphony, "La Chasse," and probably in the excerpts from Beethoven's "Creatures of Prometheus" as well.
The quick tempos of the Haydn and the dry, tight chamber-music airiness of Beethoven's ballet music also reflected, at least subliminally, recent scholarship about how musicians used to do things.


Miami Ordered to Create Homeless Zones
In a ruling that supporters say is an important step in protecting the rights of the homeless, a Federal district judge has ordered the City of Miami to create "safe zones" where the homeless can eat, sleep, bathe and cook without fear of arrest.
In his ruling on Monday, the judge, C. Clyde Atkins, upbraided city officials for what he called "a custom and practice of driving the homeless from public places," and said that "arresting the homeless for harmless, involuntary, life-sustaining acts" violated their constitutional rights.
He ordered the police to refrain from such actions against those "who are forced to live in public."


Sports of The Times; Who Will Be Tomorrow's Throneberry?
LIKE a convention of owls, all sane baseball fans surely responded to yesterday's baseball expansion draft in the very same way: With a chorus of: Who?
Who?
Who?
Trevor Hoffman?
Darrell Whitmore?
Jerald Clark?
Darren Holmes?
Not exactly next year's Rotisserie League team, but rather an expensive initiation fee for the right to print tickets for next season and charge exorbitant prices for chemicalized hot dogs.


Fay's Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 24


American Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


J. Spectre, 63, Dies; An Interior Designer Of Luxurious Homes
Jay Spectre, a New York-based interior and furniture designer, died on Monday at his house in New Canaan, Conn.
He was 63 years old.
He died of pneumonia after a long illness, said his brother-in-law, Elliot Marcus.


Team Is in Tournament and on the Spot
Coastal Carolina made its first appearance in the National Collegiate Athletic Association soccer tournament over the weekend.
Its breakthrough 2-0 victory over South Carolina should have been a cause for celebration, but it has instead become a cause for consternation because the school is under investigation by the N.C.A.A., and had been banned from its conference tournament.
After Coastal Carolina won its first eight games of the season, an opposing coach charged that four of the Coastal Carolina players, all foreign born, might have been ineligible because they played for pay outside the United States.
The players are Peter Nikolapoulos, a freshman forward from Armadale, Australia; Peter Tzamouranis, a freshman midfielder from Chadstone, Australia; Simon Marsh, a freshman goalkeeper from Manchester, England, and Brett Looker, a junior defender from London.


Couple Named to Head Loews Theater Unit
The husband and wife team of Jim and Barrie Loeks have been named co-chairmen of the Loews Theater Management Corporation, the nation's sixth-largest theater chain and a division of the Sony Corporation.
The couple, whose company, Loeks Michigan Theaters Inc., owns 74 screens in the Detroit area, had managed Loek-Star, a Midwest theater chain joint venture with Sony.
At Loews, they will replace A. Alan Friedberg, who will retire on Dec. 31.


Gerald O'Driscoll, 84, President of Ferry Line
Capt.
Gerald P. O'Driscoll, president, chief executive and part owner of the Circle Line-Statue of Liberty Ferry Inc., died Saturday at his home in Brooklyn.
He was 84 years old.
The company said he died of a heart attack.


Khmer Rouge Should Not Delay Cambodia Vote, U.N. Says
Cambodia's national elections, scheduled to be held in May, should proceed whether the Khmer Rouge take part or not, Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali said today in a report to the Security Council.
Under terms of a peace accord signed in Paris last year, the Khmer Rouge and the three other warring factions in Cambodia would turn over most of their arms to United Nations peacekeepers and retreat to guarded cantonments or camps while the United Nations prepared the country for elections.


No Headline
"If an offer were made, I would answer the question so swiftly that every one of you in the media, and especially talk-show hosts, would write, 'This, surely, is the most decisive man in America."' -- GOV.
MARIO M. CUOMO, on how he would react to a Supreme Court nomination (without saying yes or no).  [ B5:1. ]


Amazement, Wonder And Meaning of Beauty
THIS is an old-fashioned story.
Even the names of the two people in it -- Atlanta Constance Sampson and Owen Ryan -- sound like characters in an O. Henry tale.
There are also fusty settings, haphazard but critical encounters, twists of fate and moral themes of persistence rewarded and loyalty affirmed.
It began five years ago when Owen Ryan, then a 40-year-old management consultant, left his office to walk on Lexington Avenue in a misty rain.
His attention was caught by a painting of wading cranes in the window of a delicatessen.


U.S. Hopes to Broaden Ban on Arms Sales to Iran
The United States is to meet Friday with six of its closest economic partners in an attempt to persuade them to halt sales of all militarily useful equipment and technology to Iran, Administration officials said today.
But in preliminary discussions, the Bush Administration has already met considerable resistance from its allies, who are eager to increase trade with Iran.
In addition, the United States has pressed for the plan at such a low level that none of the allies have taken it seriously.


Asian AIDS Cases Soon to Pass Africa's
To the Editor:
Your Nov. 8 special report on AIDS in Asia predicts that reported cases in Asia will multiply in the millions, and the reputation of AIDS as a gay disease will be forgotten.
There is, unfortunately, a growing trend to scapegoat gay people as the principal carriers of this disease.


No Ifs, Ands or Butts
Tomorrow, the 46 million Americans who still smoke can find out if they've got the strength, the nerve and the endurance to improve their lives and the lives of everyone around them.
All they've got to do is give up cigarettes for 24 hours.
If they accomplish that feat, they can try for another 24, then another 24 . . . and so on to the end of what should be a lengthened life.
Along the way, at least for the first few weeks, they will be wise to remind themselves that climbing Everest wasn't easy.
Neither was slogging to the North and South Poles.
Nevertheless, Everest was conquered and so were the poles, and what's a pack of cigarettes compared with snow, ice and the occasional crevasse?


Tejas Power Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Big B Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 24


Mitchell Dealt for Charlton
Kevin Mitchell has been given another new baseball address and Norm Charlton has been reunited with Manager Lou Piniella.
That was the result of the trade between the Cincinnati Reds and Seattle Mariners last night, an exchange of power hitter for relief pitcher on the heels of the National League expansion draft.
The 30-year-old Mitchell, who will be playing on his third team in three seasons, leaves Seattle after one injury-plagued year.
After being acquired by the Mariners from San Francisco last December, Mitchell played only 99 games because of a strained rib-cage muscle and a stress fracture of his left foot.


THE TRANSITION: The President-Elect; Clinton Is Taking Big Role In Picking Cabinet Deputies
President-elect Bill Clinton signaled today that he intended to have a large say in whom his Cabinet officers choose as deputies to insure that they are loyal to the Clinton agenda.
Mr.
Clinton's transition team announced that the President-elect was appointing a former governor of South Carolina, Richard W. Riley, as director of personnel for the transition, to coordinate sub-Cabinet appointments with Mr.
Clinton's Cabinet choices.


ON THE RUN WITH: Jeremy Irons; Wrapping Himself Inside Enigmas
JEREMY IRONS is describing the sex scenes in his steamy new film, "Damage." The most difficult was the one in which he and Juliette Binoche lean against a door in an alley in Paris; it was, after all, the very first scene they shot together.
But the scene Mr.
Irons adores is the one in which the naked lovers cover each other's eyes with their hands.
As he says this, he gestures with long, graceful hands, but he does not create a seductive image.
No man looks romantic when he's wearing a tape measure around his head.
For, while Mr.
Irons is talking about sex, a makeup woman keeps moving the tape measure across his forehead and jotting down numbers.
Eventually a bald cap will be made for him to wear in "The House of the Spirits," a film in which the 44-year-old actor will age from 25 to 75.
This is not his most glamorous moment -- it's more like a Monty Python moment -- but he speaks with unflappable elegance.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-15  WEST TO SEARCH ADRIATIC SHIPS
In response to a United Nations resolution toughening the sanctions on Yugoslavia, an international fleet authorized to halt and search vessels carrying suspected cargo is likely to begin operating in the next several days.
A senior Bush Administration official said that United States warships would participate in a multi national fleet in the Adriatic Sea once NATO endorsed the plan.
A1  SERB-CROAT PEACE IS THREATENED
A peace plan that ended the civil war between Serbs and Croats late last year is now in danger of collapsing as Croatia's Serbian minority builds up a military force and proclaims an independent state in areas it controls.
A14


Decora Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Kimmins Environmental Service Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Strife Spreads in Zulu Region, Boding Ill for Mandela's Rival
On the night of Oct. 24, Mbonwa Sabelo thought he was playing it safe.
He knew his little compound of huts and livestock pens was too cramped for the celebration to mark his daughter's coming of age in Zulu society.
But he thought, at least, that this village on a muddy slope southwest of Durban was outside the range of the political brutality that has ravaged the black townships and bigger rural settlements of Natal Province.


Cairo Journal; That's Entertainment. But Is It Blasphemy, Too?
The Egyptian actor Adel Imam, stumbling into a Government office in his new movie, "Terrorism and Kebab," is confronted by a stout clerk who spends his day muttering religious platitudes and kneeling on a small prayer mat.
"If you spent more time helping people and less time praying," the actor utters acidly, "God would give you a greater reward."


Schott Wins. But It Isn't Over.
The Cincinnati Reds' owner, MARGE SCHOTT, has successfully fended off a $2.5 million lawsuit filed by a former employee who accused her of making racial slurs.
But attorneys for the former Reds controller, TIM SABO, said yesterday they will take the case to a State Appeals Court.
"We will be making the same arguments. It's just hoped that the Court of Appeals and or the Ohio Supreme Court will see the wisdom of our position," attorney STEPHEN IMM said.


Rockies Pick Hayes, Leaving Yanks Stranded
In gestures that mirrored a failed strategy, the Yankees' managing partner, Joseph Molloy, put a hand over his mouth and General Manager Gene Michael slumped in his folding chair when the Colorado Rockies chose third baseman Charlie Hayes yesterday with their second pick in the expansion draft.
Before the draft was even 15 minutes old, the Yankees said goodbye to a reliable starter and said hello to another nagging hole in their lineup.
They took a big chance by not including Hayes on their 15-player protected list, and when Colorado made Hayes the third player picked over all, the Yankees' most dependable third baseman in five years had been snatched away.
They had gambled and lost.


Home Depot Net Jumps; Dayton in a 62.9% Surge
Two leading retailing companies -- Home Depot and Dayton Hudson -- reported big increases in third-quarter profits yesterday.
Following are details of the companies' results: Home Depot
Home Depot Inc., the fast-growing home improvement chain, said its earnings soared by 44.7 percent in its third quarter, which ended on Nov. 1, to a record $84.5 million, or 25 cents a share, from $58.4 million, or 18 cents a share, a year earlier.


A Projected Loss Has JWP Flirting With Danger
JWP Inc., a humble Queens water utility that transformed itself into the nation's largest computer reseller and electrical contractor, said yesterday that the costs of cutting back and shaping up will create a third-quarter loss of as much as $162 million.
The prospective loss leaves JWP in violation of loan agreements, meaning that it must depend on its lenders to renegotiate instead of forcing it into bankruptcy.


Topics of The Times; Malcolm and the Mias
Current events in two hemispheres are offering young Americans lessons in history, and usage.
Vietnam's new willingness to provide information about Americans missing in action (M.I.A.'s) is likely to help young adults avoid howlers like the one some years ago when a young newscaster on National Public Radio described Congressional hearings concerning "the Mia families."


The Pop Life
A Genesis to Suit
The long and the short of marketing the rock group Genesis these days involves, well, "The Shorts" and "The Longs."
In the spirit of having something for everybody, Atlantic Records is releasing "Genesis Live: The Way We Walk" in two separate albums, aimed at two distinct audiences.
The newly released "Volume 1: The Shorts" features in-concert versions of hits from the group's last three studio albums, including "Genesis," "Invisible Touch" and "We Can't Dance." "Volume 2: The Longs" is intended to highlight the group's longer, more exploratory numbers, including "Home by the Sea," "Domino" and "Driving the Last Spike," as well as a medley of pieces from the 1970's.
To be sold at a discount, the second volume will be released in January and available only through April.


Belmac Told Brokers of Deal Before Disclosure to Public
Officials with the Belmac Corporation disclosed to a group of stockbrokers the company's plans to acquire a private French company three weeks before they announced the deal to the general public, people who heard the disclosure said yesterday.
The information was disclosed in October in a conference call involving the officials, including Jean-Francois Rossignol, Belmac's chairman, and a group of brokers who invest in the company's stock.
In the call, the Belmac officials did not disclose the name of the target or other identifying details about it.


Glenayre Electronics Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Microwave Cooking
FOR Thanksgiving I propose a variety of unusual vegetable dishes to vary the traditional fall feast.
An added advantage is that these dishes would be ample for vegetarians either having their own feast or sharing a conventional meal.
Vegetarians, of course, will want to use vegetable broth rather than chicken broth in the recipe for braised leeks.
At a Thanksgiving table laden with many foods and courses, these recipes will serve more people than indicated by their separate yields.
No matter how much is served, they will be relatively light and low in fat.
The puree of potatoes and apples, for example, uses no butter or cream.
Incidentally, the cooked pureed onions that are optional in the potato dish add time to the making of the recipe but do enliven the flavor.


Rebels Kill One as Attacks Continue to Protest of Coming Elections


CREDIT MARKETS;
The Household Finance Corporation sold $518.3 million of asset-backed certificates in two parts yesterday through Morgan Stanley &amp; Company.
The certificates were issued through a Home Equity Loan Trust 1992-2, with $466.5 million of class A certificates and $51.8 million of class B certificates, both with an average life of 2.53 years.
The collateral behind the certificates is home-equity loans.


School Tax Still Bedevils Lawmakers
The Texas Legislature is in the midst of a special session to address an issue that has bedeviled Texas for 24 years and that also haunts other states: equalizing schoolaid between rich schools and poor.
Gov.
Ann W. Richards and other state leaders have proposed a plan that would take a large slice of local property taxes from the wealthiest of the state's 1,250 school districts and redistribute it to poor schools.
The aim would be to narrow the spending gap between the poor and wealthier districts.
In the 1991-92 school year, spending ranged from $2,337 to $56,791 a student in Texas.


Review/Film; A Family Is Poor Though Undefeated
Ross Spears's "To Render a Life" is a documentary made in the long shadow of "Let Us Now Praise Famous Men," the indelible record of Southern sharecroppers' lives created by James Agee and Walker Evans during the Great Depression.
In ways deliberate and otherwise, Mr.
Spears raises interesting questions about his predecessors' methods and his own.
Among the many things for which "Let Us Now Praise Famous Men" is so vividly remembered are its stark contrasts: between the utter simplicity of Evans's photographs and the extravagance of Agee's descriptive prose, between the haunting dignity of these subjects and the harshness of their lives.
The difference between two distinguished, worldly visitors -- "a spy, traveling as a journalist," Agee called himself -- and the unself-conscious rural people they befriended and studied is another sharp one.


On Video Maps, Any Intersection Can Be a Star
The Geospan Corporation, a fledgling company in Minneapolis, is seeking to marry a map to a camcorder.
By merging the longitude-latitude methods of map- making with the more visual "turn left at the Dairy Queen" approach to finding one's way around, the company hopes to bring maps into the 21st century.
Geospan is part of a $3.5 billion industry known as geographical information services, a catchall term covering everything from planning sewers to measuring the greenhouse effect.
Such companies convert map information into digital form for computer storage and use.


Bridge
Bridge was just one of many talents possessed by Janice Gilbert Fulton, known to the bridge world as Jan Stone.
She and her husband, David Fulton, a mining engineer, were presumed dead after a boating accident last Thursday in the Caribbean.
The authorities had been notified after the Fultons failed to return to their home on Providenciales in the Turks and Caicos Islands.
She was a child actress, appearing on radio as Little Orphan Annie and in other roles.
Later she was the Paying Teller on "Break The Bank," the television game show.


60-Minute Gourmet
SOMETIMES pairing two ingredients yields a dish that is far greater than the sum of its parts.
Lay a piece of puff pastry over a poached salmon fillet, and you have a special event.
Add a few slices of black truffles to a steak sauce, and it becomes memorable.
Toss a few chunks of duck sausage on a pizza, and it becomes a national trend.
Such is the case with the major ingredients in this recipe, although I hardly predict it will become a national trend.
The recipe, which I recently devised, could have gone in several directions.
The crab meat and the ham could have been combined and then made au gratin, or I could have made sandwiches using the bread.
Instead, I gave the ingredients a more elegant presentation by arranging the crab meat and the curry sauce over slices of country ham and toasted French bread.
The visual effect is more dramatic, and the dish has an elegance it would otherwise lack.
Still, it's quick and easy to prepare.


Brister Will Be Calling the Signals
NEIL O'DONNELL hasn't lost his job as the Pittsburgh Steelers quarterback.
But it's BUBBY BRISTER who will be starting this Sunday.
Steelers Coach BILL COWHER said yesterday that O'Donnell will miss Sunday's game against Indianapolis with a pulled hamstring in his right leg and that Brister will start.
Brister hadn't played all season until throwing a game-winning 1-yard touchdown pass to TIM JORDEN in last Sunday's 17-14 victory over the Lions.


Honest Food Labels? Fat Chance.
By blocking an overhaul of food labeling rules last week, Agriculture Secretary Edward Madigan put the interests of the meat industry ahead of the health of Americans.
The new rules, mandated by Congress and written by the Food and Drug Administration, are designed to make the nutrition information on food packages more truthful and useful to consumers.
The bitter bureaucratic dispute that pits Mr.
Madigan against Health and Human Services Secretary Louis Sullivan and F.D.A. chief David Kessler now moves to the White House.
By rejecting Mr.
Madigan's obstructionism, President Bush can vindicate the right of Americans to make informed dietary choices -- and rescue one of his Administration's most valuable reforms.


CHRONICLE
The Prime Minister of Greece, CONSTANTINE MITSOTAKIS, arrived in Washington yesterday for a preview of what is considered one of the most important shows of classical Greek sculpture ever seen outside his country.
In formal remarks opening the exhibit, he alluded to his nation's treatment of women.
Speaking of Greece's gift of democracy to the world 2,500 years ago, he noted that at first "women and slaves were excluded."


CMS/Data Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Quartex Corp. reports earnings for Year June 30


U.S. Says Greek Shipping Lines Are Violating Yugoslav Embargo
United States officials said today that companies based in Greece are major violators of the world economic embargo against Yugoslavia and that the Bush Administration has privately complained to the Athens Government about its apparent willingness to tolerate the offenses.
President Bush was to raise the topic today in a meeting with Prime Minister Constantine Mitsotakis of Greece.
Mr.
Mitsotakis said later that he had assured Mr.
Bush that Greece was complying with the embargo.


Matsushita Electric Industrial Co. Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Transit Officer Wounded During Brooklyn Chase
A plainclothes transit police officer assigned to chase fare beaters was shot and seriously wounded in Brooklyn last night, and officials said it was likely that he had been hit by another officer's bullet.
The officer was wounded during a shootout that began soon after he and four other officers converged on a fare beater in Carnarsie about 6:30 P.M.
More than a dozen shots were fired, officials said, all of them, apparently, by the police.


Latino? Hispanic? Quechua? No, American; Who Is Left Out
To the Editor:
Earl Shorris (Op-Ed, Oct. 28) displays the power of language to communicate and obfuscate.
The terms Latino and Hispanic refer to peoples who for almost half a millennium have been called something else: mestizo, mulatto, ladino.
Paradoxically, there are no Hispanics or Latinos in Latin America; in no country but this do census or social practices acknowledge such ethnicities.


Trico Products Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Twice Burned: Bronx Store Loses a Last Battle
Stanley Bell hunched his shoulders against the morning chill and watched in disbelief last week as a bulldozer's chunky treads noisily crunched over a rough gray patch of broken walls and charred timbers.
A gaping hole was the final testament to Belco Distributors, the two-way radio business to which he had devoted four decades of his life in the Tremont section of the Bronx.
It was nearly four months to the day that a searing blaze had burned off the second floor of his electronics store, sending him on a journey of hope and, ultimately, disbelief through the city's bureaucracy.
Promises, Promises
Eager to rebuild, he had won promises of special assistance from city officials and a settlement from his insurance company.
But though the insurer had deemed the building salvageable, Mr.
Bell says, he was repeatedly stymied in his efforts to get the promised help or the necessary reconstruction permits from the city.
Finally, the city declared the building unsafe and tore it down.


Senators Tour Hanoi's P.O.W. Closet
Three Senators and a group of Pentagon officials were allowed today to tour long-secret areas of Vietnam's military headquarters and to rummage through a storeroom of museum artifacts that could hold clues to the fate of Americans missing from the Vietnam War.
The visits were evidence of what Prime Minister Vo Van Kiet of Vietnam described today as his nation's determination to "resolve all aspects of the issue of missing Americans" and to establish full diplomatic and economic ties with the United States.


Sports of The Times; Taylor Sounds Like He'll Be 'No. 56' in '93
IN his first inquisition since the Achilles' tendon in his right heel was sewn together in surgery, Lawrence Taylor acted the way he never did as a linebacker.
He didn't commit himself.
In answering questions about his future, he didn't really rush the passer.
But he didn't really cover the tight end.


Gerald O'Driscoll, 84, President of Ferry Line
Capt.
Gerald P. O'Driscoll, president, chief executive and part owner of the Circle Line-Statue of Liberty Ferry Inc., died Saturday at his home in Brooklyn.
He was 84 years old.
The company said he died of a heart attack.


Eastern College Report
Syracuse
In dissecting the tapes of the Miami team, Saturday's opponent at the Carrier Dome in the Big East's pivotal game, Coach Paul Pasqualoni has pinpointed the matchup that favors the Hurricanes the most.
It concerns Miami's Kevin Williams, the slotback who in any one-on-one situation must be covered by a Syracuse safety, most likely Tony Jones or Bob Grosvenor.


Global Finnish Issue Sells Well
Finland received a good reception for its $2 billion bond issue yesterday despite its economic problems at home, traders said.
And, for a change, American investors helped another country cover its budget deficit by buying bonds.
The global issue, under which the securities were sold in markets around the world simultaneously, was the first by a sovereign government, traders said.
It sold around $900 million of its dollar-denominated five-year notes in the American market.


State Dept. Official Who Searched Clinton's Passport Files Resigns
A State Department official who carried out the two-day search of passport files for information about Gov.
Bill Clinton said today that he had resigned, just 48 hours before Federal investigators are expected to issue a report criticizing the search.
The official, Steven M. Moheban, was a top aide to Elizabeth M. Tamposi, the Assistant Secretary of State for Consular Affairs who was dismissed last week by President Bush for her role in the search of files on Mr.
Clinton, his mother, Virginia Kelley, and Ross Perot, the independent Presidential candidate.


Coast Guard Widens Search for Plant
The Coast Guard expanded its search of the Atlantic Ocean yesterday for MIKE PLANT, the 41-year-old solo sailor from Jamestown, R.I., who is missing at sea.
Six aircraft were on duty over the Atlantic, including four Coast Guard C-130 propeller airplanes, and two Navy P-3 Orions, which are also propeller planes.
Plant set sail alone from New York City Oct. 16 on his new racing yacht, the 60-foot Coyote.
The Coast Guard began its search last Friday in an area about 700 miles northeast of Bermuda.
But yesterday, officials added another search area, one located about 420 miles north of the Azores, an island chain in the mid-Atlantic.
The second location encompasses 14,400 square miles.
Since the search began, rescue planes have covered 170,000 square miles of the Atlantic, said a Coast Guard spokesman at the Governors Island station in New York.


SEOUL TO RESUME ITS AID TO RUSSIA
South Korea, which granted and then cut off $3 billion in economic assistance to the former Soviet Union, is preparing to resume its aid to Russia, Government officials said today.
The formal announcement of the restoration of the aid package will be made when President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia visits here for three days starting on Wednesday.


Corrections
A report on the Credit Markets page in Business Day yesterday about a municipal bond offering of $200 million misidentified the issuer.
It is Massachusetts, not Connecticut.


Book Notes
King on Horror
Stephen King doesn't have a lot of literary pretenses.
He knows, for example, that he will probably never be sitting on a stage, waiting to hear himself named the winner of a National Book Award. (The 1992 awards are to be presented tonight at the Plaza Hotel in Manhattan).
He said he didn't expect the Pulitzer or Nobel Prize committees to be telephoning him, either.
And that's all right with him.
He has been married to the same woman, the writer Tabitha King, for 21 years.
They have three children he loves to boast about and a big old house in Maine where they can live and work in relative privacy.


Honda Motor Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


An Extra $2 Billion a Month, Thanks to Lower Mortgages
Early next month, Robert E. Pearson Jr., a 45-year-old advertising executive, and his wife expect to close a deal to replace the mortgage on their suburban Milwaukee home with one at a cheaper interest rate.
The transaction has induced the Pearsons to unzip their wallets: about $6,000 worth of new furniture now graces their living room and family room.
"We feel we made the right move," said Mr.
Pearson, who took out a larger mortgage, but at a lower rate, to give his family extra cash to pay down debts and buy new furniture.
"We feel psychologically more comfortable."


Dayton Hudson reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Morning-Sickness Aid
Ever since Bendectin, an antinausea drug, was found to cause birth defects, women have been reluctant to take any medication to stifle the morning sickness that afflicts 80 percent of women in the early months of pregnancy.
Those who were not helped by the dry-crackers-upon-awakening routine have simply had to endure the nausea and vomiting.
But now doctors in Bologna, Italy, have shown that an age-old Chinese remedy, acupressure, can eliminate or significantly reduce symptoms of morning sickness in two-thirds of pregnant women without risking unwanted side effects.
The simple remedy involves the wearing of wristbands that have a button that presses on the so-called Neiguan (or Nei-Kuan) Point on the inside of the wrist.


Wine Talk
THANKSGIVING is the quintessential Norman Rockwell American holiday.
There is no ambiguity about what the celebration means: in a forthright American way, the name tells it all.
It's an occasion to be thankful for nature's bounty.
In past years, it somehow seemed appropriate to concentrate on American wines for an American feast.
But in fact, harvest celebrations did not begin with the Massachusetts Bay Colony.
They are as old as agriculture itself and are celebrated in one form or another all over the globe.


Nationsbank Is Buying Most of a Chrysler Unit
Nationsbank, the acquisitive North Carolina banking company whose name reflects its ambitions, announced an agreement yesterday to buy almost all of Chrysler First, a consumer finance subsidiary of the Chrysler Financial Corporation.
For Chrysler, the sale of its consumer finance subsidiary will provide an infusion of cash and reduce by about $4 billion its borrowings in financial markets and from banks.


Cato Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Selfix Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 26


Dinkins Says Critics Distort Facts Of His Response to Crown Heights
Mayor David N. Dinkins yesterday accused some of his critics of distorting the facts on how he handled the Crown Heights disturbances, saying they were trying to get his "political scalp."
In a speech before a group of rabbis, the Mayor delivered his strongest and sharpest defense yet of his actions.
For the first time, he said that critics who have accused him of restraining the police during the disturbances in August 1991 were motivated by race, saying "they see everything through an ethnic prism."


Market Place; Living Down Atari's Ghost
AFTER years of being haunted by the ghost of Atari, a soaring star of the early 1980's that fizzled out, American video game software companies finally appear to be getting some respect on Wall Street.
The two largest publicly traded video game developers -- Acclaim Entertainment Inc. of Oyster Bay, L.I., and Electronic Arts of San Mateo, Calif. -- are garnering most of the attention, and being promoted by many industry analysts as safe and promising.
This marks a departure from the historical reading of these companies as volatile, risky plays.


Hydrochloric Acid Cleaned From Road in New Jersey


Many Women for Ferraro Withheld Their Votes From Abrams
To the Editor:
In the Nov. 5 editorial and articles analyzing the New York Senate race between Alfonse M. D'Amato and Bob Abrams, one consideration has been ignored: the women's vote.
Some 647,410 fewer votes were cast in the Senate race than in the Presidential.


Topics of The Times; Let the Gag Rule Die
President Bush says, honorably, that he wants to "finish this job in style." One way is to give up on the gag rule, which bans abortion counseling at federally funded family planning clinics.
"Gag rule" is the blunt term used to describe his Administration's initial blanket prohibition on informing women about their abortion option.
The rule survived Supreme Court scrutiny in 1991.
But it so angered Congress and the medical profession that Mr.
Bush approved a modification exempting doctors from the ban.


Coleman and Nets Delayed By Malone's Special Delivery
It is not such a good idea to challenge the Mailman. He knows where you live.
Karl Malone came to Derrick Coleman's house tonight, the Byrne Meadowlands Arena, and left no doubt as to who is the premier power forward in the National Basketball Association.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
A banking syndicate is reportedly trying to help Northwest Airlines avoid a bankruptcy filing by putting together $300 million in new credit while it attempts to complete its merger with KLM.
But some banks are said to be reluctant to go along.  [ Page D1. ]
Nationsbank will buy almost all of Chrysler First, a consumer finance subsidiary of the Chrysler Financial Corporation.
The sale will provide Chrysler with an infusion of cash, and Nationsbank will be able to expand its consumer lending business quickly.  [ D1. ]


Expansion Draft; Play Ball? Well, It's a Start
Baseball held its expansion draft to help stock two new teams, the Florida Marlins and the Colorado Rockies, who begin play next April in the National League.
Who was chosen?
Which players did the Yankees and Mets lose?
And who is David Nied?
SportsWednesday, page B9.


Book Chain Refinances, Easing Debt
Barnes &amp; Noble Inc., the giant bookstore chain, said yesterday that it had completed a $508.4 million recapitalization that eased its heavy debt burden and would enable it to continue its ambitious expansion program.
The company, which operates more than 900 stores in 46 states, plans to open about 150 so-called superstores by 1994.
These stores carry as many as 100,000 titles, at least five times the number carried in typical mall bookstores.


Increasingly, Reporters Say They're Democrats
The news media's critics often say reporters are overwhelmingly Democratic, and they say that affects the fairness of news coverage.
A survey released yesterday of 1,400 journalists nationwide showed that those perceptions of reporters' political sympathies may be even more accurate than the critics thought.
And the study reopened an old debate about whether reporters do -- or should -- bring their biases to work.


Elwood Whitney, Ex-Art Director, 88; Led in Sales Pitches
Elwood Whitney, a retired New York art director, advertising executive and the creative spirit behind many corporate sales promotions, died on Thursday at his home in Boulder, Colo.
He was 88 years old.
He died after a long illness, his family said.


MEXICANS PREPARE ELECTION PROTESTS
More than a week after Mexico's ruling party rolled to what were officially counted as easy victories in elections in three states, opposition leaders in two of them vowed today to press campaigns of civil disobedience until the votes were overturned.
Opposition charges of fraud have long been the rule rather than the exception in Mexican votes.
But the prospect of extended political conflict in areas where the opposition's strength is relatively limited underscored the growing pressure on President Carlos Salinas de Gortari to quicken the pace of change in a system long dominated by his Institutional Revolutionary Party.


Vietnam Offers War Artifacts to U.S. Senators


National Realty L.P.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Fordham Needs a Let's-Get-Acquainted Party
Minutes after Fordham defeated the Republic of Russia, 86-80, in double overtime on Monday night at Rose Hill Gym in the Bronx, Dave Buckner, a senior shooting guard for the Rams, swept into the locker room to celebrate.
Buckner charged in the direction of a teammate but came to a screeching halt.


Kelly Report Stops Short, Lawyer Says
The chief counsel to a mayoral commission investigating the scope of corruption in the New York City Police Department said yesterday that a report issued by Police Commissioner Raymond W. Kelly "does not go far enough" in addressing underlying flaws in the department's methods of rooting out corrupt officers.
While calling the report thorough, the chief counsel, Joseph P. Armao, questioned whether the changes called for in the report, largely a restructuring and centralization of the investigative bureaucracy, will have any effect on what he called the reality of police culture, where officers do not like to inform on one another and where commanders believe it is against their interest to uncover and report scandal.
Hopes Report Will Be a Tool
Commissioner Kelly said yesterday that the report was not meant to pre-empt the mayoral commission, headed by Milton Mollen, and that he hoped the panel would use it as a tool.
But the commission's existence, as well as various state and Federal investigations into allegations of corruption, have placed Mr.
Kelly in the somewhat awkward position of trying to keep control of anti-corruption efforts inside his department.


Food Notes
Don't Panic! Call . . .
Help with roasting the turkey will be available for those with patience by calling the meat and poultry hot line run by the Federal Department of Agriculture.
Calls will be answered from 9 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Eastern time Monday through Friday through the end of November, and this Saturday and Sunday.
On Thanksgiving, the hours are 8 A.M. to 2 P.M.
Regularly, the hours are 10 A.M. to 4 P.M.
Monday through Friday.
The number is (800) 535-4555, and it's often busy.
Shopping for Dinner
Catering shops, supermarkets and butchers in the region, as well as many restaurants, are ready to provide anything from a few portions of cranberry sauce to the entire Thanksgiving meal.


No Regrets, but More 'What Ifs'
As he nears the beginning of his 11th year as Governor of New York, these are Mario M. Cuomo's answers to questions about his future, which nowadays tend to deal with the possibility of his nomination to the United States Supreme Court.
"If an offer were made," the Governor said today, "I would answer the question so swiftly that every one of you in the media, and especially talk-show hosts, would write, 'This, surely, is the most decisive man in America.' "


Arbor Drugs reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Wachtler Chair Is Filled as Judicial Life Goes On
Meeting for the first time since Sol Wachtler's arrest and resignation as Chief Judge of the State Court of Appeals last week, the six remaining Court of Appeals judges took their places in the courthouse in Albany yesterday and tried to carry on as if nothing had happened.
But for the first time since Mr.
Wachtler was appointed chief judge in 1985, his chair in the center was filled by someone else, Associate Judge Richard D. Simons, who was named Acting Chief Judge yesterday.


Corrections
A picture caption in some editions on Monday, with the continuation of an article about President-elect Bill Clinton's meeting with Congressional leaders, misidentified the man at the right.
He was George J. Mitchell, the Senate majority leader.


ITALY ARRESTS 75 IN MAFIA ROUNDUP
The Italian police arrested more than 75 suspects, including businessmen and local politicians, in Sicily and other parts of the country today in what law enforcement officers termed the biggest coordinated crackdown on the Mafia since 1984.
Police officials said more than 200 arrest warrants had been issued for some 120 suspects at large and 81 already in jail on other charges.
A further 100 people were advised they were under investigation for crimes including association with the Mafia, extortion, electoral fraud and bribery.


Crown Heights Case Judge Calls Resolution 'Senseless'
The judge in the Crown Heights murder trial of Lemrick Nelson Jr. yesterday criticized as "irresponsible" and "senseless" a proposed City Council resolution condemning Mr.
Nelson's acquittal.
The criticism was particularly striking because the judge, Justice Edward M. Rappaport of State Supreme Court, is a former business partner and longtime political associate of Noach Dear of Borough Park, Brooklyn, the Council member who sponsored the resolution,


Sunshine Mining reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Corrections
A chart in Science Times yesterday about the eye's sensitivity to intensities and colors of light described its scale incorrectly.
It was a logarithmic scale.


ILLNESS THREATENS HONECKER'S TRIAL
The advance of age and illness is threatening the manslaughter trial of the former East German leader Erich Honecker and his co-defendants.
Last week, the trial's first session was cut short when it was announced that Willi Stoph, a former East German Prime Minister and one of Mr.
Honecker's co-defendants, had suffered a heart attack.
Judge Hansgeorg Brautigam later separated Mr.
Stoph's case from the others.


InterContinental Life Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball American League  CLEVELAND INDIANS -- Named Marc Bombard manager at Indianapolis of the American Association.
SEATTLE MARINERS -- Traded Kevin Mitchell, outfielder, to the Cincinnati Reds for Norm Charlton, pitcher.
National League  COLORADO ROCKIES -- Traded Kevin Reimer, outfielder, to the Milwaukee Brewers for Dante Bichette, outfielder.
Traded Jody Reed, second baseman, to the Los Angeles Dodgers for Rudy Seanez, pitcher.
FLORIDA MARLINS -- Traded Greg Hibbard, pitcher, to the Chicago Cubs for Gary Scott, third baseman, and Alex Arias, shortstop.
Traded Danny Jackson, pitcher, to the Philadelphia Phillies fot Joel Adamson and Matt Whisenant, pitchers.
Traded Eric Helfand, catcher, to the Oakland Athletics for Walt Weiss, shortstop, and a player to be named later.
Traded Tom Edens, pitcher, to the Houston Astros for Brian Griffiths and Hector Carrasco, pitchers.
Basketball  National Basketball Association  CLEVELAND CAVALIERS -- Placed Brad Daugherty, center, on the injured list.
Activated Jay Guidinger, center.
Continental Basketball Association  OKLAHOMA CITY CAVALRY -- Placed Quintin Dailey and Dirk Minniefield, guards, on the injured list.
Signed Sebastian Neal, forward, and Jerome Henderson, center.
OMAHA RACERS -- Acquired the rights to Matt Fish, center, from the Fort Wayne Fury for a 1993 second-round draft pick.
Signed Steve Criss, center.
ROCKFORD LIGHTNING -- Placed Mario Donaldson, forward, on the injured list.
Acquired Darren Guest, center, from the Sioux Falls Skyforce for a 1993 sixth-round pick.
Football  National Football League  NEW YORK JETS -- Waived A.B.
Brown, running back.
Signed Johnny Hector, running back.
PIITSBURGH STEELERS -- Signed Rick Strom, quarterback.
SEATTLE SEAHAWKS -- Announced Kirk Scrafford, guard, claimed on waivers, has failed his physical examination and won't join the team.
WASHINGTON REDSKINS -- Placed Martin Mayhew, cornerback, on injured reserve.
Signed Mickey Washington, cornerback, off waivers from New England.
Arena Football League  CLEVELAND THUNDERBOLTS -- Signed an agreement with the Richfield Coliseum through the 1996 season.


Eating Well
HOLIDAY gifts of food do not have to go directly to your thighs and hips.
There are so many superb ingredients available by mail today that those who prefer to keep five-pound cheesecakes and two dozen ginger snaps out of their cupboards can easily be accommodated.
The alternatives are not pinched-looking artificial sweets, tasteless fat-free cheeses or chemically laden salad dressings.
There are organically grown greens that are so beautiful that they look as if they just stepped out of a bandbox, and stunning assortments of wild mushrooms that look as if they have been plucked from a still life at the Metropolitan Museum of Art, all brimming with flavor unknown in supermarket food.
There are also wrinkled, dried tart cherries and blueberries, nothing to behold but suffused with taste that makes traditional dried fruits, like raisins and apples, just plain boring.


Many Women for Ferraro Withheld Their Votes From Abrams; Maloney's No Upstart
To the Editor:
Your Nov. 4 reference to Representative-elect Carolyn B. Maloney as an "upstart," followed by "New York's Perverse Losses," your Nov. 5 editorial on her defeat of Representative Bill Green, is patently unfair to a bright, effective elected official whom you saw fit to endorse as recently as last year's City Council elections.


Dinkins's Plan Is Said to Seek Higher Taxes
New York City officials said yesterday that Mayor David N. Dinkins planned to propose $162 million in new taxes next year, including an increase in the city's income tax for commuters and increased taxes on wine, beer, liquor and tobacco.
But the proposal is considered extremely unlikely to be enacted.
The State Legislature refused last spring to permit the city to raise rates for such taxes, and a spokesman for the State Senate majority leader, Ralph J. Marino, said yesterday that it would probably do so again next year.


Shelter Components Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


CHINA THREATENS HONG KONG TREATY
China has sharply escalated its dispute with the British and Hong Kong authorities by threatening to scrap the 1984 agreement that promised Hong Kong continued political and economic freedom for 50 years after the colony returns to Chinese control in 1997.
The threat was made on Monday night by Deputy Prime Minister Zhu Rongji, who was in London for talks with British officials.


Personal Health
BEVERLY MIELKE was a middle-class 3-year-old who in 1984 lived in a well-kept home in St.
Paul.
So what was she doing with lead poisoning?
The problem was eventually traced to a lead-contaminated sandbox at her day-care center.
Her father, a toxicologist, was appalled at how easily his daughter had accumulated dangerous levels of lead in her blood, levels that recent studies have shown can permanently damage a young child's brain.


Social Workers: Targets in a Violent Society
A released convict, angered because his daughter was placed in foster care, pursued a social services worker to her farmhouse near Auburn, N.Y., last year and beat, bit and strangled her.
Last month in Watkins Glen, N.Y., a truck driver infuriated by child support payments killed four women working in a county welfare office and then turned his gun on himself.


Joseph H. McCann Jr.; Lawyer, 70
Joseph H. McCann Jr., a retired lawyer for the International Business Machines Corporation, died on Saturday at his home in Stamford, Conn.
He was 70 years old.
He died after a long illness, his family said.


Outcry Over Shooting By Los Angeles Police
By all accounts, Efrian Lopez seemed out of his mind when he came at two police officers early in the morning of Nov. 9, swinging a broom and screaming "Shoot me! Kill me!"
But what happened next has prompted an outcry here: Officer Neil Goldberg shot the 18-year-old Mr.
Lopez nine times in the torso, killing him.


INSIDE
Passport Searcher Resigns
An official who carried out the search of passport files for information about Bill Clinton has quit his State Department post.
Page A19.
Police Plan Criticized
The New York Police Commissioner's proposal on battling corruption "does not go far enough," a lawyer on a mayoral commission said.
Page B1.
Help for Northwest Air
A syndicate of banks is putting together a loan to help Northwest Airlines avoid bankruptcy, an executive in the syndicate said.
Page D1.


Jets Run on Empty, Full and In Between
The signs are there, probably too late for a significant change in fortunes this year.
But the Jets finally are playing at their proper level: Beating an inferior team (Cincinnati), holding their own with better clubs (Buffalo and Denver) and even staging an upset (Miami).


Woman's Body Found in Car
The body of a 21-year-old hair stylist who vanished on her way to work last Friday morning was found today in the wreckage of her car at the bottom of a steep, brush-filled embankment near Newark International Airport, law-enforcement officials said.
The search for the woman, Isabel Simoes, gained attention because of fears that she might have been a victim of a carjacking, in which thieves use force to take cars from motorists.
Less than two weeks ago, an Edison woman, Gail F. Shollar, was raped and stabbed to death after a shopping trip in Piscataway.
An Accident Victim
But the Acting Essex County Prosecutor, James F. Mulvihill, said today he thought it was possible that Ms.
Simoes was the victim of an automobile accident.
Although he refused to speculate on the cause of death, he said he found no injuries on the woman's body to suggest an assault.


Steam Pipe in Blast Had Leaked in June
The steam pipe at a Manhattan power plant that broke last Tuesday night, killing one man and seriously injuring two others, had sprung a leak four and a half months earlier, according to Consolidated Edison.
"There was a very small leak in the same pipe, about 15 feet away, on June 25," Dan Walden, a spokesman for the company, said on Monday.
"It was described more as a whisper, as opposed to any sort of serious leak," he said.


Amdura Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Mets Lose 2 Pitchers; Donnels Also Goes
The strategy for the Mets wasn't elaborate or daring: expose your strength, take the hits where you are best able to absorb them.
The Mets, who took stock of their system and convinced themselves that if there was a surplus of anything it was in pitching, lost a pair of young starters in yesterday's expansion draft, as well as third baseman Chris Donnels.


First Liberty Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Guess What Lawrence Taylor Is Up to Now?
And you thought the only options for Lawrence Taylor were retiring from pro football or coming back next year?
Today, the Giants' 33-year-old outside linebacker, who feels "in love with the game of football again," introduced a different and incredible option: playing this year in the playoffs and then retiring.
When Dr.
Russell Warren operated on Taylor a week ago today to repair a torn right Achilles' tendon, he said the injury was season-ending.
Warren said he did not expect Taylor to be ready to run until February or March.
Instead, Taylor said today that he hoped to play football by early January, assuming the stumbling Giants make the National Football League playoffs.


METRO DIGEST
ON THE FRONT LINES OF DESPERATION
Across the New York region and around the nation, experts say social service workers are increasingly at risk of assault.
At least eight workers, five in New York State, have been slain by clients in five years and hundreds of others have been assaulted as they deal with desperate clients and a government they believe has caused their problems or cannot solve them.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY A FIERCE REBUTTAL FROM DINKINS
Mayor Dinkins defended his handling of the Crown Heights racial violence to a group of rabbis and ministers, accusing critics of distorting facts to get his "political scalp" and saying that critics who accuse him of restraining the police during the violence in August 1991 are motivated by race.
A1.
Judge in Crown Heights trial criticizes proposed City Council resolution against the verdict.
B2.
TENSE TRIAL IN HASIDIC WOMAN'S SLAYING
Hasidic women from Crown Heights filled a Brooklyn courtroom to hear somber testimony about the slaying of a neighbor who was stabbed to death in her home in February.
The slaying heightened tensions because the suspect is black and because it occurred after the racial disturbances there in 1991.
B3.
TRADING IN THE TOKEN FOR A TRANSIT CARD
Transit officials now promise that, after years of delays, riders will be able to use an automated card in some subway stations in December 1993.
By March 1994, they say, the cards will be in use in 69 major subway stations and by May 1994 in all 3,450 buses.
By 1997, transit officials hope, the token will have been eliminated.
B3.
TAXES AIMED AT OUT-OF-STATE WORKERS
New York City officials said yesterday Mayor Dinkins planned to propose $162 million in new taxes next year, including an increase in the income tax for commuters and increased taxes on wine, beer, liquor and tobacco.
A spokesman for the Senate minority leader, referring to similar proposals, said: "We've killed it five times, five separate times, and if it rears its head again, it will likely die a sixth death." B3.
REGION THE ROAD TO DEATH ROW
Though voters in New Jersey have approved a state constitutional amendment that could put more convicted murderers on death row, prosecutors and defense lawyers say the change is unlikely to increase the number of death-penalty trials dramatically.
B5.
SUFFOLK BUDGET CUTS VETOED
The Suffolk County Executive ignored the pleas of fellow Republicans in the County Legislature and vetoed nearly all their proposed cuts in his $1.5 billion budget for 1993.
Should an attempt to override his vetoes fail, residents will face a 17.7 percent increase in property taxes, or $110 for the average homeowner.
B4.
CUOMO MAKES UP HIS MIND TO BE DECISIVE
If President-elect Clinton asked Governor Cuomo to consider a Supreme Court post, what would he do?
Simple, the Governor said.
He would decide.
B5.
IN SEX-ASSAULT TRIAL, A MOTHER TESTIFIES
The mother of the mildly retarded young woman in the Glen Ridge sex assault trial took the witness stand today, testifying against young men she has known since their childhood.
B5.
About New York by Michael T. Kaufman B4


Genesco Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Metropolitan Diary
THE scene is the lobby of the Lunt-Fontanne Theater.
Michael Pollack, attending a performance of "Catskills on Broadway," overhears the following dialogue.
Woman 1:
Did you know Marilyn Michaels isn't in the show anymore?


U.S. Tests Dry Cleaning Method That Leaves Air Cleaner as Well
"I would like to air some dirty laundry to the press," William K. Reilly, the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency, told reporters at a news conference on Monday.
And he meant it.
Mr.
Reilly was the first Federal employee to drop off a few dirty clothes at a local dry cleaner that is participating in a test of a new cleaning method based on biodegradable soaps instead of the harmful chemicals normally used to dry-clean clothes.


Review/Television; Unearthing The Foibles Of Young Washington
As if the job of turning George Washington from an icon into a human being had not proved daunting enough for generations of historians, David Sutherland, the producer and director of "George Washington: The Man Who Wouldn't Be King," was faced as well with making a television program without any photographs and with few pictures of any sort of the young Washington.
The result, at best, is a standoff.
Tonight's offering of "The American Experience" traces Washington's pre-Presidential career from his days as a land surveyor and possible fortune hunter through his mixed record as a British officer in the French and Indian War and his subsequent establishment as a prosperous Virginia planter to his dominating military role in the American Revolution.
The climax of the account is his voluntary handing over of power to the Continental Congress, a pivotal point in the development of both the man and his country.


Gabe Kruks; Gay Center Leader, 42
Gabe Kruks, chief operating officer of the Los Angeles Gay and Lesbian Community Services Center, died Nov. 11 at Century City Hospital in Los Angeles.
He was 42 years old and lived in Los Angeles.
Mr.
Kruks died of complications from AIDS, said Brad Laughlin, a spokesman for the center.


Otter Tail Power reports earnings for 12mos Sept 30


Running Half-Engine to Save Fuel
In the race to develop automobile engines that conserve fuel but provide adequate power, the Mitsubishi Motors Corporation has revived an idea that failed a decade ago.
Mitsubishi's new engine automatically switches from four cylinders to two in slow city driving to save fuel, and shifts back to four cylinders when open-road power is needed.


Correction: Rice and Zucchini
The recipe for rice with zucchini in the 60-Minute Gourmet column in The Living Section last Wednesday omitted a step.
Here is a corrected version. 2 small zucchini, about 1/2-pound total 1 tablespoon butter  1/2 cup finely chopped onions 2 teaspoons turmeric 1 cup converted rice 1 1/2 cups water Bay leaf Salt and freshly ground pepper to taste 2 tablespoons finely chopped coriander.
1. Trim and wash the zucchini and cut them into 1/2-inch cubes, about 2 cups.
2.
Melt the butter in a saucepan and add the onions and zucchini.
Cook, stirring, until the onions are wilted.
Add the turmeric, rice, water, bay leaf, salt and pepper.
Bring to a boil.
Cover tightly and simmer for 17 minutes.
3. Remove from the heat, add the coriander and mix well with a fork.
Yield: 4 servings.
Approximate nutritional analysis per serving:
215 calories, 3 grams fat, 8 milligrams cholesterol, 300 milligrams sodium (before salting), 4 grams protein, 40 grams carbohydrate.


Presley Companies reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


With a Crackle, Religion Enters G.O.P. Meeting
At the close of a gathering here in which the nation's Republican governors spent two days pledging harmony and a "big tent" of inclusion, a testy exchange between two Southern governors today underscored the topic that is at the core of the party's internal struggle: the role of religion.
At a news conference concluding the meeting of the Republican Governors Association, a reporter asked the governors whether they could succeed in holding together a diverse conservative coalition without alienating the religious right.


Public &amp; Private; Set Her Free
In the last year these things have happened to Silieses Success: Her parents were murdered, she fled her home in a boat, she was taken to a refugee camp, she was told she had "a little problem" with her blood, she gave birth to her first baby, and she buried him.
Perhaps, after all this, it may seem almost unremarkable that she is in prison despite the fact that she has been charged with no crime.
She describes her days in the Detention Center run by the Immigration and Naturalization Service on Varick Street in New York City: "I get up, I sit down, I cry, I think."


Justice on Trial
When a high-ranking member of the judiciary, especially a respected and popular judge, is arrested for a serious crime, the entire judicial system is placed on trial.
The world waits to see if judges can judge other judges fairly and equally.
Never in recent memory has so distinguished a jurist as Chief Judge Sol Wachtler of the New York Court of Appeals been arrested for so serious a crime -- extortion, by threatening to kidnap a young child.


A Night to Buy Low at Sotheby's
Attention, Sotheby's shoppers.
Bargains were plentiful at last night's sale of contemporary art.
Of the 77 works offered, only 51 found buyers, and many lots went by without a single bid.
The sale totaled $21.3 million, well below Sotheby's estimate of $31.5 million to $40 million.
Many works by major artists sold for surprisingly low sums.
"I wasn't surprised by the sale," said Eli Broad, a Los Angeles collector.
"Clearly there were cases where the estimates were too high."


Citizens Utilities reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Witness Saw Accused Killer In Another Crown Hts. Case
Showing concern for violence in Crown Heights, more than 30 Hasidic women filled a Brooklyn courtroom yesterday to hear somber testimony about the slaying of a neighbor, Phyllis LaPine, who was stabbed to death in her home on Feb. 6.
Quiet weeping could be heard in the spectator section of the small, crowded courtroom as a witness testified about finding Mrs.
LaPine's 2-year-old daughter singing a children's song alone in her bedroom as the victim lay dead in a nearby hallway.


Hatch, N.M.: High-Voltage Chili Generator
WHEN Joseph and Celestina Franzoy came to the Hatch Valley about 70 years ago, they never dreamed that the little town of Hatch, hardly more than an Army outpost on the Rio Grande, would someday call itself the chili capital of the world.
Or that their family of 10 would grow to a clan of 500, almost all in the chili business here (well, there is an aunt in Wisconsin, but they send her seeds at Christmas), with thousands of acres and their own processing plants, and with clients as far-flung as Egypt and Harrod's of London.
The Franzoys, these miners from Austria, didn't even know what chilies were.
Their neighbors taught them how to build an adobe house while they lived in a tent and grubbed out their first piece of land with wild horses tamed in the mountains.
One day, their Mexican neighbors brought them a bowl of chili peppers.


Accounts
*
KMS Research Inc., Redding, Calif., to Atlas Citron Haligman &amp; Bedecarre, San Francisco, to handle its KMS Haircare products account, previously in-house.
Billings were estimated at $2 million. *
Burroughs Wellcome Co., Research Triangle Park, N.C., to Vicom/FCB, New York, as the first agency to handle advertising for Alkeran, an anti-cancer drug, and to introduce an undisclosed product still in development.
Billings were not disclosed.


Consolidated Stores reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Don't Forget The Turkey
THERE are dozens of methods of roasting a turkey.
Unless you are willing to remove the drumsticks and roast them separately, you will probably have overdone breast and perfect drumsticks or perfect breast and undercooked drumsticks.
It helps a little if you cover the breast after it has browned.
No matter what recipe you use, these are some basic rules to keep in mind when roasting a turkey:


New Post at Paramount
Paramount Communications Inc. said yesterday that Kerry McCluggage, president of the television group of Paramount Pictures, would become the chairman of that group, a newly created position.
The announcement follows last week's appointment of Sherry Lansing as chairman of the motion picture group.
Mr.
McCluggage, 38 years old, joined Paramount in 1991 from MCA's Universal Television, where he had been president for four and a half years.


Bronx Bus Line Riders Get Glimpse of Future
Instead of tossing in a token or handing over a transfer as he boarded a bus in the South Bronx, Freddy Melendez passed an automated fare card through a narrow slot in the fare box.
A small electronic screen on the side of the box flashed a message: "Too Fast." He tried again and got the message: "Try Again."
Mr.
Melendez looked searchingly at the bus driver, Leonard Dempster, who shrugged.
A long line of passengers waited behind Mr.
Melendez, and the woman at its head clucked in impatience.
After his third swipe, the screen finally flashed "O.K.," and Mr.
Melendez leaned back momentarily, as if to absorb the message, before ambling down the aisle.


Review/Pop; Country On a Road Through Suburbia
If Mary-Chapin Carpenter had emerged in the 1970's, she might well have gravitated to Los Angeles, where songwriters were turning out confessional songs with rock and country roots.
But in the 1990's, the 34-year-old Ms.
Carpenter is based in Washington, and her albums come out of Columbia's Nashville (country) division.
Yet she's making music that can stand alongside the best efforts of Bonnie Raitt and Linda Ronstadt.
Unlike them, Ms.
Carpenter writes most of what she sings, and she knows how to distill complex emotions into concise lyrics and stick-to-the-ribs tunes.
Her concert on Monday night at the Beacon Theater revealed a performer with brains, humor, determination, insight, resilience and a voice that can express them all.
Country music has turned suburban in the last decade, but Ms.
Carpenter's songs are a sign of the suburbs taking on a bit of country.
Ms.
Carpenter grew up in Princeton, N.J., and graduated from Brown University; there's no drawl or twang in her singing.
Her Cajun-pop hit, "Down at the Twist and Shout," is about a club in Bethesda, Md., with music from Louisiana, a place where, "I swore someday I was gonna go."


Handicapping the Education Secretary
The biggest guessing game in education circles these days is, of course, who will be the next Secretary of Education.
Although aides to President-elect Bill Clinton are not talking, and Mr.
Clinton himself has said no Cabinet post has been offered to anyone yet, some education insiders think they know whose names are on the short list.
They could be wrong, but these are the hottest tips -- for now.
Johnnetta B. Cole -- President, Spelman College, age 56 She is considered a leading spokeswoman on higher education issues, especially on those concerning historically black colleges like Spelman and the education of women.
Thomas H. Kean -- President, Drew University, age 57 The former Governor of New Jersey is a Republican, but some think Mr.
Clinton may name him as a way of fostering bipartisan support for education goals.
Has a reputation as an innovative policy-maker.
Roy Romer -- Governor of Colorado, age 64 Currently chairman of the National Governors' Association.
He and Governor Clinton were leaders in creating the six national education goals proclaimed by the governors and President Bush.
Richard W. Riley -- Lawyer, former Governor of South Carolina, age 59 Named yesterday to the Clinton transition team to oversee personnel decisions.
As Governor from 1979 to 1987, he pushed through changes in education that experts still praise as among the most effective in any state.
Donna Shalala -- Chancellor, University of Wisconsin at Madison, age 51 One of the nation's top women in academic administration.
She was also an Assistant Secretary of Housing and Urban Development in the Carter Administration, and Hunter College president.


Campus Journal; Mourning a Teacher, and Lost Serenity
The provost at Clark University, Fern Johnson, sought today to get past the violent circumstances of a Clark professor's death, and the emotions it evoked on this city campus, as she addressed about 500 colleagues and students during a memorial service on the Clark campus here.
"Let's get beyond the sadness, anger, fear, frustration and unresolved questions that surround Margaret Comer's death," Ms.
Johnson urged those who had come to remember Professor Comer, a geneticist and molecular biology professor who was strangled in her home last month.


Sampras Outlasts Becker
The sign draped in the elegant confines of the Frankfurt Festhalle read: "Big Boris is Back." What the banner neglected to mention was that Pete Sampras is back, too -- back on the same blue indoor surface where he powered his way to victory in last year's ATP Tour world championship.
Sampras, the mild-mannered American, was every bit as impressive tonight, prevailing over Boris Becker of Germany, 7-6 (7-5), 7-6 (7-3), in an opening round-robin match bereft of service breaks and nearly bereft of lengthy exchanges.


Etac Sales Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


RESULTS PLUS
N.H.L.
Imports Lead Winnipeg Past Tampa Bay Teemu Selanne of Finland scored a goal with 6 minutes 26 seconds remaining to snap a tie and Russian rookie Yevgeny Davydov scored three times to lead the Winnipeg Jets to a 6-5 victory over the Tampa Bay Lightning last night in Tampa, Fla.
Selanne put in the rebound of Alexei Zhamnov's shot to break a 5-5 tie.
It was his 15th goal, tops among National Hockey League rookies.
The victory was only the second in 11 road games for the Jets.
The Lightning, now 9-10-2, has lost two straight following a club-record six-game unbeaten streak.
Davydov, who joined the Jets late last season after winning an Olympic gold medal with the Unified Team, finished off his hat trick at 15:48 of the second period. (AP) Penguins 4, Sabres 2: Rick Tocchet scored twice and N.H.L. scoring leader Mario Lemieux had his 23d goal as Pittsburgh extended its home unbeaten streak to 19 games.
The Penguins are 17-0-2 at the Civic Arena in regular-season games since losing, 8-4, to Hartford last Feb. 27.
Lemieux has at least one goal in 18 of Pittsburgh's 20 games this season.
Red Wings 5, Blackhawks 4: Shawn Burr's tie-breaking goal with 6:40 left gave Detroit the comeback victory over visiting Chicago.
Detroit trailed, 3-0, after one period, and by 4-2 after two, but scored three straight goals in the last 20 minutes.
Burr scored the winner from a nearly impossible angle, bouncing his shot off goaltender Ed Belfour and into the net for his third goal. (AP) Canadiens 5, Senators 3: Visiting Montreal scored three goals in the second period to deflate Ottawa, avenging an opening-night loss to the first-year Senators.
It was the second night in a row the league-leading Canadiens used a second-period rally to climb out of a hole.
Montreal scored five times to overcome Boston's 3-0 lead in Monday's 6-3 victory.
Ottawa is now 0-17-1 in 18 games since its season-opening 5-3 victory over Montreal on Oct. 8. (AP) Nordiques 3, Maple Leafs 1: Ron Hextall made 32 saves as Quebec defeated Toronto in a game played in Hamilton, Ontario.
Joe Sakic, Steve Duchesne and Mats Sundin scored Quebec's goals.
Nikolai Borschevsky scored for the Maple Leafs, who lost for the first time in six games. (AP) INDOOR SOCCER United States Defeats Russia  Jeff Agoos and Chico Borja of Belleville, N.J., scored two goals each as the United States beat Russia, 8-3, last night in its opening match of the FIFA world indoor championship in Hong Kong.
The United States, which finished third in 1989 in the first world indoor tournament, took a 3-0 halftime lead on Fernando Clavijo's goal in the fifth minute, Agoos's goal in the 14th and Borja's goal one minute later.
Second-half goals by Agoos, Terry Woodberry, George Fernandez and Borja made it a seven-goal lead before Russia closed to 7-3.
In the other Group D match, Spain beat China, 6-2.
Argentina and Poland advanced to the quarterfinals in Group A. Argentina beat Hong Kong, 2-1, while Poland beat Nigeria, 5-4. (AP)


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Nov. 13
Nov. 6
Nov. 15
1992
1992
1991
Gasoline production, daily
7.2
7.0
6.9
Distillate production, daily
3.3
3.2
3.0
Gasoline stocks
207.8
208.3
197.4
Distillate stocks
138.4
135.7
136.1
Crude imports, daily
5.6
6.2
5.6
Product imports, daily
1.4
2.0
2.2
Crude stocks
319.9
326.9
352.5
Crude production, daily
7.0
7.0
7.4
Refinery utilization (%)
89.5
89.0
82.3
Source: American Petroleum Institute


Fred's Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


McFarland Energy Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


5 People Shot Inside a Club In Brooklyn
Two men were killed and three other people, including two women, were wounded when an unidentified, masked gunman burst into a social club in Red Hook, Brooklyn, last night and sprayed it with bullets.
The assailant fled, the police said.
Sgt.
John G. McCluskey, a police spokesman, said there was no immediate explanation for the shooting, which occurred at 55 Rapelye Street.
It is near the entrance to the Brooklyn-Battery Tunnel and the Brooklyn-Queens Expressway.


Millicom Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Serbian Buildup Imperils Croatia's Tenuous Peace
A peace plan that ended the civil war between Serbs and Croats here late last year is now in danger of collapsing as the Serbian minority in Croatia builds up a provocative military force and has proclaimed an independent state in areas it controls.
Under the plan prepared by the former American Secretary of State, Cyrus R. Vance, now a United Nations Yugoslav mediator, a 13,000-strong peacekeeping force was deployed in two areas of Croatia, covering roughly a third of its territory, to protect the Serbian majorities there.


Court of Appeals Opens, Minus One


Malone Admits Error of Omission
If he had to do it over again, the only thing Karl Malone would have done differently before speaking his mind on the comeback of Magic Johnson was choose another audience.
"I would still have made the same statement, but I would have talked to him first," Malone said tonight, referring to the concerns he voiced publicly about competing against a player infected with the virus that causes AIDS.
His statements were published one day before Johnson aborted his return to the Los Angeles Lakers on Nov. 2 without playing in a regular-season game.


Trade Pact May Have To Wait
The Mexican Government has stopped pushing for a quick adoption of the North American Free Trade Agreement, amid signs that the new Clinton Administration will want to deal first with the domestic economy.
After initially seeking a resolution of the outstanding issues by next March, Mexican officials now say they are prepared to discuss President-elect Bill Clinton's objections to the pact whenever and wherever he wants.


Roman Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


A NAVAL BLOCKADE AGAINST YUGOSLAVS LIKELY WITHIN DAYS
In response to a United Nations resolution toughening the sanctions on Yugoslavia, an international fleet authorized to halt and search vessels suspected of carrying prohibited cargo is likely to begin operating in the Adriatic Sea within several days, Western officials said today.
A senior Bush Administration official said United States warships would join the fleet once the North Atlantic Treaty Organization endorsed the plan, which it is expected to do.
The fleet would be authorized to use force if necessary to stop ships.


Young Believe Malcolm X Is Still Speaking to Them
In a Roxbury high school near the streets where Malcolm X hustled away his adolescence, the 11 teen-agers in Steve Grace's history class sat straight and spellbound as the stark image of the Black Muslim leader glowed from a television set up front.
The gaunt man in the thin tie and spectacles was talking to 1960's Harlem about how drugs were destroying the community, how they were flown in by outsiders and how blacks needed to unite against the scourge -- words that could as easily have been said of 1990's Roxbury.


Ordination of Women Puts New Fire in Bishops' Debate
Even as they considered a compromise on a proposed pastoral letter about women in the church and society, the country's Roman Catholic bishops today opened one of the sharpest debates that the document has produced in its troubled nine-year history.
The church's opposition to the ordination of women, which the Vatican and church leaders have insisted was not open to further debate, nonetheless became the central object of discussion at the semi-annual meeting of the National Conference of Catholic Bishops.


A Dizzy Day Of Drafting And Dealing
The expansion Florida Marlins and Colorado Rockies capped a seven-hour siege of drafting players for 1993 last night by announcing a spree of six trades that were made both before the draft, on a contingency basis, and during it on the "spur of the moment."
As a result of the trades, players took some strange circuitous trips geographically:


Corrections
A chart in The Metro Section on Friday about air pollution characterized the data incorrectly.
The graphs showed only pollution from carbon monoxide, primarily a wintertime pollutant, and did not show smog, primarily a summertime pollutant.
The adjoining article made the distinction between the two types of pollution, but failed to say that some of the same control measures, including limits on car traffic into Manhattan, could be required to combat smog even if the carbon monoxide problem was solved.


Daniel Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


A New Wireless Phone From Japan
Japan is experimenting with wireless telephones that are cheaper and possibly closer to availability than the latest versions under development in the United States, according to Japan's second-largest long-distance carrier.
Dr.
Sachio Semmoto, senior vice president with the DDI Corporation, said yesterday that his company was developing a new system called "personal handy phone." The Japanese phones may be commercially available as early as next year, he said.
Equivalent United States phone systems called personal communications services may be three or more years away from market.
Japanese Wireless Market Small
Despite manufacturing most of America's cellular telephones, Japan has had until recently a fledgling domestic market for wireless telephone service.
High service prices have discouraged all but the corporate customer.
There are one million cellular subscribers in Japan compared with 10 million in the United States, which has a population double that of Japan.


On Thanksgiving, What's a Chef to Do?
CHEF shmef.
Come Thanksgiving, they'll be just like the rest of us: stuffing turkeys and themselves; secretly longing for marshmallows on the candied sweet potatoes and insisting that the holiday would be a flop without cranberry sauce, even if, like Dean Fearing, they put jalapenos and cilantro in it.
The message from most trend-setting chefs is unmistakable: don't mess with my holiday.
Some of them are more hidebound than others, but none would dream of Thanksgiving without a turkey, stuffing and either sweet potatoes or pumpkin something-or-other.


Southwest Gas reports earnings for 12mos Sept 30


THE TRANSITION: Visit to Washington; Clinton to Take Walk in the 'Real City'
Bill Clinton visits his new hometown this week to meet with President Bush at the White House and Congressional leaders on Capitol Hill, dine in Georgetown salons and sleep at the elegant Hay-Adams hotel in a two-bedroom suite that commands a view of the Executive Mansion.
But as rich as the visit will be with the trappings and symbolism of official Washington, it will depart from the traditional for at least two hours on Wednesday afternoon, when the President-elect will journey to Georgia Avenue, the commercial spine of a large proportion of the city's black neighborhoods.


Corrections
An article yesterday about the investigation of the Government's role in a bank fraud case involving Iraq misstated the date of the law providing for appointment of an independent counsel in some copies.
It was the Ethics in Government Act of 1978, not 1987.


Data Research Associates reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


International Leisure Enterprises reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Rustic Calm Inspires McEwan Tale of Evil
The road to evil lies right outside Ian McEwan's doorstep in the Languedoc region of France.
Trail No. 74 in the national hiking system known as the Grande Randonnee winds across the Causse du Larzac, an arid limestone upland whose wildness surprises visitors accustomed to the soft countryside of Burgundy or the Dordogne.
It is an appropriate setting for the terrifying encounter that gives "Black Dogs," Mr.
McEwan's latest novel, its title.
The dogs, enormous and wild, appear like an apparition in front of June Tremaine, an idealistic Communist hiking through the countryside with her new husband, Bernard, in 1946.
June's encounter, a quick, sickening glimpse into savagery and chaos, changes her forever.
She can no longer believe in science and reason, or in her husband, also a Communist, whose political program seems absurd to her.
The two drift apart.
The course of postwar European history insures that the philosophical rift between them remains an open wound.


THE TRANSITION: The Accommodations; Blair House It Isn't, but It Isn't Inexpensive, Either
In spurning the luxury of a government mansion for a luxury hotel, President-elect Bill Clinton may be making a point, but he won't save the taxpayers any money.
In fact, his decision to stay at the Hay-Adams Hotel instead of Blair House will cost more because of the additional Secret Service protection needed, said State Department officials who operate the Government mansion, which usually houses visiting heads of state.


La-Z-Boy Chair reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 24


Trump's Castle Casino Resort reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


COMPANY NEWS
BMW, Germany, said that it had raised its investment and output plans for its new plant in Spartanburg, S.C.
The company now plans to produce 90,000 cars a year, beginning in 1995, up from an initially planned 70,000.
Investment in the plant is estimated at $350 million to $400 million by 1995, up from an initial estimate of $300 million to $350 million.
GENERAL ELECTRIC CO., Fairfield, Conn., said its power generation unit had received two orders totaling $58 million to supply equipment to Bechtel Construction Co. and Petro-Canada.


Rival French Environmentalists Form a Party
With French politics in disarray four months before crucial parliamentary elections, two rival environmental groups signed an electoral pact today aimed at winning over voters disenchanted with mainstream political parties.
Generation Ecologie and the Greens, which won 7.1 percent and 6.5 percent of votes respectively in regional elections this spring, pointedly described their accord as "not a marriage contract" because they have agreed only to run single candidates in elections next March.


Face Lift Continues for Former Department Store


Red Eagle Resources reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


BRIEFS
Ratings  *
Potomac Capital Investment Corp.'s senior debt rating has been lowered to A-, from A, by Duff &amp; Phelps.
Potomac Capital is a unit of Potomac Electric Power. *
Unisys's senior note rating has been raised to B+, from B-, and convertible subordinated note to B, from CCC, by Duff &amp; Phelps.


Home Depot reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 1


Accuser's Mother Testifies In Sexual Assault Trial
The mother of the mildly retarded young woman in the Glen Ridge sex assault trial took the witness stand today, testifying as a prosecution witness against young men she has known since their childhood.
Testifying about the hours just after the purported March 1, 1989, attack, the witness said her daughter talked in her sleep that night and was "extremely restless." At one point, she said, she went into her daughter's bedroom to listen, but was unable to understand what she was saying.
Then she woke her up and asked what was troubling her.


Meeting South African Wines
SINCE early summer, ships with container-loads of South African wine have been docking at American ports and the wines have been showing up in wine shops and restaurants.
By the end of the year, about 40,000 cases will have landed here.
With the lifting of trade sanctions against South Africa nearly a year and a half ago, Americans have an opportunity -- and for many it is the first time -- to sample South African wines.


Going Beyond Campaigns and Into Sales and Marketing
NOT many top agency executives spend time designing store displays or hang-tags for pants and shirts.
But when officers at the San Francisco office of Foote, Cone &amp; Belding do that for Levi Strauss &amp; Company, they are exemplifying a philosophy they hope will enable them to stand out amid the industry's fiercely competitive climate.
The agency calls this philosophy, as it informs work for clients like Levi Strauss, Clorox, Coors and Pacific Bell, "brand architecture." While the phrase is far from catchy, the underlying idea seems sound: attract new clients and entice more business from existing clients by going well beyond simply creating advertising to become integrally involved in the entire sales and marketing process.


A Rustic Pasta That Plays Hard to Get
ON a recent trip to Lombardy, in northern Italy, I searched for pizzocheri, an unusual pasta I had had once in New York.
This wide flat pasta is made from buckwheat flour, and after it is cooked it is mixed with potatoes, cabbage, onions, cheeses and sage.
It is very rustic and probably not what I should have expected to find in the restaurants I visited.


Aid Effort For Airline Is Reported
A syndicate of banks led by the Bankers Trust Company is working to put together $300 million in new credit to help Northwest Airlines avoid a bankruptcy filing while it tries to complete its merger with KLM Royal Dutch Airlines, an executive participating in the syndicate said yesterday.
The airline, which has exhausted its current bank credit, is depleting its cash reserves to pay for running the airline at a time of heavy losses.


Politics Fuels Debate on Budget Power
The renewed arguments over whether President Bill Clinton should have what President Bush wanted -- devices he could use to cut spending, like the "line item veto" and its feebler cousin "enhanced rescission authority" -- are not really about cutting the deficit.
Nobody, not even Mr.
Clinton, argues that either device would affect the deficit very much, even though they would allow a President to strike individual items from spending bills without having to veto the entire measure.


Knicks Mix Things Up But Can't Sink Sonics
The Knicks' performance on their West Coast trip continued to head South.
Losing their second game on this three-game trip, the slumping Knicks dropped a 100-90 decision tonight to the Seattle Supersonics before 13,245 at the Seattle Coliseum.


Latino? Hispanic? Quechua? No, American
To the Editor:
"Latino, Si. Hispanic, No." (Op-Ed, Oct. 28) by Earl Shorris is a fine example of the creation of artificial groups of people so that they can be counted and controlled politically.


Pratt Hotel Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Budget Cuts Are Vetoed By Executive
County Executive Robert J. Gaffney ignored the pleas of his fellow Republicans in the Suffolk County Legislature today and vetoed nearly all of their proposed cuts in his $1.5 billion budget for 1993.
Should an attempt to override his vetoes fail, as expected, county residents will face a 17.7 percent increase in property taxes next year, or $110 for the average homeowner.


Bad Breaks
Now that the election is over, all we have to do is get the economy moving again, tackle the deficit and add a few much needed domestic programs.
All this will take money.
But instead of raising taxes, we could consider eliminating a few unproductive tax subsidies that favor corporate debt, foreign investors and long lunches.
Here are some suggestions:
*
The debtors' subsidy
.
Right now, a company can deduct all interest payments on debt, even debt incurred buying up its own shares.
This means that in effect the Treasury subsidized much of the damaging casino economy of the 1980's.
The deduction was originally limited to investment in plant and equipment.
If the interest on debt to purchase more than $5 million in stock was no longer deductible, and if companies were no longer able to write-off "goodwill" and similar intangible assets of acquired companies, we would gain $9 billion over five years.


Ford Motor Credit Prices Offering
A $400 million debt offering by the Ford Motor Credit Company, a unit of the large auto maker, was priced through underwriters led by the First Boston Corporation.
The notes due in 2002 have a 7 3/4 percent coupon and are priced at 99.395 to yield 7.838 percent, or about 98 basis points more than Treasury securities with a similar maturity.


Consolidated Products reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Books of The Times; Germany and Poland as War-Crossed Lovers
The Call of the Toad  By Gunter Grass  Translated by Ralph Manheim  Illustrated by the author. 248 pages.
A Helen and Kurt Wolff Book.
Harcourt Brace Jovanovich. $19.95.
Never expect the expected from Gunter Grass, one reason he continues to be Germany's most original novelist and most engaged essayist.
Mr.
Grass is what Germans call a Querdenker, someone who thinks in a risky, original way.
And so he does, in novel after novel since "The Tin Drum."


Ballet Orchestra to Play Before Contract Accord
The New York City Ballet orchestra has agreed to perform without a contract while negotiations with the company, which opened its winter season last night at the New York State Theater, are under way.
The agreement came after a meeting that ended late Monday night.
"We are looking forward to a successful completion of this process," David Gray, a spokesman for the ballet company, said yesterday.


Events: Antiques Expo And Christmas Fairs
Antiques on the Hudson Piers 88, 90 and 92, 12th Avenue between West 48th and 52d Streets; (201) 384-0010.


BASEBALL;
The good news for major league club owners: The number of players earning between $1 million and $2 million continued to drop this year.
The bad news: The number of players earning $2 million or more continued to rise.


POLITICAL MOTIVE CITED IN SCRUTINY OF PASSPORT FILES
The State Department's internal investigator said today that he suspected that the White House was aware of what he called a "politically motivated" search through Bill Clinton's passport records while it was under way.
But he said there was no evidence that the White House had instigated the search.
After a seven-week investigation into a scandal that jolted President Bush's re-election campaign and deeply embarrassed the State Department, the agency's inspector general, Sherman M. Funk, said it was clear that White House officials had hoped the State Department could get "information detrimental to Clinton" in an effort "to influence the outcome of a Presidential election."


Lobbying Supporters; Mayor Seeks 'Responsible Voices' on Crown Heights
Over wine, crudites and lox on bread, Mayor David N. Dinkins briefed several dozen prominent Jewish secular and religious leaders in an unannounced meeting Tuesday night to galvanize what he has called "the responsible voices" who have been drowned out in the aftermath of the Crown Heights verdict.
The session, at the Fifth Avenue apartment of Howard J. Rubenstein, the public relations executive, was supposed to last 45 minutes.
Instead, Mr.
Dinkins stayed more than two hours -- passionately recalling his record against anti-Semitism, providing his personal perspective on the case, and giving some of the guests an opportunity to voice their concerns about the implications of the verdict on relations between blacks and Jews in New York, which has more of both than any other American city.


Transactions
Baseball  American League
TEXAS RANGERS -- Named Jackie Moore dugout coach. National League
COLORADO ROCKIES -- Named Ron Hassey, first base coach; Amos Otis, hitting coach; and Jerry Royster, third base coach.


Caesars World Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Pop and Jazz in Review
Sugarcubes The Limelight
Art devoted to play promises special liberties.
Play can be serious, as in Dada, or deceptively light, as in Pop; but it's always more meaningful than it first appears.
The Sugarcubes' licentious rock values the body's pleasures and rejects discretion, turning the dance floor into a playpen where audience and performers retrace youth's first imaginative steps.


Vandals Paint a Swastika On Begin's Tomb in Israel
A black swastika was painted last night on the gravestone of former Prime Minister Menachem Begin, and the Israeli police said today that the vandalism seemed to be the work of ardently religious Jews.
After the vandalism of the grave, on the Mount of Olives, Israeli newspapers and the state-run radio received phone calls from men who said the attack was a response to "the desecration of the graves of the righteous." It was not clear why the vandals had singled out the grave of Mr.
Begin, who died in March.


New Police Academy Is Unveiled


Sidney Gaines Is Dead; Law Partner Was 76
Sidney Gaines, a retired lawyer and insurance company executive, died on Tuesday at the Mary Manning Walsh nursing home in Manhattan.
He was 76 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died of complications of multiple sclerosis, his family said.


Eleanor Spencer, 97, Medieval-Art Scholar
Dr.
Eleanor P. Spencer, a scholar of medieval art, died on Tuesday at Le Vieux Chateau, a retirement home near Paris.
She was 97 years old.
Dr.
Spencer was the first woman to receive the Sachs Fellowship for Research in the Fine Arts from Harvard University, which enabled her to earn a doctorate at Radcliffe College.
Earlier, she had received a bachelor's and a master's degree from Smith College and had studied at the Sorbonne in Paris.


U.S. Is Backing Serbian President's Internal Foes
Having failed to budge President Slobodan Milosevic from his position as Serbia's strongman with economic and political sanctions, the United States is now trying to increase pressure for his ouster by supporting Serbian opposition to him, especially on Yugoslav television.
While the Bush Administration is pushing to tighten enforcement of a United Nations embargo against Yugoslavia, it is seeking an exemption to the sanctions to permit the export of communications equipment to independent television stations in Belgrade, the Serbian and the federal Yugoslav capital.


Egghead Software reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 10


Without Firing Shot, Espanol Captures Belize
In 1796, when 32 Spanish ships of the line gathered offshore to take over an English loggers' outpost here, 240 men rallied to defend this nascent British colony tucked in a small corner of Central America.
Legend has it that after a week of minor skirmishes the Spanish were forced to flee, not so much by the prowess of their overmatched foes as by an outbreak of severe dysentery.


Hadassah Dies at 83; Dancer and Instructor
Hadassah, a pioneer of Israeli and Indian dancing in America, died yesterday at St.
Luke's Hospital.
She was 83 years old and lived in Manhattan.
She died of cancer, said her husband, Milton Epstein.


Allied-Signal Sells Stake in Union Texas
Allied-Signal Inc. said yesterday that it had sold 33.3 million common shares of Union Texas Petroleum Holdings for $585 million, ending a relationship with the oil and gas exploration company that began three decades ago.
The stock was sold through a secondary public offering by a syndicate led by Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company.
Allied-Signal announced earlier this month that it was planning the common stock sale.
It follows Allied's redemption in September of a total of $355 million in Union Texas preferred stock and warrants.


Sidney Gaines Is Dead; Law Partner Was 76
Sidney Gaines, a retired lawyer and insurance company executive, died on Tuesday at the Mary Manning Walsh nursing home in Manhattan.
He was 76 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died of complications of multiple sclerosis, his family said.


Treasuries and Municipals Gain
Prices rose and yields fell yesterday across the board in the Treasury market.
The municipal bond market also gained as investors bought up $1.26 billion in North Carolina power bonds.
Traders are not sure if this is a rally or just the other side of the sharp fall in prices at the end of last week.
This will be answered in the next several days of trading, especially if the yield on the 30-year bond can break below the 7.50 percent it fell to yesterday.


WHERE TO FIND IT
AS a textile conservator, Judith Eisenberg works on all sorts of fragile fabrics, from shredded samplers to quilts riddled with holes.
"They're usually flat textiles, like Asian embroideries, wall hangings, Torah curtains or lace," she said.
But not always.
Several years ago, Ms.
Eisenberg, a textile conservator for 15 years, was asked to help revive the original Winnie-the-Pooh because the famous stuffed bear had a torn foot.
She also gently repaired his cohorts, Kanga, Piglet and Eeyore, the stuffed animals that inspired A. A. Milne's famous stories.
All are on view, behind glass, at the Donnell Library Center in Manhattan.


A Retail Season of Hope and Caution
With their fingers tightly crossed and rabbits' feet stashed in their pockets, merchants are predicting healthy -- but not robust -- sales increases this holiday season.
Retailers are taking hope from their strong performances in the third quarter, when sales and profits increased for many.
Also figuring into their estimates are the recent encouraging economic statistics, like stronger housing starts, rising consumer confidence and slightly lower unemployment and consumer debt loads.


R.O.T.C. USES OATH ON HOMOSEXUALITY
The Naval Reserve Officers Training Corps is requiring all R.O.T.C. midshipmen to sign a new affidavit saying they can be discharged and forced to pay back their scholarship if they are found to be homosexual.
The military services and service academies have for years required their members to say whether they are homosexual and whether they had ever engaged in homosexual activity.
But the new Navy policy seems to reinforce the policy and make it clear that it means to recoup education and training costs if an officer is discharged for homosexuality.


2 New Offerings Backed by Assets
The First Boston Corporation was the lead manager yesterday for two asset-backed deals totaling $914 million.
In one, Honda offered $414 million of class A certificates through Honda Auto Receivables 1992-A Grantor Trust at a price of 9953/64 to yield 5.08 percent.


Trump Plaza Hotel &amp; Casino reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Call Him Earvin: 'I Can't Be Magic'
IF ever there was a man of contradictions, it is Magic Johnson.
He is a 6-foot-9-inch powerhouse of arms and legs charging the court.
Yet he can seem more like a teddy bear -- huggable, with a boyish smile and a soft voice that says everything is all right.


CHRONICLE
They may seem like an unlikely trio, but Borough President RUTH MESSINGER of Manhattan is teaming up this weekend with EARTHA KITT and BIANCA JAGGER at St.
Peter's Church on Lexington Avenue for "A Thanksgiving Celebration of Women's Music, Words and Crafts" for the benefit of Iris House, a planned center for women living with H.I.V., which causes AIDS.
Tomorrow evening Ms.
Kitt is to perform in a concert along with Abbey Lincoln, the Roches and others.
Readings by women writers are planned for Saturday afternoon, with another concert in the evening, featuring Cassandra Wilson and Julia Migenes, among others.


Save the Peace Dividend
President-elect Bill Clinton deserves high marks for aggressively addressing a number of important issues during the transition period.
But as was the case during the campaign, the most important issue since the end of World War II has received minimal attention.
It may be politically shrewd to give domestic policy, as it affects an economy just beginning to recover from recession, a higher priority than foreign policy.
But the collapse of Boris Yeltsin's pro-Western, democratic Russian Government would have a far greater impact on the American economy than anything the new Administration could do at home.


Needed: An Ambassador in Moscow
Just as the political struggle over reform in Russia is reaching a fever pitch, Ambassador Robert Strauss has decided to come home.
Whatever his reasons for leaving Moscow, Mr.
Strauss feels he can "do more good" for the Russians from his office in Washington.
That is certainly worth trying.
And one of his biggest jobs, he wisely says, would be to lower expectations in the United States about what the new Russia can quickly accomplish.


Forget the Cliches About Motorcyclists
To the Editors:
Richard Brookhiser makes a valid point about not judging people by their wardrobes in his Oct. 31 Op-Ed article on what happened to him when a fellow Manhattanite slapped a sticker for the Republican ticket on his motorcycle jacket, "Bikers for Bush-Quayle. No Kidding."


Breast Cancer Research Must Have the Funds
To the Editor:
"Medical Madness on Capitol Hill" (editorial, Oct. 29), which criticizes my "backdoor solution" to provide (via the Army 1993 budget) a $210 million increase in funds for breast cancer research, completely misses the point.


Refilling the Molds Of a Silversmith
SHORTLY after William Spratling, an American architect, settled in Taxco, Mexico, a small mining town near Acapulco, in 1929, he opened a silver studio.
The studio produced table-top items, candlesticks, platters and the jewelry for which he became well known.
One of the first to combine pre-Columbian motifs with Art Deco designs, Mr.
Spratling revived what had been a nearly forgotten craft in that region.
A few years after Mr.
Spratling died in 1967, Alberto Ulrich, a long-time friend, bought the Spratling ranch and hired Don Tomas -- a craftsman who had trained with Mr.
Spratling as a boy and who is now in his 70's -- to run the studio.
Many pieces, like the baby cup below ($675), are being made with the original molds.


A Traveling Soup Kitchen Helps Fight Hunger


Mickey and Bambi, Meet Mandy and Billy
IT may be hard to believe, but some people can just never get enough of those oh-so-cute Disney characters.
That's what the Disney Consumer Products company is wishing very, very hard upon a star.
The company has just introduced "A New Generation of Disney Babies," a mind-boggling array of products.
"Our concept is to tap into the memories that Mom had growing up with Disney characters," said Glen Ellen Brown, the marketing director at Disney Babies.
"That mom is now having kids, and the idea was to coordinate all the products."


Prisoner With AIDS Appeals Sentence for Biting a Guard
A prisoner who has AIDS asked an appeals court today to overturn his 25-year sentence for attempted murder for biting a prison guard, saying that he had been unfairly treated because of fears about the disease.
A lawyer for the prisoner, Gregory Dean Smith, argued that the jury acted irrationally in convicting him because there is no evidence that biting someone can transmit the virus that causes AIDS.


Hancock Fabrics reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 1


With Taylor Gone, Defense Is Cautious
The Giants miss Lawrence Taylor in more ways than you might think.
With him, they had the greatest pass-rushing outside linebacker ever.
Even at the age of 33, he was still a threat to opposing quarterbacks.
Without him, they have reverted to a tentative and cautious defense.
Sunday night's 27-13 loss to the Denver Broncos was the Giants' first game since Taylor tore his right Achilles' tendon.
His absence prompted the team to go conservative on defense.
Some of the Giants, while choosing their words carfefully, indicated today they felt their hands had been tied.


G.M. to Curtail Dealer Financing and Drop Allante
In another move to shore up its sagging finances, the General Motors Corporation notified its 9,000 dealers today that its General Motors Acceptance Corporation unit would no longer provide wholesale and retail financing for non-G.M. models sold by dealers who also sell General Motors cars.
Separately, G.M.'s Cadillac division said it was dropping its Allante two-seater luxury roadster next year, after a seven-year run in which it often fell short of Cadillac's, and owners', expectations.


Catholic Bishops in U.S. Reject Policy Letter on Role of Women
The nation's Roman Catholic bishops refused today to adopt a proposed pastoral letter on the role of women in the church and society, a document nine years in the making that had ended up being dominated by traditional church views.
The vote marked the first time since the National Conference of Catholic Bishops was formed in 1966 that the nation's Catholic hierarchy failed to reached a two-thirds majority consensus on a proposed pastoral letter, the bishops' weightiest form of policy statement.


Britain Stays Firm on Hong Kong, But Calls for 'Calm' Negotiations
Britain today reiterated its plans to introduce more democracy to Hong Kong before returning the colony to Chinese rule in 1997, but called on China to bring forward counterproposals if it has objections.
In what appeared to be an attempt to ease the mounting strains between London and Beijing over the issue, Hong Kong's Governor, Christopher Patten, said after meeting here today with Prime Minister John Major that Britain wanted "calm and constructive and rational discussions" with China.


Giles T. MacIntyre, 66, Animal Paleontologist
Dr.
Giles Ternan MacIntyre, a high-school dropout with a Phi Beta Kappa key who was an expert on the evolution of mammals, died on Nov. 8 at Presbyterian-University Hospital in Pittsburgh.
He was 66 years old and lived in Great Neck, L.I.
He had gone to Pittsburgh for a liver transplant and died of liver failure, reported Queens College of the City University of New York, where he had first gone as an evening lecturer in 1959.
The college announced the death yesterday.


New Police Academy Is Unveiled


Slim Crowd Not Neutral To Devils
Devils 3, Sabres 2
HAMILTON, Ontario, Nov. 18 (AP) -- Aleksandr Semak's goal early in the second period gave the New Jersey Devils a 3-2 victory over the Buffalo Sabres tonight before the smallest neutral-site National Hockey League crowd this season.
Only 6,972 tickets were sold at Copps Coliseum, where a Toronto-Quebec game Tuesday night drew 17,026.
Anti-Sabres sentiment lingers with some Hamilton fans who believe that the team's owners lobbied against N.H.L. expansion to the city.
When a few dozen Sabres fans began chanting "Let's go, Buffalo" in the third period, they were drowned out by booing locals.


Warnings to Taylor Cited
LAWRENCE TAYLOR ignored requests by the Giants and the National Football League to sever a relationship with a man whom the State Police superintendent described as a "known associate of the Genovese crime family," according to a New Jersey State Commission of Investigation report.
Taylor told the commission in the summer of 1991 that he had been warned by BILL PARCELLS, then the coach of the Giants, to stay out of the Bench, a bar near Giants Stadium that the commission said was managed by VINCENT RAVO.


Scientists Move Up Likelihood of California Quake
Three scientific teams reported yesterday that recent California earthquakes had increased strain on critical parts of the San Andreas fault, so much so that a major quake, last seen as likely within 30 years, could strike 10 to 20 years sooner.
But they caution that their mathematical models are not sophisticated enough to predict exactly when a "big one" will strike.


Caught in the System, Kurvers Waits
Tom Kurvers could soon become the highest-paid player on the Islanders.
In the meantime, he plays for their minor league team.
When he takes the ice with Capital District today at Fredericton, New Brunswick, Kurvers will play his first minor league game in nine professional seasons.
Kurvers's agent charges that the player was demoted this week as punishment for taking the Islanders to salary arbitration.
"They are trying to create enough pressure and unhappiness in Kurvers's life to force him to reach an agreement on a contract rather than submit to salary arbitration," said the agent, Ron Simon, in a telephone interview from Minneapolis.
"This is punitive."
Don Maloney, general manager of the Islanders, said Simon's charges were "absolutely ludicrous."
"Kurvers has been through waivers twice where any other team could have him for nothing," Maloney said by telephone from Toronto, where he was attending a meeting of general managers.
"Obviously, teams don't want him. He's demanding to be a top-paid player. If you are a worker on the assembly line at Chrysler and demanding Lee Iacocca's salary, that doesn't quite work. He may come back in two weeks and play for us. And he may be down there for the rest of the season. This is not punishment. It's nothing personal. This is just business."
Although Kurvers has been on the Islanders' major league roster for most of this season, he has dressed for only six games and has no goals and four assists.
Kurvers, reached by telephone in Fredericton yesterday, said: "I'm not taking a crazy position here. We're willing to let an arbitrator decide it. I don't want a big thing coming out where I am complaining and making sour grapes.
"But it's a tough situation. This is not strictly business. I feel like there is an attempt being made to get me to settle. I don't want to say I'm being punished, but I'm in this situation because of arbitration.
"The reason I cleared waivers twice is because of salary arbitration. If Donnie thinks it is smart business for him to have a guy in the minors for the rest of the year at the salary I'll be at, that doesn't make sense. It's been a tough, unsettled year, and it's harder on my wife."
The Kurvers case is an unusual one with several major undercurrents.
It is the first big challenge by a player to Maloney, who is in his first season as a general manager.
It involves a player representative who was a spokesman during the 10-day strike last spring, although both Maloney and Simon say Kurvers's union activity has nothing to do with the demotion.
It is an example of how hockey players, with a weak system of free-agent mobility, can nevertheless increase their wages through arbitration.
Part of the strike settlement in April involved a reformed arbitration process.
The players wanted it to be speedier and wanted a stronger say in the choice of arbitrators.
But about 50 N.H.L. players are waiting for arbitration, and no cases have yet been heard.
This is because the collective bargaining agreement hasn't been signed while the league and the union settle technicalities of arbitration procedures.
Kurvers earned $285,000 last season and is being paid at that rate until the arbitration.
A 30-year-old defenseman from Minneapolis who has played with five other N.H.L. teams, Kurvers had 9 goals and 47 assists for 56 points last season, the most among Islanders defensemen and the seventh-highest point total on the team.
He is considered a power-play specialist who is at his best on the attack when the opposing team is short-handed.
His weaknesses are defensive, in stopping opposing forwards at even strength.
In arbitrations, statistics are very important.
Based on the current pay scale for defensemen with similar point totals, Kurvers will ask for approximately $800,000 in arbitration.
During contract negotiations last summer, the Islanders offered Kurvers "about $400,000," according to Simon.
They could have released him, Simon said, but chose instead to keep him and therefore risked salary arbitration.
The arbitrator, Richard Bloch, can choose either figure or choose one of his own.
Currently, the highest-paid Islander is Steve Thomas, who says he makes $755,000.
Pierre Turgeon is second; he says his salary is $750,000.
Maloney has said for the last several weeks that he has tried to trade Kurvers but that the pending arbitration scares other teams because they don't know how much they would have to pay him.
Maloney concedes that Kurvers's statistics from last season "rival some guys who have some significant contracts" and that Kurvers could end up, "hypothetically," earning between $700,000 and $900,000.
"But there is a lot more to the game than simply offensive statistics," he said.
"There's intangibles, there's defense, there's so many things that make up a complete player, a complete package."
Simon, who hasn't talked with Maloney lately, said Maloney's treatment of Kurvers "seems like a very insensitive thing to do."


Medtronic Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Economic Scene; Boris Yeltsin's Bridge Too Far?
IS Russia's dash for capitalism about to be derailed by mismanagement and a popular backlash?
With inflation pushing 30 percent a month and hostile legislators poised to sabotage the transition plan when they convene next month, many analysts think it is time for reformers to beat a tactical retreat.
"There is no escape except to work with the gradualists," concluded Padma Desai, an economist with the Harriman Institute at Columbia University.
But President Boris N. Yeltsin's Western advisers, in particular, Jeffrey Sachs, draw a starkly different conclusion.
Mr.
Sachs acknowledges that "the antibodies to change are stronger" in Russia than in Poland, where a parallel leap toward free markets is apparently succeeding.
The Harvard economist, however, puts much of the blame for Russia's wobbly start on an uncontrollable central bank, a shortage of hard currency worsened by penny-wise foreign donors and a "military industrial complex" with disproportionate influence over legislators.


Martin Segal Awarded Arts Medal of Honor
Martin E. Segal, the founder of the International Festival of the Arts and chairman emeritus of Lincoln Center, is the recipient of this year's medal of honor, given annually by the National Arts Club for significant contributions to the arts.
Mr.
Segal received the award at a ceremony last night, which was attended by those in the arts at the National Arts Club in Gramercy Park.


Valvano Returns to Broadcasting
Five months after being diagnosed with cancer, the college basketball analyst JIM VALVANO returns to ESPN tomorrow night a more overtly spiritual person who vowed to spend considerable time raising money for cancer research.
"When I stand up on Friday night at Florida State, there will be a lot of tears," he said during a conference call.
"I cry a lot now. If you thought I was emotional before, well, I might cry at a great 3-point play now."


Bonds Now 2 for 3 in M.V.P. Titles for the 90's
No one ever confused Barry Bonds with Mr.
October, but he has gained the right to be dubbed Mr.
November.
For the second time in three years, Bonds was named National League most valuable player, winning easily yesterday over Terry Pendleton of Atlanta, who edged him a year ago.


Foreign Affairs; Shoot to Feed Somalia
"If the Somali war chiefs read in the newspapers that U.S. or U.N. forces are coming to their country to blow their heads off, will they start slaughtering relief workers or start behaving?" asked a senior Bush Administration official.
Neither he nor his colleagues have any idea.
But they will soon find out.
Key Bush aides will gather in the White House tomorrow to tell the President that he should not duck the mass slaughter and starvation of Somalia's civil war and then dump the problem on Bill Clinton.
They will urge him to energize the U.N. now to provide more food, more transport and most importantly more troops with more powerful weapons and a mandate to be aggressive -- using U.S. forces for logistical support only.


Breast Cancer Research Must Have the Funds; Management Question
To the Editor:
"Medical Madness on Capitol hill" (editorial, Oct. 29) sounds to me like childish and bureaucratic footstamping.
While the National Institutes of Health is certainly a competent organization, Army (and Navy) medical research is superb.
It has produced numerous groundbreaking advances in tropical disease, infectious disease, diagnostic imagery, frozen and dried blood products and artificial blood, to name but a few.


THE TRANSITION: Recruiting; Clinton Economic Advisers Get Assignments, and Heads May Turn
Robert B. Reich, the head of President-elect Bill Clinton's economic transition team, has made assignments to a dozen advisers to help frame specific economic proposals for the new Administration, several advisers said today.
As Washington is abuzz with speculation about who will be nominated for top positions, the assignments, made at a meeting in Little Rock, Ark., on Tuesday, give some indications of who may be named to economic policy posts.


Refunding Bonds Priced by Texas
A $250 million offering of general obligation refunding bonds was priced yesterday by the Texas Public Finance Authority to yield a maximum 6.35 percent for securities due in 2020.
The offering, whose lead underwriter was Smith Barney, Harris Upham &amp; Company, will be used to refinance previously issued bonds for a supercollider project.


Bridge
When it starts to get cold in New York City, many bridge experts head south, and some go farther than Florida.
A month ago a group including Alvin Roth and Zia Mahmood, both of Manhattan, and Mark Molson of Fenton, Mich., were in Barbados playing in a sociable tournament.
The diagramed deal from the team event, with Roth sitting East and Molson West, featured some interesting defense.
Normal bidding took South to three no-trump, and the diamond nine was led and ducked around to the king.
The declarer led the spade ten and overtook with the jack, unaware that he could have made at least 10 tricks by playing the ace.


CHRONICLE
They came to pay their respects yesterday afternoon in the conference room of DC Comics to the superhero who was faster than a speeding bullet, more powerful than a locomotive, who could leap tall buildings in a single bound.
In the end, even Superman could not avert death at the hands of the monster Doomsday, after they had battled for weeks.
So he died yesterday in the arms of Lois Lane, his perennial sweetheart and, at the end, oh sob, his fiancee.
While "Superman No. 75," the comic book that contains a depiction of the final battle, was being snapped up at newsstands by grieving fans, the staff at the DC Comics offices gathered for a memorial service.


Judge's Ouster Sought in Rerun Suit
Hoping to overturn a Federal court decision that opened the way for television networks to own the lucrative rerun rights to popular prime-time programs, Hollywood movie producers and their allies demanded today that the Federal appeals judge who wrote the decision disqualify himself.
The Hollywood groups argued that the judge, Richard A. Posner of the Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit, in Chicago, had forfeited the appearance of impartiality because as a law professor in 1977 he filed a legal brief for a client, CBS Inc., attacking restrictions that barred the networks from the $5 billion business of selling reruns to local broadcast stations and cable channels.


Calendar: Fine Crafts From Around the World
An Austrian Designer
I.B.M. Gallery of Science and Art, 590 Madison Avenue at 57th Street; (212) 745-3500.


David Oliver, 30, Dies; A TV and Stage Actor
David Oliver, who played the role of Sam Gardner in the television drama "A Year in the Life," died last Thursday at his home in Los Angeles.
He was 30 years old.
Mr. Oliver's career also included performances on the stage.


CANADA WILL PAY 50's TEST VICTIMS
In a footnote to an unusual chapter of the cold war, Canada has agreed to compensate victims of psychiatric experiments carried out mainly in the 1950's and financed in part by the Central Intelligence Agency.
The experiments began after some prisoners returned from the Korean War brainwashed, and Western intelligence agencies began studies and experiments on the nature and possibility of mind control.


Cascades Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Early Nuclear Plan Weighed Radioactive Sprays
American military planners explored the idea of using radiation from nuclear bombs as an instrument of terror, along with using the explosions to inflict military damage, according to a study by two groups that seek to reduce the threat from nuclear weapons and the production of bomb fuel.
The study of nuclear arms, which was made public yesterday in Washington, quotes extensively from previously secret documents about the potential uses of radioactive mists, created by exploding bombs under water.
The Government exploded such a bomb in 1946 at Bikini Atoll in the South Pacific, throwing tons of contaminated water into the air.


Report of Government Move Pushes Up Japanese Stocks
Reports that the Government had urged big institutions to undertake a buying campaign sent share prices rocketing here on Wednesday, but analysts said the explosive rally did little to turn around the generally gloomy sentiment caused by continuing signs of weakness in the economy.
Battered by slumping industrial investment, evaporating corporate profits, a banking crisis and a political scandal that has paralyzed Parliament, the market has been steadily sliding.
It set off alarms on Tuesday when the Nikkei average of 225 issues fell below the 16,000 mark.


Surviving in Sarajevo
There is a bleakness, but also a generous spirit and an occasional smile, for a Muslim family that is coping but also thinks about fleeing.
Page A12.


Dorothy Kirsten, a Lyric Soprano, Is Dead at 82
Dorothy Kirsten, an American lyric soprano who sang leading roles at the Metropolitan Opera for 30 years and was particularly renowned for her performances of Puccini heroines, died yesterday morning at the U.C.L.A.
Medical Center in Los Angeles.
She was 82 years old and lived in Los Angeles.
She died of complications from a stroke she suffered on Nov. 5, said Peter Gravina, her longtime press representative.


Gitano Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Review/Television; On the Argentine Economic Miracle
Probably no one explains economics to the American public in simpler, more vivid half-hour television bites than Adam Smith.
But simplicity seems to have worked against Mr.
Smith in his latest effort, a two-part series that tries to explain Latin America's latest surge toward prosperity.
The answer never quite emerges from the talking heads that he has chosen to interview or from his own narrative.
Perhaps Mr.
Smith attempted too much.
Three years ago, he had traveled to Argentina to report on that nation's violent hyper-inflation.
The inflation has since disappeared, and Mr.
Smith returned recently to explain how President Carlos Saul Menem had achieved this goal.
The first show, broadcast last Thursday night, answered this question.
The second, to be shown tonight at 8 on Channel 13, should have explored who got hurt in Argentina from Mr.
Menem's solutions and why those solutions might therefore be short-lived.
Instead, Mr.
Smith wanders off into a survey of Latin economics and the program loses its edge.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Mojo Nixon Lone Star Roadhouse
Mojo Nixon got a jump on the holiday season on Monday night, literally, as he leaped up and down and plunked out "Good King Wenceslas" on guitar while his band slammed out a punk beat.
He was wearing a Santa Claus hat and shirt.


U.S. Officials Defend Data On Economy
Still smarting from election-week attacks on the integrity of Government statistics, the Commerce Department today took the highly unusual step of inviting closer scrutiny of its methods for compiling reports on gross domestic product, the broadest gauge of American economic performance.
Top officials summoned reporters from The New York Times and The Wall Street Journal to deny strenuously that there was any "cooking" of the data in the department's report on Oct. 27 -- the week before Election Day -- that the gross domestic product grew at a 2.7 percent annual rate for the third quarter.
That was well above the 1.5 percent that expert consensus had predicted.


An Anxious Israel, 2 German Visitors and a Riveting Tableau
In this country that was born in the pain of Nazi Germany's horrors, leaders of the new Germany have arrived this week, reassuring their sensitive hosts that there will not be another fire this time.
Not surprisingly, Israelis have watched the recent surge of German anti-Semitism and violence against foreigners with special attentiveness and dread.
Prominent Israelis, including Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin and the writer Amos Oz, have visited Germany in the last few months, warning German leaders that they must move swiftly to suppress right-wing racism or risk having it tumble out of control once again.
German-Israeli relations go back decades, and many German leaders have come here over the years.
But given the recent violence in Germany, it was not a case of just another ho-hum official visit when the German Foreign Minister and the military Chief of Staff made overlapping journeys this week to tell Israelis that modern Germany is not the Weimar Republic, the chaotic democracy that gave way to the Nazi takeover in 1933.
"If the impression has been created that we in Germany are blind in our right eye, then I must say that this is not true," the Foreign Minister, Klaus Kinkel, said today on his first visit to Israel since taking over his post from Hans-Dietrich Genscher.
Mr.
Kinkel was told by his Israeli counterpart, Shimon Peres, that Israeli would judge Germany by the measures it took to end "this ugly outburst" of violence.
In response, according to the Israeli Foreign Ministry, Mr.
Kinkel said that "as a German he was ashamed of the racist incidents" and that "the majority of the German people feels this way and has demonstrated against this phenomenon."
Like most official visitors, he went today to Yad Vashem, the memorial in Jerusalem to the six million Jews who died at the hands of the Nazis five decades ago.
"We owe it to the living not to forget," Mr.
Kinkel wrote in the visitors' log.
Two days earlier, the German Chief of Staff, Gen.
Klaus Nauman, made the same pilgrimage, standing at attention in front of the memorial's eternal flame and saluting the six million.
The picture of him there, in full uniform, made a strong, favorable impression on many Israelis, even as they acknowledged that General Nauman was to be congratulated for combating neo-Nazi forces within his ranks.
"We cannot care so little about the murmurs of Jewish history," the newspaper Maariv wrote in an editorial, "as to not stand still for a moment when the German Chief of Staff visits Israel as the guest of the Jewish Army and lays a wreath in the name of the German military at Yad Vashem."
"God!" the newspaper added. Some Unfinished Business
But while impressed, Israelis were not fully satisfied with everything that they heard from the Germans.
Shevah Weiss, Speaker of the Israeli Parliament and a Holocaust survivor from Poland, suggested that Germany give its police emergency powers and pass special laws to deal with the right-wing violence.
That was not necessary, Mr.
Kinkel said at a news conference.
Israeli officials also want the reunified Germany to pay reparations for Nazi war crimes that they assert they were owed by the former East Germany but that the Communist Government had refused to acknowledge.
Mr.
Kinkel, however, said that while the Bonn Government would continue to give Israel aid and to encourage German investment here, it had already fulfilled its obligations to make reparations and would not assume claims against the East Germans.
"While the statute of limitations will never apply to the Nazi Holocaust," he told the newspaper Haaretz, "it's a fact that the Federal Republic of Germany paid twice over what was agreed upon" in a 1952 accord between West Germany and Israel.
The Israeli Government agrees that West Germany met its obligations in full.


New Test to Emphasize Problem Solving
Disenchanted with multiple-choice tests, the New York City school system will introduce new citywide tests that emphasize the ability to solve problems rather than choose the right answers, starting with a mathematics examination for seventh graders in the spring.
On that test, choosing the correct answer may yield a lower score than displaying a sensible strategy for solving a particular mathematical puzzle.
Students will be asked, for example, not only to add fractions but also to figure the cost of a 60-day supply of cat food for two cats if one cat eats 3/4 of a can of food each day, the other eats half a can and cat food costs $1 for three cans.
They will be graded on a scale of 0 to 6 on their explanations, as well as their computations.


PARENT &amp; CHILD
EVEN though he was born in Boston, Ed Barsamian grew up speaking Armenian at home.
His family, bilingual immigrants, only spoke English when non-Armenian friends visited.
"If someone asked me my nationality then, I would have said I was Armenian first and American second," said Mr.
Barsamian, who owns a speciality food store in Cambridge, Mass.
He has tried to raise his two teen-age sons to use both languages, but has had only mixed success.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Salsa Meets Jazz Village Gate
The Salsa Meets Jazz shows at the Village Gate are fairly ritualized, usually starting out with some salsa, then collapsing into some lackluster jazz.
On paper the combination makes sense, pairing the great salsa orchestras with a great jazz improviser.
But in intent, jazz and salsa have parted ways, with the salsa orchestras there to provide what the audiences want and jazz musicians there to produce art in a more traditional way, with the artist the primary mover in the exchange.


Counties in New Jersey Retain Above-Average Credit Ratings
Despite the region's deep recession, the 21 counties of New Jersey retain better credit ratings and sounder fiscal policies than most American counties, according to a profile of the state released yesterday by Moody's Investors Service.
Moody's, one of the nation's largest credit-rating agencies, said roughly half of New Jersey's counties maintained its highest ratings, Aa and Aaa.
Nationally, only 18 percent of counties achieved those ratings.


NATO Agrees to Use Warships to Enforce Yugoslav Blockade
NATO agreed today to enforce a United Nations-backed naval blockade to tighten the trade embargo against Yugoslavia and ordered its military experts to work out operational details by Friday.
Meeting in Brussels two days after the United Nations Security Council voted to impose the blockade, NATO ambassadors said the alliance would coordinate its activities with the nine-nation defense bloc known as the Western European Union and with other countries willing to join the operation.


To Be Rescued, Historical Society May End Up Joining Its Savior
The board of trustees of the New York Public Library approved a plan to assist the financially troubled New-York Historical Society yesterday.
The directors of the library will consider lending the society about $1.5 million and will enter into formal discussions that could result in a merger of the two institutions.
"We don't know exactly where this will lead," said Dr.
Timothy S. Healy, the president of the library.
"The possibilities range from folding the society to merge with us to finding a white knight and not needing our help.


Berndt Is Dismissed by Temple
Temple University dropped Coach JERRY BERNDT yesterday, just before the end of his fourth year in a five-year contract.
The dismissal is effective after the game Saturday against Rutgers, Temple's president, PETER LIACOURAS, said in a statement.
Temple has lost nine straight after winning its opener. (AP)


Graves Looks for Passing Grade Against Miami
Marvin Graves smiled earlier this afternoon when someone asked if he remembered his first game against Miami.
How could he forget?
As a 19-year-old freshman, Graves had won the starting job at quarterback earlier that season.
He recalled how the Orange had left the overcast gray of Syracuse and landed in balmy, sunny Miami.
He recalled how he had fumbled on the first play from scrimmage and how the Hurricanes had scored on their first three possessions and led, 23-0, at the half.
Finally he recalled the 33-7 shellacking.


Pittsburgh Paper in Accord
The Pittsburgh Post-Gazette and the teamsters' union reached a tentative labor agreement today, putting within reach a settlement of an extremely bitter labor dispute that has halted publication of Pittsburgh's two daily newspapers for 187 days.
Management and union leaders would not release details of the contract until after the newspaper reached agreement with nine other unions whose contracts expired last year.
But both sides were optimistic that those negotiations would go relatively smoothly.


Montana Throws but Also Waits
JOE MONTANA reluctantly conceded yesterday that he would be willing to assume a backup role to San Francisco quarterback STEVE YOUNG, who replaced him as the 49ers' starter.
But right now, Coach GEORGE SEIFERT says there is no opening for Montana on the roster.
"There's nothing I can do about it at this point," said Montana of his prospect of being No. 2 when he returns.
He has been throwing daily but remains on injured reserve after elbow surgery.


RESULTS PLUS
HORSE RACING  A.P. Indy and Piggott Earn Top Honors
A.P.
Indy and the veteran English jockey Lester Piggott won top honors in London yesterday at European racing's Cartier Awards.
The Breeders' Cup Classic winner, A.P.
Indy, succeeded Arazi as North American Horse of the Year, gaining 20 points in the voting system devised by Cartier.
That was 7 more than Pleasant Tap, the horse he beat Oct. 31 to win racing's richest race at Gulfstream Park in Florida.
Piggott, 57 years old, received the Award of Merit for his overall contribution to racing in Europe. (AP) BOXING  South Korean Regains a W.B.C.
Title
Yuh Myung Woo of South Korea outpointed Hiroki Ioka of Japan in a 12-round bout yesterday to recapture the World Boxing Association junior flyweight title he lost to Ioka nearly one year ago.
Antonio Requena, a judge from Venezuela, scored the bout 119-111 for Yuh and Manuel Gonzalez of Panama had Yuh winning by 117-112.
A judge from the United States, Lou Tabat, scored it even at 114.
There were no knockdowns. (AP)
BASKETBALL  Marathon Oil Tops St. John's, 88-82
Brooke Steppe scored 22 points and Marathon Oil beat St.
John's, 88-82, last night in an exhibition game.
Todd May added 17 points for the team of former pro and collegiate players while Mark Meredith had 16.
Lamont Middleton had 23 points for the Redmen, who played without their leading returning scorer and rebounder, Shawnelle Scott, who was suspended for the game after playing in an unsanctioned summer league game.
Freshman Charles Mineland had 17 points and 10 rebounds for St.
John's, which is playing under a first-year coach, Brian Mahoney, a longtime assistant to Lou Carnesecca, who retired in April.
Marathon Oil opened the second half with a 9-0 run to take a 55-51 lead.
It took the lead for good at 54-51 on a 3-pointer by May with 17:07 to go. (AP)


Benjamin R. Raphael; Lawyer, 80
Benjamin R. Raphael, a former president of the Brooklyn Bar Association who practiced law in New York City for more than four decades, died on Friday at the Miami Heart Institute in Miami.
He was 80 years old and lived in Miami Beach.
Mr.
Raphael, a native of Brooklyn, graduated from Columbia College in 1933 and from Brooklyn Law School in 1937.
Mr.
Raphael served as president of the Brooklyn Bar Association in 1967 and 1968.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
7.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
4.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
2.93
3.06
4.62
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.12
3.14
4.49
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.33
3.36
4.55
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.37
6.44
6.96
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.50
7.53
7.89
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.45
8.48
8.90
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.41
6.45
6.88
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Strike Hits Tobacco Industry, And 13 Million Italians Suffer
In a recent rash of strikes, just about everyone here stopped work for one reason or another, and the events drew no more than a shrug and the sense that, well, in Italy, strikes are non-business as usual.
Then the employees of the state tobacco monopoly marched off their jobs, and that touched something deep in the nation's nicotine-hungry soul.


Joseph Kaliff, 80, Dies; Caricatured Celebrities
Joseph Kaliff, a caricaturist and syndicated Broadway columnist, died on Friday at the Veterans Medical Center in Manhattan.
He was 80 years old and lived in Manhattan.
Mr. Kaliff died of heart failure, said a nephew, George Hashim.


So Maybe the Dog Ate Your Invitation
SOCIAL standing won't do it.
Ancestors, other than top-of-the-line royals, don't mean a thing.
Money helps, as always, but it's no guarantee.
Achievement?
Now you're getting closer, but the competition is fierce.
Physical beauty?
Nice but not enough, unless it's an adjunct to fame or notoriety in some field.
So just how are those guest lists made up, the lists that are an open sesame to the glittering, glossy parties that titillate the gossip columnists and lure the paparazzi, the lists that validate, in their own eyes and the eyes of others, the importance of the men and women on them?


New Police Academy Is Unveiled


Hewlett-Packard reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Westvaco Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Yanks Still Smarting After Taking a Loss
Gene Michael stood outside a midtown hotel Tuesday night, eager to desert the premises and eat dinner.
It was shortly after the National League expansion draft had stolen the Yankees' starting third baseman and two of their top prospects, and the general manager was still assessing the damage.
The blank faces of other Yankee officials exhibited how disappointed they were to lose Charlie Hayes to the Colorado Rockies in the first round, and the subsequent surrendering of Class A center fielder Carl Everett to Florida and Class AAA catcher Brad Ausmus to the Rockies continued the carnage.


INSIDE
Japanese Trade Gap Widens
The U.S. trade deficit with Japan jumped sharply in September, even as the overall deficit narrowed slightly to $8.31 billion.
Page D1.
A Rare Step by Grand Jurors
Twelve grand jurors asked that the Justice Department be investigated for its handling of an environmental case at a nuclear plant.
Page A16.
New Peril for Alaska Wolves
Trying to favor moose and caribous, and thus tourism, Alaska has decided to start shooting wolves.
Page A16.
Israel Bars H.I.V.
Immigrants
Israel announced that it is barring immigrants carrying the virus that causes AIDS.
Page A3.


An Architect's City In Black and White
SOMETIMES a few rooms of black-and-white photographs can evoke a whole era.
And that is just the case at the Urban Center galleries, 457 Madison Avenue at East 51st Street, where the Municipal Art Society's "Stanford White's New York: A Celebration of the City" is on display through Dec. 4.
Family photographs, as well as pictures of most of the architect's public and private projects, offer a poignant view of what is often thought of as the gilded age of New York.
As a partner in the architectural firm of McKim, Mead &amp; White, the architect designed the Washington Square Arch at the tip of Fifth Avenue.


Public Service Enterprise Group Inc.  reports earnings for 12mos Oct 31


Essay; Eight Rounds To Go
Having inundated journalists with misinformation for more than a decade, James Baker and his amazing leakage machine are down to their last piteous squirt: that the cause of Middle East peace would best be served by appointing Baker and his "strongly-condemn-Israel" crowd asspecial envoys.
He even sounded out the Israelis to see if they would object.
Don't worry; it won't happen.
Nor will former President Jimmy Carter, the second choice of American Arabists, get the assignment.
The perfect choice for Clinton Administration Special Middle East Envoy, Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary: nobody.


For a Building in Japan, Many Visions
WITHIN four years, Nara, Japan, a city that was an imperial capital 1,300 years ago, is to have a new convention hall that will resemble a sleek black ship.
The technology-filled design by Arata Isozaki, the Japanese architect, won the grand prize in an international competition that ended in May.
Construction is scheduled to begin in 1994 and to be completed two years later.
A model of the winning design, along with those by the nine other finalists, will go on display in New York tomorrow at the Johnson Gallery of the Museum of Modern Art.
The exhibition, which will run through March 7, also includes 60 color drawings, plans and elevations.


34 Indicted in a 3-Month Sting On Theft and Insurance Fraud
Posing as brokers for stolen cars, Suffolk County authorities recovered 42 cars and a cache of weapons in an elaborate three-month sting operation in which 34 people were indicted on theft and fraud charges.
Half the suspects were charged today with illegal possession of stolen property.
The other half were charged with insurance fraud.
They were accused of selling their own cars to the operators of the sting and then reporting them stolen to collect on their insurance policies.


Clinton Should Make Gore Chief of Staff
To the Editor:
In "A Chief of Staff? Forget It" (Op-Ed, Nov. 10) Jack Valenti argues that Bill Clinton should refrain from appointing a chief of staff because of problems with previous chiefs.
His major argument is that the chief of staff becomes an unelected deputy President.
Because of this, it is likely that the person will become a poor filter for the multitude of ideas being debated in the White House.
In the process, resentment builds in the White House over the growing power of the chief of staff.


COMPANY BRIEFS
BEI HOLDINGS LTD., Atlanta, said a Dallas unit had won the RTC Mortgage Trust N-1 Series bid on 425 real estate assets totaling $360 million from the Resolution Trust Corporation.


Aldon D. Bell, History Professor, 62
Aldon D. Bell, a professor of history at the University of Washington, died Monday at his home in Seattle.
He was 62 years old.
Professor Bell died of leukemia, said a daughter, Ruth Bell.


Foote, Cone to Buy Mojo in South Pacific
Foote, Cone &amp; Belding Communications Inc. said yesterday that it had reached agreement in principle with Chiat/Day Holdings Inc., parent of Chiat/Day/Mojo, to acquire the Mojo network in Australia and New Zealand, with billings of $180 million and 220 employees.
Under the agreement, Foote, Cone will purchase Mojo's operations in Sydney, Melbourne, Brisbane and Perth, Australia, and in Auckland and Wellington, New Zealand.
Each office will operate under the Mojo name, with Graeme Wills, Mojo's chief executive, continuing to serve in that capacity.


Rangers Get a Timeout to Sort Out Problems
On Sunday morning, after the plane ride home from Quebec, the Rangers were pretty much a mess.
They had lost three straight.
The defense was struggling.
In the previous week, the captain had complained publicly and several other players had some private griping of their own.
It was just the time, it seems, for a four-day stretch without a game.
If nothing else, a little extra practice couldn't hurt.


'Nonpartisan' Is a Virtue at State Dept.
For almost 90 minutes this afternoon the State Department stopped.
Not since the first days of the Persian Gulf war were so many officials tuned into the Cable News Network, not to watch American bombs fall on Baghdad, but to hear Acting Secretary of State Lawrence S. Eagleburger announce the conclusions of a much-awaited internal investigation.


SPORTS PEOPLE: BOXING;
The world heavyweight champion, RIDDICK BOWE, has been offered $12 million to defend his title against LENNOX LEWIS of Britain in a bout next April in England.
FRANK MALONEY, Lewis's manager, said he sent the offer on Tuesday to Bowe's manager, ROCK NEWMAN.


Simms Is Throwing Again
Phil Simms, who began the season as the Giants' starting quarterback, threw a football today for the first time since he injured his passing elbow on Oct.4.
If the elbow reacts well, he may be activated for the Dec. 6 game at Giants Stadium against the Washington Redskins, although Jeff Hostetler will probably remain the starter.
Simms is still on injured reserve.
On the sideline, he threw 15 or 20 soft passes, starting at 20 yards and stretching a few to 30 yards.
Coach Ray Handley said the important thing was how Simms felt Thursday, when he is scheduled to follow the same routine.
He said Simms did not seem to have discomfort throwing.
Simms said only that he felt fine.


For Youths, 'Malcolm X' Is Reflection and Identity
Monique Callender's classroom sat hushed in the darkness of a Harlem moviehouse yesterday.
And when the credits rolled at the end of Spike Lee's latest film, "Malcolm X," the teen-ager burst into vigorous applause with 300 other students.
For Ms.
Callender, a 19-year-old high school junior on a field trip to see the epic film, "Malcolm X" sketched out a rich portrait of a man whose life has been the subject of her African-American literature class at Montclair High School in New Jersey.


New Editor for Fitness
Rona Cherry, the former editor in chief of Longevity, has been named editor in chief of Fitness.
Ms.
Cherry helped to start Longevity in 1988 and was editor in chief for more than three years.
She also served as vice president of new magazine development for General Media International, which publishes Longevity.
Ms.
Cherry has also been a reporter with The New York Times and The Wall Street Journal and an associate editor at Newsweek.
Fitness, which is published by The New York Times Company Women's Magazines, was started in 1987 as part of Family Circle's Great Ideas series.
It became a quarterly magazine in January.


Review/Cabaret; In Songs of Innocence, Sharp Satiric Points
"Corkscrews," the lighter-than-air revue that is running indefinitely at Club 53 in the New York Hilton Hotel, belongs to a vanishing genre of cabaret entertainment that flourished in the 1950's and 60's under auspices of the nightclub impresario Julius Monk.
The show, created by its three performers, Miriam Fond, Tony Lang and Arthur Siegel, satirizes big-city life in a series of short sketches and songs that gallop along at a very brisk pace.
In its 50 minutes, it compresses 33 bits, some of which are less than a minute long.


Sports of The Times Barry Bonds Checking Out Real Estate
THIS was during the National League championships in Atlanta last month.
A man got into a taxi, and the driver said he had just taken Barry Bonds out to a swanky suburb where Whitney Houston and Bobby Brown, the singers, make their home.
Bonds had not been indulging in some afternoon star-gazing, either.
He had been talking to real-estate agents.
Well, it beats spending all day at the movies, or bumping into the four walls of a hotel room.
But this was more than an afternoon diversion for Barry Bonds.
He has been investigating the real-estate market in some of America's major cities.


MIDWEEK REPORT
Week 12
Once in a blue moon, or about every four seasons or so, the American Football Conference sweeps the National Football Conference, as the A.F.C. did on Sunday for the third time in 12 years and the first since 1988.
The 4-0 A.F.C. record included only one real upset, the 5-4 Oilers over the 7-2 Vikings, which is all it will take for the A.F.C. to do it again this Sunday.
The 7-3 Vikings versus the 5-5 Browns is the only one of four interconference games in which the N.F.C. team has the better record.
The Rams' upset of the Cowboys dropped Dallas from the sole league lead to a three-way tie at 8-2, along with the Bills and the 49ers.
With five teams at 7-2, none of the top eight teams play another team in the top eight this weekend.


No Headline
I believe in fact our reputation has been tarnished.
I am sorry it happened.
But it did, and now we've got to try to clean it up.
LAWRENCE S. EAGLEBURGER, the Acting Secretary of State.  [ A24:4 ]


Baker Hughes Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Alaska to Kill Wolves To Inflate Game Herds
Trying to tip the balance of nature in favor of moose and caribous, wildlife officials have decided to start shooting wolves from airplanes over a huge portion of the Alaska wilderness.
By reducing the number of wolves that prey on big-game animals, Alaska wildlife officials hope to produce a bounty for hunters and tourists.


Longs Drug Stores reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 29


National Book Award For Gay Autobiography
Paul Monette won the National Book Award for nonfiction last night for "Becoming a Man: Half a Life Story" (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich), an autobiography about his struggle to come to terms with his homosexuality, a work he said "literally kept me alive" after discovering he had AIDS.
Cormac McCarthy won the fiction prize for "All the Pretty Horses" (Alfred A. Knopf), a novel about a young rancher who becomes cut off from the life he had known and heads off on a dangerous journey to Mexico.
Mary Oliver, the Pulitzer Prize-winning poet, won the poetry award for "New and Selected Poems" (Beacon Press), a collection that deals with questions about nature, life and death.
A Record 561 Submissions
The winners were announced last night at a ceremony and dinner at the Plaza Hotel in Manhattan and each winner receives a prize of $10,000.
The winning books were chosen from among a record 561 submissions in the three categories, said Neil Baldwin, the executive director of the National Book Foundation, which sponsors the awards.


Sears Is Hoping to Repeat Success With Cuddly Alien
ONE reason Sears, Roebuck &amp; Company decided that for a second consecutive year its crucial Christmas shopping season promotional program would center on "E.T. the Extra-Terrestrial" is the overwhelming popularity of that film, the highest-grossing in Hollywood history.
Another, more subtle, reason might be that in many ways the story that the movie tells echoes the retailing giant's recent travails.
Like the eponymous alien in "E.T." who desperately desires to return home, so does Sears.
This urge was underscored when the nation's third-largest retailer disclosed in September that it would divest itself of securities, real-estate and credit-card subsidiaries to return to concentrating on its traditional retail operations.


Garden Q. &amp; A.
Air Layering
Q. I have a skinny ti
houseplant, six feet tall.
Is it possible to cut it down and root the top? -- Mrs.
Herbert F. Lown, Kingston, N.Y.


Growing Up Under the Eyes of a Probation Officer
It only took 15 minutes for Jacqueline McDonald, a probation officer, to decide that things were going badly for Montel B., the 15-year-old under her supervision.
She saw two big bottles of wine cooler on his bedroom table.
She heard his grandmother explain his absence from school that day by saying that she lacked carfare for him -- although she admitted that she had lent the same amount that day to a woman who was known to stash guns for teen-agers in the housing project.
And as Ms.
McDonald left, she spied Montel in a new coat that she knew he could not afford except for the help of gang members who protected him in return for allegiance.


Redoubling the Efforts At Teaching Geography
Students in Allyson Geary's ninth-grade class at Central High School in Independence, Ore., watch the Los Angeles Dodgers on television at home.
But when Ms.
Geary asked them in September where Los Angeles was, most responded with blank stares.
Alarmed that her class knew more about bunts than borders, Ms.
Geary turned to the National Geographic Society for help.
That help has now arrived in the form of the 160,000 geography teaching kits that the society sent to schools earlier this month for use during National Geography Awareness Week, Nov. 15-21.


Victor Bernstein, 87, A Retired Editor, Dies
Victor H. Bernstein, a retired editor and writer who covered Nazi Germany and the Nuremberg trials, died on Tuesday at Yale-New Haven Hospital in New Haven.
He was 87 years old and lived in New Milford, Conn.
He died of heart disease, said Maurice A. Goldstein, his lawyer.


Smucker (J.M.) (N) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


New York's Finest, Embarrassed
The Suffolk County police embarrassed the New York City police last spring when they arrested six city officers on drug charges.
Why hadn't the city's famous Internal Affairs Division detected so grievous a violation of law and public trust?
A revealing report prepared by Raymond Kelly, New York's new Police Commissioner, lays out appalling mistakes and offers sound proposals for systemic reform.
But it leaves readers wondering if systemic reform will be enough.


Topics of The Times; A Star Is Born
He doesn't look like Madonna -- although, given her infinite variety, she may choose one day to look like him.
He doesn't sing like Madonna, dance like Madonna, strip like Madonna or propose to free Americans of their Puritan heritage like Madonna.
Never mind.
Socks Clinton is a star.
If he weren't, would he have figured so hugely in the nation's newspapers this week?
There he was, lured from his home by catnip and surrounded by five crouching, kneeling or prone photographers -- all of them trying hard for a really swell shot of the President-elect's daughter's cat.


Prices Below Estimates At Christie's Art Sale
The market for contemporary art is still struggling, but when the price is right, works sell.
Last night, Christie's sale of contemporary art totaled $17.7 million, well below the auction house's pre-sale estimate of $27.4 million to $34.5 million.
But the sale was 81 percent sold; of the 72 works up for sale, only 14 did not find buyers.
The figure was far higher than at Sotheby's sale on Tuesday night, where only 65 percent of the art was sold.
While Sotheby's sale had a higher total -- $21.3 million -- that figure, too, was well below the auction house's pre-sale estimate of $31.5 million to $40 million.
The most expensive work to sell last night was Jasper Johns's "0 Trough 9," from 1961, offered by Graham Gund, the Boston architect.
The work was estimated to bring $2.8 million to $3.5 million; it was sold to a telephone bidder for $2.1 million.
With its sale a night after the one at Sotheby's, Christie's had some leeway in persuading sellers to lower their reserves (the secret minimum price) at the last minute.
Of the works that sold at Christie's, more than half went for below their low estimates.


Breast Cancer Research Must Have the Funds; Projects Lack Money
To the Editor:
In "Medical Madness on Capitol Hill" (editorial, Oct. 29), you state that cancer research "is already well funded." This is both untrue and dangerously misleading.


The Government's Big Designs
FOR many people, the relationship between the Federal Government and the world of design is not clear at all.
A new exhibit, "From Mars to Main Street: America Designs, 1965-1990," opens today and explores the way the Government responds to design issues and develops design products and projects.
On view through Dec. 31, 1993, at the National Building Museum in Washington, the 7,000-square-foot show was organized by the museum and the National Endowment for the Arts Design Arts Program.
It was designed by Lee H. Skolnick Architecture and Design Partnership of New York.
Doublespace, of New York, designed the graphics that lead visitors through a maze of spaces.


Tyson Foods reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 3


Topics of The Times; Correction on Mara Letica
An item in Topics of the Times on Nov. 2 incorrectly described Mara Letica, President Bush's nominee for ambassador to the former Yugoslav state of Croatia.
The article gave two grounds for opposing her nomination.
It referred inaccurately to her father as the chief U.S. fund-raiser for Croatia's President, Franjo Tudjman.


Trump Taj Mahal reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


India's Little Airlines Battle a State Monopoly
When pilots from the state-run Indian Airlines began another job action this week, disrupting schedules and causing delays, thousands of frustrated travelers did something that had not been possible a year ago: they flew on a competing airline.
"For the first time, air travelers have a choice in India," said Abdul Wahid Nasir, chairman of East-West Airlines, a private airline that is drawing thousands of passengers a week.


Italian-American Institute Wins Round Against City University
Italian-American faculty members and their supporters won a legal round against the City University of New York yesterday when a Federal judge issued a preliminary injunction aimed at settling allegations of bias against the university.
The injunction, by Judge Constance Baker Motley of Federal District Court in Manhattan, had the effect of barring the school from making administrative changes involving the John D. Calandra Italian-American Institute, a unit largely devoted to recruiting and counseling Italian-American students.


BUSINESS DIGEST
International
The nation's trade deficit with Japan jumped sharply in September, even as the overall deficit narrowed to $8.31 billion.
This was only a modest improvement from the August deficit.  [ D1. ]
Top U.S. and European officials held another round of meetings aimed at averting a potential trade war.
But neither side expressed any willingness to change positions.  [ D2. ]


Southland Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


An Insult'
To The Home Section:
You recently printed an article on Kelly Klein, the wife of Calvin Klein.


2 Sides Ask Flexibility As Trade Talks Begin
Each side called on the other to show flexibility today as top American and European officials gathered at the White House's sumptuous guest house to begin another round of meetings aimed at averting a trade war that links humble animal feeds and costly white wines.
But neither side publicly expressed any willingness to change its positions.


Profits Fall, Hopes Rise At Hewlett
The Hewlett-Packard Company reported today that its earnings for its fourth quarter fell 46 percent.
But the company's stock surged more than $3 a share based on the company's report that its orders for the quarter were up 20 percent, to a record $4.4 billion.
The rise of the stock of the Palo Alto-based computer company was similar to the recent experience of its nearby competitor, Sun Microsystems Inc., based in Mountain View.
Sun last month reported higher revenues and lower earnings and saw its stock rise by 50 cents the next day.


Israel Bars Immigrants Who Carry the AIDS Virus
The Government has announced that Israel is barring immigrants carrying the virus that causes AIDS, setting off an outcry here from critics who say the ban is discriminatory and contradicts the Israeli law that gives all Jews the right to settle in Israel.
The dispute erupted after the Interior Ministry said last week that Israeli embassies and consulates were instructed this year to refuse immigrant visas to applicants found in mandatory medical checks to test positive for H.I.V., which causes AIDS.


Some Well-Dressed Walls of Yore
PEOPLE have decorated the walls in their homes for thousands of years, ever since prehistoric men and women first took charcoal to cave walls.
An exhibition at the Cooper-Hewitt Museum explores a small part of this long history.
"From Background to Foreground: Looking at an 18th-Century Wallpaper" begins Tuesday and continues through April 3.
"Wallpaper is one of the decorative arts, but it has often been overlooked," said Joanne Warner, head of the museum's wallpaper collection and curator of this exhibition.
"When you are in a historic house or a period room, it is the wallpaper that transforms the space."


Cracker Barrel Old Country Store Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 30


Leonard Salvato, 40, An Architect, Is Dead
Leonard Salvato, an architect credited with helping to rejuvenate the New Orleans warehouse district, died on Saturday in New Orleans.
He was 40 years old.
He died of meningitis, said his office, Salvato &amp; Company.


Colonel in Hanoi Tells Senators How 4 M.I.A.'s Died in a Battle
Documents and wartime artifacts released this week by the Vietnamese Government have allowed American investigators to determine that four soldiers listed as missing from the Vietnam War did in fact die, the chairman of a Senate investigating panel said today.
The soldiers were apparently killed in an ambush by North Vietnamese forces in July 1967 in the central province of Quang Ngai.


Jacobs Engineering Names New Chief Executive Officer
Joseph J. Jacobs, the 76-year-old founder and chairman of the Jacobs Engineering Group Inc., said today that he was turning over the chief executive reins to a successor before ill health or a crisis forced him out.
Noel G. Watson, who became president and chief operating officer of the company in 1987, will take on the additional duties of chief executive, effective Thursday.
Mr.
Jacobs will continue as chairman.


Grand Jury Seeks Inquiry on Weapons Plant Case
Twelve members of a grand jury that spent two and a half years hearing evidence of environmental crimes at the Rocky Flats nuclear weapons plant took rare public action today and requested appointment of a special prosecutor to investigate the Justice Department's handling of the case.
In a step that lawyers connected with the case said they had never heard of before, the 12 members of the 23-member grand jury signed a letter to President-elect Bill Clinton asking him to investigate the inquiry.


Home Video
New films get the hype, but occasionally there are fresh reminders of vast other worlds on tape.
One such is the annual catalogue from Movies Unlimited of Philadelphia.
The 1993 edition has more than 30,000 titles in 23 categories, including action, cult classics, documentaries, musicals, performing arts, silents and religion.
The catalogue, the largest in the country, is a barometer of demand.
One difference from the 1992 edition -- aside from an additional 5,000 titles -- is its deference to fans of old movies.
"We're going on the theory that many of them don't care about 'Terminator' but do care about Errol Flynn's 'Robin Hood,' " said Irv Slifkin, an editor of the catalogue.
For that reason, films in all categories are arranged by decade, he added.


Washington Greets Clinton With Open Arms
President-elect Bill Clinton walked into Washington's open arms today, gliding from the campaign he just won into the campaign he has just begun.
In a sneak preview of the style and symbolism likely to mark the Clinton Presidency, he moved quickly from the august confines of the White House to the storefronts of Georgia Avenue, seeking wisdom from the President and from the people.
The Presidential wisdom was offered in private.
But Mr.
Clinton later described his meeting with Mr.
Bush, which covered topics from foreign policy to health care, as "terrific."  [ Page A22. ]


Review/Television; More of David Suchet As Hercule Poirot
Part of the fun in watching drama imports from England, the kind that have become "Masterpiece Theater" staples, is realizing that the seemingly new face you're so impressed with belongs to an actor you've seen in innumerable previous productions.
England has its stars, to be sure, but the country seems overrun with positively brilliant character actors.
Some even manage to hitch their careers to a role, usually in a television series, that evolves into a special stardom of its own.
Enter David Suchet, stage veteran of the Royal Shakespeare Company, recipient of a spate of awards for his work in film and television.
He works steadily, and sometimes quite prominently.
A decade or so ago, he gave a masterly performance in the title role of the mini-series "Freud." But it's only in recent years, in still another title role, that Mr.
Suchet has, as they say, come into his own.


Police in Crown Heights: 'A Holding Approach'
When violence erupted in Crown Heights, Brooklyn, last year, the Police Department initially adopted "a kind of holding approach" that for three days failed to quell the disturbances, Police Commissioner Raymond W. Kelly said yesterday.
But at no time, he said, did the department receive orders from City Hall to show restraint in dealing with those who caused the unrest.
The Commissioner's assertion of no interference from the Dinkins administration rebuts a central claim of critics, who have accused City Hall and Mayor David N. Dinkins of telling the police not to quickly quell the violence that ultimately resulted in the killing of Yankel Rosenbaum.


After 17 Shots, Officers Find Own Colleagues Were Target
A detail of three New York City transit police officers on an anti-crime patrol had stumbled upon an all-too-common situation outside a Brooklyn subway station Tuesday evening: two shabbily dressed men, one with a drawn gun, menacing a woman.
The two men were actually police officers in plain clothes, making what was until that moment a typical arrest on the second-to-last stop of the L line.
They were searching a suspected fare beater they had chased down a staircase and cornered on the dark street below.
Shooting at Comrades
But the anti-crime patrol did not know that what they were seeing was not a crime in progress.
Two of the officers from the patrol opened fire on colleagues from their own command.
The officers fired 17 shots in a matter of moments, the Transit Authority said yesterday, striking one of the plainclothes officers three times: twice in his bulletproof vest and once in his throat.
One officer from the anti-crime detail emptied his six-shot .38-caliber revolver, and then reloaded, still not realizing he had shot at a fellow officer.


Trade Gap With Japan Is Widened
The nation's trade deficit with Japan jumped sharply in September even as the overall deficit narrowed slightly to $8.31 billion, the Commerce Department announced today.
The overall deficit showed only modest improvement from the August deficit of $8.95 billion, which was the largest in nearly two years.
The politically touchy deficit with Japan widened to $4.44 billion, the biggest this year and considerably wider than the August deficit of $3.73 billion.


Events: Antiques Expo And Christmas Fairs
Antiques on the Hudson Piers 88, 90 and 92, 12th Avenue between West 48th and 52d Streets; (201) 384-0010.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Boukman Eksperyans S.O.B.'s
On the two albums by Boukman Eksperyans, the songs are vigorous pop with an undercurrent of voodoo drumming.
But when the Haitian band performed on Saturday night at S.O.B.'s, songs expanded, tunes gave way to modal chants and the drumming moved into the foreground.
The music reclaimed its incantatory, ecstatic heart.


Market Place; Westinghouse Reported To Want Broadcast Sale
Pressed by financial troubles, the Westinghouse Electric Corporation has approached Kohlberg, Kravis, Roberts &amp; Company, the New York buyout firm, about buying its broadcasting operations, one of the conglomerate's crown jewels, Wall Street executives said yesterday.
The approach to Kohlberg, Kravis was preliminary, executives said.
Kohlberg, Kravis was said not to have indicated whether it would be interested in pursuing the talks.


Marathon Winner Made Headlines Back Home in South Africa
To the Editor:
It is unfortunate, to say the least, that your Nov. 3 sports pages assert that Willie Mtolo, men's winner of the New York City Marathon, isn't making big headlines back home.
You state: "In the white press of Johannesburg, Mtolo's feat was reported only in the sports section, not on the front page."


Gretzky Says He's Improving
Wayne Gretzky, idle this season with an upper-back injury, said yesterday that he is feeling better and might begin skating "by late in the season, maybe February."
"There's a light at the end of the tunnel," the Los Angeles Kings' superstar told The Toronto Sun.
"Two weeks ago, it wasn't there. This past week has been a big step forward."


Ross Stores reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Richard Nixon's Unjust Reward
A Federal Court in Washington adds injury to insult by ruling that Richard Nixon is entitled to payment for documents seized when he was forced from the White House, including the notorious incriminating tapes.
The insult is that Mr.
Nixon wins legal title to those documents -- records from an office whose trust he violated.
The injury is that U.S. taxpayers must pay for documents that, by any fair view of the law, they already own.


HOME IMPROVEMENT
OUT of sight is sometimes out of mind, and that may be one reason why small household repairs are often neglected.
There are other reasons, too: the unavailability and high cost of professional services, and the way it seems harder to find time for small repairs than large ones, particularly if the way to proceed is not clear.
The truth is that many small repairs are simpler, less expensive and less time-consuming than they may appear, a fact that is good news for owners of homes that are in need of them.
Following are techniques for performing some common fixes speedily and with minimum aggravation and expense.
Loose Hinges
Loosened cabinet and doorway hinge screws, caused by enlarged holes, are often easily tightened after removing the screws and packing the holes with steel wool.
Tamp the material firmly with a toothpick or with the head of a small nail, and replace the screws.


Cuomo Plans Bills On Campaign Laws
Complaining that legislation enacted in New York State last spring did not go far enough, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo said yesterday that he would introduce a new package of bills aimed at revamping the state's election laws and reorganizing its lower court system.
Last year, the Legislature passed and the Governor signed into law a bill setting new campaign contribution limits and making it easier to get on the ballot and register to vote.
But watchdog groups immediately denounced the measure as too watered-down to be effective, and the Governor himself -- who had originally pledged to veto anything he considered too weak -- said he was dissatisfied with it despite his decision to sign it.


Common Folk, Too, Can Have Mattress Trouble
ONCE upon a time there was a princess who slept on a pea.
Though there were 20 mattresses and 20 featherbeds on top of it, the pea made her black and blue.
But she had it easy; she never had to go mattress shopping.
Turn the page to the present.
The place is New York City.
A woman who is not a princess and her husband, who is not a prince, find themselves engaged in a post-pubescent rite of passage.
They have finally shucked the platform bed of their youth and, to celebrate, decide to treat themselves to a new mattress.


Perkin-Elmer Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY SHOCK AND CAUTION AFTER A SHOOTING
A transit police detail, mistakenly convinced they were confronting a pair of armed robbers, opened fire on plainclothes colleagues outside a subway station in Canarsie, Brooklyn, on Tuesday, leaving one officer seriously wounded.
In the wake of the incident, many plainclothes operations were suspended, and questions arose about whether the controversial new 9-millimeter Glock semiautomatic pistol the transit police are phasing in could itself have played a role in touching off the shooting.
A1.
WHO ASKED THE QUESTION?
A bit of revisionist music history was made in a courtroom in lower Manhattan, with a ruling on the source of the lyrics of a simple, tender 1955 song: "Why Do Fools Fall in Love?" And now, a cab driver from Queens and an unemployed Washington Heights resident -- former members of Frankie Lymon and the Teen-Agers -- stand to collect millions of dollars from those who profited from the song.
A1.
ON FIRST SEEING 'MALCOLM X'
The film "Malcolm X" has opened, and the debates it has ignited since its director, Spike Lee, began work on it were evident in the range of reactions of students who spilled out of a Harlem theater after viewing it.
B4.
A, B, C OR D?
NONE OF THE ABOVE
Disenchanted with multiple-choice tests, New York City schools will introduce new tests that emphasize the ability to solve problems rather than to choose the right answers.
B3.
REGION FEDERAL INQUIRY ON BANK VOTES
Federal investigators have questioned at least 18 present and former state lawmakers and searched the home and office of Connecticut's Republican Party chairman as part of an inquiry into a series of 1989 votes about allowing out-of-state banks to operate within the state.
The investigation was made raucously public at a State Capitol news conference this afternoon by the Republican chairman.
A1.
A bank merger's tough path.
B6.
WOMAN DIED IN CRASH, OFFICIALS SAY
A Hillside, N.J., woman whose body was found in her car five days after she disappeared died instantly from injuries suffered when the vehicle plunged into a ravine, officials said.
Her disappearance gained attention because of fears that she might have been a carjacking victim.
B5.
BRIDGEPORT LIKELY TO TAKE ITS CHANCES
A second major casino operator, Harrah's Casino Hotels, made a presentation to business and political leaders in Bridgeport, Conn., making it likely that casinos will compete to open in this depressed industrial city if Connecticut legalizes casino gambling.
B7.
PRISONER WITH AIDS APPEALS BITE CASE
A prisoner who has AIDS asked an appeals court in Newark to overturn his 25-year sentence for attempted murder for biting a prison guard, saying that he had been unfairly treated because of fears about the disease.
B7.
STOLEN-CAR STING IN SUFFOLK
Posing as brokers for stolen cars, Suffolk County authorities recovered 42 cars and a cache of weapons in an elaborate three-month sting operation, and 34 people have been indicted on theft and fraud charges.
B7.
Chronicle B22


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Saturday about the credit markets misstated the change in the yield on the 30-year Treasury bond.
On Thursday, a new 7.625 percent bond due in November 2022 was auctioned by the Treasury.
In trading on Friday, the price of the new 30-year bond fell 5/32 point.
The yield on this issue, however, remained at 7.57 percent, unchanged from pre-auction trading on Thursday.
The yield on the old 7.25 percent 30-year bond due in August 2002 was 7.59 percent.


Intermark Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Former Aide to Milken Avoids Prison Term
In a case in which Michael R. Milken gave his account of wrongdoing at Drexel Burnham Lambert during its heyday, a Federal district judge ruled in Manhattan yesterday that a former protege of Mr.
Milken would not go to prison for paying a kickback to a Drexel customer.
Judge Louis L. Stanton gave Alan E. Rosenthal a one-year suspended sentence, fined him $250,000, ordered him to perform 300 hours of community service and placed him on probation for three years.
For his conviction on a single felony charge, Mr.
Rosenthal could have been sent to prison for up to three years.


Hong Kong Gets a Taste of Radical Chic
WHEN Polam Lau, the owner of Le Cadre, a tiny and spare home furnishings shop in Hong Kong, arranges an opening for a one-week show, he sends out 500 invitations.
At least 250 people, the design cognoscenti of Hong Kong, crowd into the white and glossy shop at 4B Sunning Road in the Causeway Bay section.


A Bank Merger's Tough Path
In the early 1980's, banks in Connecticut and other New England states were eager to merge when it suited their purposes, but just as eager to protect themselves and their local markets from competition with their southern neighbors, the large New York City banks.
The solution was a "regional compact" under which the states, including Connecticut, agreed to allow mergers among banks in the region, but not with banks from New York or other states out of the region.


No Sweat
To The Home Section:
I was amused by Alex Witchel's article  [ "Pool-Hopping With Kelly Klein: Reflecting a Lovely World," Oct. 22 ] .
Those of us who admire Mrs.
Klein know perfectly well that she would never "sweat" sitting in direct sunlight wearing a cashmere sweater.
At most, she may perspire.
ROSS MOLHO Cleveland Heights, Ohio


BRIEFS
Debt  *
Airborne Freight Corp., Seattle, filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission for $200 million of debt securities through Goldman, Sachs &amp; Co.
*
Federal National Mortgage Association offered $200 million of 5.40 percent medium-term noncallable notes due in 1995 at par through Lehman Brothers.


Atlanta vs. Augusta on Golf Issue
The International Olympic Committee will not vote until next June at the earliest on whether to hold a golf competition at the Atlanta Summer Games in 1996, but the issue has already divided loyalties in Georgia.
On Monday, the Atlanta City Council unanimously passed a nonbinding resolution that urged the I.O.C. not to stage the competition at the Augusta National Golf Course because the club has only one black member and no female members.
Yesterday, State Sen.
CHARLES WALKER, Democrat of Augusta, responded by telling Atlanta to mind its own business, but not without a strong political jab.


Jets Say Secondary Deserves Limelight
No secondary in the league this season has faced a group of quarterbacks stronger than the last four the Jets' secondary has just gone through.
Jets cornerback Mike Brim thinks that because the unit wasn't strafed into oblivion, people should take notice.


Hartford Legislators Focus of U.S. Inquiry Over Banking Votes
Federal investigators have questioned at least 18 present and former Republican state lawmakers and searched the home and office of the state's Republican Party chairman in an inquiry into a series of 1989 votes about allowing out-of-state banks to operate in Connecticut.
The United States Attorney for Connecticut, Albert S. Dabrowski, declined to comment today on the searches, which were carried out on Tuesday.
He also refused to identify specific targets of the investigation, which was made raucously public at a State Capitol news conference this afternoon by the Republican chairman, Richard Foley Jr.


Goetz Will Join L.P.G.A. Tour
VICKI GOETZ, the United States Amateur and N.C.A.A. women's golf champion, said yesterday she would join the Ladies Professional Golf Association tour next summer.
Goetz, 20 years old, a sophomore at the University of Georgia, will finish her amateur career with the N.C.A.A. tournament in May at the Georgia course. (AP)


Trade by Mets Puts Reed Back Where He Started
The Mets, turning the kind of management double play that is all the rage in baseball, yesterday added to their bench power while slashing their payroll with the reacquisition of outfielder Darren Reed.
Reed, whom the Mets had traded to the Expos in the spring of 1991, was obtained from the Twins for minor league outfielder Patrick Howell.


Dockers Footwear To Foote, Cone
Johnston &amp; Murphy of Nashville said yesterday that it had moved its Dockers Footwear account, with billings estimated at $4 million, to Foote, Cone &amp; Belding in San Francisco from Griffin Bacal in New York.
Foote, Cone, which already handles the Dockers apparel account, was awarded the new casual-shoe line's account without a review.
Johnston &amp; Murphy licenses the Dockers name from Levi Strauss &amp; Company, the Dockers apparel manufacturer, which has been a Foote, Cone client since 1930.


American Woodmark reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


It's Time to Adjust Dial On the Knicks' Lineup
It is early, but not too early for the Knicks to be frustrated and concerned.
Seven games into the season, the Knicks have failed to reach 100 points five times.
They have averaged 95.3 points, the second-lowest scoring average in the National Basketball Association behind the Detroit Pistons (94.5).


THE TRANSITION: Reconciliation; Bush and Clinton Proclaim End to the Election's Rancor
President Bush and his successor, President-elect Bill Clinton, today declared a peaceful end to a rancorous campaign year, smiling, shaking hands and chatting about world and domestic affairs at the White House.
Sweeping noisily into Washington for the first time since the election, Mr.
Clinton moved swiftly from the grandeur of the White House to the proletarian bustle of Georgia Avenue, from cocktails with a Washington interest group to dinner with the Washington elite.


Populist Clinton Begins the Shift to President Clinton
President-elect Bill Clinton set out today on the politically perilous journey from outsider to insider.
The last Democratic President, Jimmy Carter, another Southern Governor who had spent little time in Washington, never did fully manage the transformation.
He has regained the nation's admiration, as an outsider once more, only after a painful defeat.
The example is not lost on the Clinton strategists.


Review/City Ballet; New Faces, More 'Nutcrackers'
The more things change the more they are not the same, as the French don't say.
It could have been just another opening of the New York City Ballet, but Tuesday night's gala benefit with its Russian theme ushered in a fall-winter season that includes some new wrinkles: there will be unfamiliar faces, especially among the men, and more "Nutcrackers."
Without question the newsworthy debut at the New York State Theater was by Nikolaj Hubbe, who joined the company in Saratoga, N.Y., in July.
Anyone who saw this 25-year-old former principal of the Royal Danish Ballet at its springtime Bournonville Festival in Copenhagen, or during the Danish company's tours, will not be surprised at his blazing technique or dramatic temperament.


2d Casino Operator Woos Bridgeport in Gaming Bid
A second major casino operator, Harrah's Casino Hotels, made a presentation to Bridgeport business and political leaders today, making it likely that casinos will compete to open in this depressed industrial city if Connecticut legalizes casino gambling.
While Harrah's has not selected a site or sketched a plan, it said it wanted to invest $300 million in a 100,000-square-foot casino, a 1,000-room hotel, and restaurant and entertainment areas built around replicas of landmarks like the Parthenon, the Eiffel Tower, a Mayan pyramid and a Chinese temple.


Tiles That Dazzle
To The Home Section:
As the president of the Friends of Terra Cotta and a member of Red Tide, a masters swim team in New York, I enjoyed Alex Witchel's Oct. 22 article on Kelly Klein.


Books of The Times; Being Beautiful, Being Practical
Looking Around A Journey Through Architecture By Witold Rybczynski Illustrated. 301 pages.
Viking Penguin. $22.
The fun and stimulation of reading Witold Rybczynski is that he sees objects in the framework of time.
For example, in "Good Housekeeping," one of the early essays in his new book, "Looking Around: A Journey Through Architecture," he notes the growing luxuriousness of bathrooms and kitchens in contemporary houses.


Here's Who First Asked Rock's Big Question
It was 1955, there was a revolution on the radio, and five kids from Washington Heights signed up as foot soldiers.
Just after the birth of rock-and-roll, they had their moment.
That moment was a simple, tender song called "Why Do Fools Fall in Love?"; the group was Frankie Lymon and the Teen-Agers.
For nearly 40 years -- as the song was recorded and rerecorded into the pop music pantheon -- the boy with the sweet soprano and that first blockbuster hit were joined in rock 'n' roll immortality.


Fed Chief Links Tight Credit to Slowdown
Alan Greenspan, chairman of the Federal Reserve, said yesterday that a strong economic recovery remained elusive as long as banks were reluctant to lend and businesses were reluctant to borrow.
He said that banks appeared to be making credit somewhat more available but that reducing bank regulations could encourage more lending.


Under Siege: A Muslim Family Survives, With Fear and Grace, in Sarajevo
It is cold now at the home of Amra and Sakir Dzirlo, bitterly so when the winter wind beats against the plastic sheeting that has replaced window glass broken by exploding shells.
But the chill that pervades 27 Marshal Tito Street is deeper than the physical hardships of the Sarajevo siege.
As winter sets in, there is a bleakness of mood that pervades the old apartment, something that transcends the need to burn old furniture for heating and the dwindling food reserves that have cut the diet for the family of six to the meanest levels.


Anne Wilder Memorial
A memorial service for Anne G. Wilder, the chairwoman of Playwrights Horizons, is to be held tomorrow at 4 P.M. at the Playwrights Horizons Mainstage Theater, 416 West 42d Street, Manhattan.
Wendy Wasserstein, the playwright, and Andre Bishop, a former artistic director of the company, are to be among the speakers.
Mrs.
Wilder died on Sept. 26 at the age of 63.
Information: (212) 564-1235.


Executives
ANIMAGIC ENTERTAINMENT GROUP, New York, appointed John F. Yeomans Jr. executive vice president and corporate finance director.
CHASE PHARMACEUTICAL CO., Newark, named Dr.
Carey Bottom senior vice president for quality assurance and scientific affairs and chief scientific officer.


RETRIAL NEAR END IN CONTRA AFFAIR
The second trial of Clair E. George, a former top official of the Central Intelligence Agency charged with lying about the Iran-contra affair, is lurching to an end, drained of most of its drama and suspense.
The trial has proceeded largely in obscurity on the sixth floor of the Federal courthouse here.
That is in sharp contrast to Mr.
George's first trial, which ended last August in a mistrial after the jurors said they were deadlocked.
That trial drew such a crowd each day that United States marshals had to set up lines and limit access.


ATP Tour Considers Expanded Drug Tests
The ATP Tour is considering the possibility of expanding its drug-testing program to include testing players outside of competition for the first time, according to Mark Miles, the tour's chief executive officer.
"I think a pretty good case can be made for it," Miles said today during the second day of the year-end ATP World Championship.
"The technical side of steroid use is always evolving, and you have to look at ways to stay ahead of it. This is not because I believe we have a problem in tennis. I think our sport's clean. I just want there to be absolutely no doubt in the public's mind that tennis is ahead of every other sport in this regard."


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-13 NATO BACKS YUGOSLAV BLOCKADE NATO agreed to enforce a United Nations-backed naval blockade to tighten the trade embargo against Yugoslavia and ordered its military experts to work out operational details by Friday.
A1 U.S.
PRESSES FOR SERB'S OUSTER Having failed to budge President Slobodan Milosevic from his position as Serbia's strongman with economic and political sanctions, the United States is now trying to increase pressure for his ouster by supporting Serbian opposition to him, especially on Yugoslav television.
A11


No Headline
This town on Lake Michigan is gray and barren in late fall.
Jack Provencal, who keeps his small office warm against the cold outside, tries to talk about his son, shot dead last month by a stranger clumsy with a gun.
His words are slow, his deadened eyes and cracking voice chilling the room.
"In my mind, this was a total loss and a complete waste," Mr.
Provencal said quietly.
A childhood picture of his son, Adam, hangs on the wall.


People
*
Philip Palazzo Jr., executive vice president and chief financial officer at Ammirati &amp; Puris, New York, was named to the additional new position of general manager. *
Ian McGregor was named to the new position of executive vice president and managing director at Lintas Campbell-Ewald, Los Angeles.
He was previously chairman and chief executive at Lintas South Africa, Sandown, South Africa.


Forgetful Capriati Recalls How to Win
Goofy, giggly and forgetful, Jennifer Capriati was back in regulation teen-aged form last night: first she thrashed Helena Sukova, then she laughed about the funny thing that happened to her on the way to the Virginia Slims Championships at Madison Square Garden.
Because of self-induced technical difficulties, Capriati's 7-6 (7-3), 6-1 victory almost didn't happen.
You can't strike a tennis ball, she later explained, if you can't see it.


Two Lebanese Are Killed in Raid on Israelis
Two Lebanese guerrillas were killed and an Israeli soldier was wounded in renewed violence in southern Lebanon today, security officials said.
Israeli gunners retaliated by bombarding Lebanese targets, according to the officials.
The Israel radio said Israeli artillery shelled Party of God positions in southern Lebanon after guerrillas attacked an Israeli outpost in the security zone Israeli has designated close to the Lebanese market town of Nabatiye.
The radio did not mention any casualties.


Dimensional Medicine reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


2 Killings Tied to Feud Over Loot
At first, the lethal gunfire had all the earmarks of another battle between two factions in the Mafia's Colombo crime family.
A 50-round fusillade fired by a masked gunman from a hand machine gun killed two men and wounded three people Tuesday night in a social club in Red Hook, Brooklyn, long a stronghold of the Colombo family.
But authorities said yesterday that the attack apparently stemmed from a dispute over a holdup between low-level associates in another organized-crime group, the Gambino family.


Dr. Julian Rachele, 80, Penicillin Researcher
Prof.
Julian Rachele, who helped in the research that led to the development of penicillin, died on Monday at New York Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 80 years old and lived in Queens.
He died of heart failure, said his wife, Anne.


If Time Is Money, These Hands Are Full
THE exhibit began with five new clocks by designers like Martin Szekelycq and Bonetti &amp; Garoustecq and commissioned by Hour Lavigne, a French company.
It then grew to include 50 rare clocks.
"Beyond Time" opens tomorrownov 20 at Cymann cqInternationalCymann International, a modern furniture showroom, at 305 East 63d Street.
The showexhibit, which continues through Dec. 4, is open to the public.
Ten percent of the sales price will be donated to DIFFA (Design Industries Foundation for AIDS).


Tax-Exempt Yields Off a Bit While Taxables Are Flat
Yields offered by tax-exempt money market funds moved slightly lower in the latest week, while taxable funds were unchanged, according to IBC/Donoghue's Money Fund Report, which surveys more than 850 funds.
Tax-exempt yields declined for the second consecutive week, and the assets of tax-exempt funds declined by $449 million, to a total of $97.5 billion.
The average number of days left to maturity of securities was down a day, to 63.


Tallaght Journal; Ireland's New Job Seekers: Can You Spare a Vote?
In his 46 years, Michael Keating has been a high-school English teacher, Lord Mayor of Dublin, Member of Parliament, Minister for Youth and Sport, novelist and, most recently, a county councillor for this suburban district on Dublin's southwest edge.
Now he is running for Parliament again in an area that reflects many of Ireland's problems as it approaches a national election on Nov. 25.


Transcripts Show Confusion in 1989 Oil Spill
Newly released transcripts of phone conversations in the hours after the 1989 Exxon Valdez oil spill paint a picture of disarray and confusion as oil industry officials struggled frantically to grapple with the nation's worst environmental disaster.
The transcripts, prepared by representative of the hundreds of plaintiffs who are seeking billions of dollars in damages in civil suits filed against the Exxon Corporation and the Alyeska Pipeline Service Company from tapes made at Alyeska's command post in Anchorage, provide some of the clearest evidence to date that the industry was unprepared to deal with a spill of that magnitude.


Clinton Should Make Gore Chief of Staff; Willkie Remembered
To the Editor:
In "A Quiz for Candidates" (Op-Ed, Nov. 2), a passage from a Muriel Rukeyser book based on the life of the 1940 Republican Presidential candidate, Wendell Willkie, the name "Willkie" was misspelled.


Clinton Should Make Gore Chief of Staff; Pardon for Weinberger
To the Editor:
"A Bush Pardon Now: Unforgivable" (editorial, Nov. 12) argues against President Bush's pardoning former Secretary of Defense Caspar Weinberger.
I have known Mr.
Weinberger for many years, and while I write in support of him as a friend, I believe that he should be pardoned for other reasons.


An Insult'
To The Home Section:
You recently printed an article on Kelly Klein, the wife of Calvin Klein.


COMPANY NEWS: Touring the Federal Abyss; A Plan to Cut the Deficit For a Minute or So
As the owner of Special Expeditions Inc. of New York, Sven-Olof Lindblad has sent his clients out to track African wildlife, navigate the Amazon and dodge Arctic icebergs.
Now he plans to enlist them in the ultimate adventure: bridging the Federal deficit.
For each person who signs up between now and the end of the year to travel by next April, Mr.
Lindblad will donate $500 to reducing the deficit, up to a total of $500,000.


East Europe Police Join to Fight Smuggling
With organized crime gangs smuggling drugs, cars and weapons across the newly porous borders of the former Soviet empire, senior police officials from Poland, Ukraine, Lithuania, Latvia, Estonia, Russia and Belarus agreed this week to forge closer links.
The police officials acknowledged at a news conference today that they lacked many of the essential tools for combating crime across borders.
But they said that within the next year, their countries would negotiate extradition treaties, set up computerized listings of stolen cars and even begin joint operations.


Dorothy W. Bush, Mother of President, Dies at 91
Dorothy Walker Bush, the mother of President Bush, died shortly after 5 P.M. yesterday at the family's house in Greenwich, Conn., after suffering a stroke.
She was 91 years old.
Mrs.
Bush died barely five hours after President Bush returned to Washington from Greenwich, where he had flown early today with his daughter, Dorothy Koch, to be at his mother's bedside.


THE TRANSITION: Political Notebook; Mrs. Bush Gives Mrs. Clinton a Tour, and Some First Advice
One has been described as a tough political insider who is fiercely protective of her husband's interests; the other has gained a reputation as a warm friend and devoted mother.
Both descriptions fit Hillary Clinton and both fit Barbara Bush.
Today, the two women met at 1600 Pennsylvania Avenue to search for other common ground.





Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about an agreement by Canada to compensate victims of psychiatric experiments misstated the year of the death of Dr.
D.
Ewen Cameron, a psychiatrist at McGill University in Montreal.
He died in 1967, not 1977.


Review/Art; At the Armory, Abundance Without Great Peaks
Sometimes eclectic is just another word for nervous.
At least that's how it looks at the seventh annual "Modernism" show at the Park Avenue Armory, where a predominance of cluttered, often scattershot displays suggests that dealers are anxiously trying to appeal to a wide range of tastes.
The show, which has brought 68 dealers together through Sunday, contains its usual dizzying, stimulating array of furniture, design, decorative arts and even art (more art than usual, in fact).
It is, as always, a wonderful place to look, to learn and, from the dealers' perspective, to buy.
But this year's show, officially titled "Modernism: A Century of Style and Design," has gone more than a little fuzzy around the edges.
It might best be described as a show in transition.


2 Rival Irish Groups Vie for Parade Permit
Two Irish groups -- one favoring the inclusion of a gay and lesbian organization, the other maintaining its traditional opposition -- are competing for the permit to run next year's St.
Patrick's Day Parade.
To be granted the permit from the New York City Police Department, the traditional group, the Manhattan chapter of the Ancient Order of Hibernians, would have to successfully appeal a city Human Rights Commission order that it include the Irish Lesbian and Gay Organization in the March 17 parade up Fifth Avenue.
It would also have to get approval from the national board of the Hibernians, which, because of the recurring controversy over the gay group, passed an amendment to its constitution in July prohibiting its chapters from running parades.


'Tobacco' Its Middle Name, Law Firm Thrives, for Now
In early November, eight years after she died of lung cancer, Rose Cipollone joined John Ross, Mildred Peters, Peter Ierardi and a number of others on a lengthy list of losers in lawsuits against tobacco companies.
They or their survivors took the cigarette companies to court, only to be vanquished once they got there by the law firm of Shook, Hardy &amp; Bacon.
Over the last 30 years, ever since it beat back a suit by Mr.
Ross, a Missouri man who lost his larynx to cancer, the law firm has defended America's cigarette manufacturers in hundreds of liability claims brought by former smokers or their families.
The industry has yet to pay out a dime in damages, settlements or court costs, and much of the credit goes to Shook, Hardy.
An Inextricable Link
But as impressive as the Kansas City firm's durability is its doggedness and scientific sophistication.
Shook, Hardy defeated Mr.
Ierardi, for instance, by showing not only that he failed to inhale the parts-per-billion of impurities shown by studies to be harmful, but that the military post-exchange where he said he bought Kents in the 1950's did not start selling them until two years after his discharge from the service.


Events
FRIDAY  Music
METROPOLITAN OPERA, Rossini's "Semiramide," 7:30.
NEW YORK PHILHARMONIC, Kurt Sanderling, conductor; Peter Roesel, pianist, Avery Fisher Hall, 8.


Quest for Plant Is Discontinued
The United States Coast Guard yesterday called off its search for Mike Plant, the prominent solo sailor, noting that an aerial survey of more than 200,000 square miles in the Atlantic Ocean over six days had turned up no signs of him.
Plant, who left New York Harbor on Oct. 16 on a voyage to France, relayed a radio message to friends Oct. 21 that the electronic system was down on his 60-foot racing yacht, Coyote.
He has not been heard from directly since.
The Coast Guard began an airplane search for Plant last Friday after learning he had set off an emergency radio beacon Oct. 27.


STRATEGY LEAKED IN BEATING CASE
A Justice Department memorandum outlining the Government's strategy for prosecuting the police officers accused of beating Rodney G. King has fallen into the hands of defense lawyers, Justice Department officials said tonight.
The leak was first described in a transcript released tonight of a report scheduled for broadcast on Friday on the National Public Radio program "Morning Edition." The transcript quoted a former Justice Department official, Abbey Lowell, as saying whoever provided the memorandum wanted "to make sure the defense has every opportunity to take advantage of the weaknesses of the Government's case."


Surgery for Weinbrecht
DONNA WEINBRECHT, the gold-medal moguls skier at the 1992 Olympics in Albertville, France, faces surgery on Monday to repair a torn anterior cruciate ligament in her right knee and a fracture of her right tibia.
Weinbrecht, 27 years old, from West Milford, N.J., suffered the injury earlier this week while practicing a new move in Breckenridge, Colo.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
5.5-6.00
5.5-6.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
2.97
2.99
2.90
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.10
3.09
3.19
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.26
3.23
3.38
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.38
5.27
6.45
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.33
6.24
7.52
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.39
7.30
8.50
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.66
5.61
6.40
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Elliott B. Nixon; Lawyer, 71
Elliott B. Nixon, an expert in maritime law, died on Nov. 3 at St.
Vincent's Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 71 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died after a brief illness, said a spokesman for his law firm, Burlingham Underwood.


Man in the News; An Inspector With No Shortage of Enemies: Sherman Maxwell Funk
Sherman Maxwell Funk is no stranger to trouble.
The man who was asked to investigate efforts by State Department officials to dig up dirt on Bill Clinton during the Presidential campaign is, after all, that same bureaucrat who incurred the wrath of the powerful pro-Israeli lobby this spring by producing a report asserting that Israel had violated export restrictions on American military technology.


U.S. Raids Computer Pornography at Cornell
F.B.I. agents raided the dormitory room of a Cornell University sophomore Wednesday afternoon in an investigation into the distribution of child pornography through an international computer network.
Authorities said today that they were investigating whether the student used graphics imaging technology to copy pornographic pictures of children onto computer files and send the images through the Netnews network, described as a major computer bulletin board that is used internationally.
Theoretically, they said, people with the right equipment could then send copies of the pornographic files from the bulletin board to their personal computers.


A Challenge to New York's Top Court
New York's highest court often operates quietly, turning out a high volume of significant but uncontroversial decisions.
Suddenly the six judges of the Court of Appeals confront one of their thorniest issues in years.
A legal principle that ordinarily would be significant only to lawyers threatens to wipe out hundreds of trials -- for no good reason.
The principle itself is undoubtedly sound: defendants, no less than their lawyers, have a right to be present when the judge is asking prospective jurors about potential bias and other matters bearing on their fitness to serve.


Tough Political Insider Meets Warm Friend and Devoted Mother


Court Picks Tallahassee for Retrial of Miami Officer
In a case that has been shuttled among three cities, the Florida Supreme Court ordered today that a Miami police officer be retried in Tallahassee in the deaths of two black men that led to several days of racial riots here.
The ruling, a unanimous decision of the state's highest court, in effect endorsed a Miami judge's determination that the officer, William Lozano, whose 1989 conviction was overturned last year, be retried in the capital "to insure blacks serve on the jury." The justices found that a state judge had acted improperly in refusing to allow the retrial to take place in Tallahassee.


Art in Review
A.
R.
Penck 'Drawings, a Retrospective'  David Nolan Gallery 560 Broadway, at Prince Street SoHo Through tomorrow
The word retrospective seems misused in this context, overlarge for this modest, if very good, survey of 34 drawings by the German Neo-Expressionist painter A. R. Penck.
Dating from 1977 to 1991, the works on view confirm that Mr.
Penck is perhaps more at ease, and his methods more varied, on paper than on canvas.
American viewers will be especially interested in a series of dark, emphatic pencil drawings from 1977 whose layered cartoonish images depart from the artist's characteristic hieroglyphs and share qualities with both Mr.
Penck's fellow countryman Jorg Immendorf and the American painter David Salle.
Especially beautiful are a pair of small pink gouaches from the late 1980's in which his stick figures seem to float in a pink mist; but there is little here that is not of interest.


Review/Film; Jaded Cop, Raped Nun: Bad Indeed
When Abel Ferrara calls something bad, better believe it: he means business.
Mr.
Ferrara, whose gleefully down-and-dirty films include "Fear City" and "King of New York," has used his latest, "Bad Lieutenant," as a form of personal one-upmanship.
He has come up with his own brand of supersleaze, in a film that would seem outrageously, unforgivably lurid if it were not also somehow perfectly sincere.
In inventing the corrupt police officer of the title, this director is not thinking of the sort who fixes parking tickets.
He's imagining a crack addict who'll yell "Police business!" to empty a tenement hallway so he can make his drug buy.
Mr.
Ferrara is inventing a law officer who, confronted with the sight of a robbery in progress, runs to a pay phone to call his bookie with a bet on a Mets game.


Amid All the Smoke, the Ethics Are Indistinct
This is about smoke and coke, proud sponsors of American sport.
Smoke, the legal product, is the cloud on which women's tennis floats.
A premier event, the $3 million Virginia Slims Championships, is in town this week.
This has always seemed to be the most cynical promotion in professional sports, one whose slogan should really be "You've come a
lung
way, baby."


Miscellany
*
DDB Needham Worldwide, Toronto, agreed in principle to buy Anderson Advertising, Toronto and Montreal.
Anderson, which will remain autonomous, brings in Canadian account billings estimated at $30 million (United States). *
Three Syracuse agencies -- Latorra Advertising; Paul, John &amp; Lee, and Signet Advertising -- merged to form Latorra, Paul &amp; McCann, with billings estimated at $14.6 million.


RESULTS PLUS
HOCKEY  North Stars Prevail  Goalie Jon Casey came within 7 minutes 51 seconds of his third shutout of the season as the Minnesota North Stars defeated the Tampa Bay Lightning by 4-1 last night in Tampa, Fla.
Brian Bradley's unassisted goal foiled Casey's bid for the 12th shutout of his career.
Bradley directed the puck through Casey's legs while falling down to extend his consecutive-point streak to 10 games.
Casey finished with 38 saves.
Minnesota improved to 10-8-2 over all and improved its Norris Division-best road record to 5-5. (AP) Jets 5, Red Wings 3: Rob Murray scored his first goal in three seasons to break a third-period tie and give Winnipeg the victory over the Red Wings in Detroit.
Murray's last goal came for Washington in the 1989-90 season when he was playing for Washington, coached by the current Red Wings coach, Bryan Murray, and later by his brother, Terry. (AP) Nordiques 4, Canadiens 3: Joe Sakic scored a goal and set up two more, recording his 400th career point, as Quebec rallied to defeat Montreal in Quebec.
The Nordiques' Mats Sundin set a club record with his second-period assist.
He has points in 20 consecutive games, eclipsing the team record of 19 set in 1983-84 by Peter Stastny. (AP) Flames 4, Canucks 3: Joe Nieuwendyk and Theoren Fleury scored within a 46-second span of the second period, leading Calgary to the victory over visiting Vancouver.
Nieuwendyk scored at 3:06 and Fleury clicked moments later to increase Calgary's lead to 3-0 and send the Flames to their fourth straight home-ice victory. (AP) SOCCER  Spain Stops U.S.
Francisco Ledesma scored a pair of second-half goals as Spain rallied to beat the United States by 5-3 last night in the first round of the FIFA World Indoor Championship in Hong Kong.
The United States (1-1) is tied with Russia (1-1) for second place in Group D behind Spain (2-0).
The Americans will play China (0-2) on Saturday. (AP) GOLF  Peoples Grabs Lead  David Peoples, an American playing in his first Japanese tour event, fired a six-under-par 66 yesterday and took a one-shot lead in the first round of the Dunlop Phoenix tournament in Miyazaki, Japan.
Peoples mastered the 6,993-yard Phoenix course in southern Japan, needing just 27 putts.
Yoshinori Mizumaki of Japan was one shot back. (AP) BASKETBALL  Redmen to Play Duke  St.
John's announced yesterday that it would play Duke, winner of the last two National Collegiate Athletic Association titles, next season on the Blue Devils' court and in 1994-95 at Madison Sqaure Garden.
TENNIS  Ivanisevic Beats Courier  Since arriving for the ATP Tour championship, top-ranked Jim Courier has found fault with the tour's ranking system and the slick, quick surface at the Frankfurt Festhalle, among other things.
But yesterday, there was no assigning blame or making excuses after Goran Ivanisevic had thrashed him, 6-3, 6-3, in a round-robin match.
Ivanisevic improved to 2-0 and clinched a semifinal spot with his complete performance.
Also, Richard Krajicek overcame a minor injury to his left ankle in the second set to beat Michael Chang, 2-6, 6-3, 7-6 (7-4).
Pete Sampras (3-0), already in the semifinals from his group, was a 3-6, 6-3, 6-3 winner over Petr Korda (0-3).
HIGH SCHOOL FOOTBALL  Nassau Final Set  Bethpage will meet Lynbrook Thanksgiving morning for the Nassau County Conference III championship after both teams won semifinal contests last night at Hofstra University in Hempstead, L.I.
In the first game, Lynbrook defeated Roosevelt by 13-12 in overtime, and Bethpage followed with a 14-6 victory over Clark.


Compleat Eckersley: M.V.P. As Well
Benefiting from an abundance of talent in his right arm and an abundance of talent in Toronto, Dennis Eckersley registered his second post-season electoral victory yesterday.
Eckersley, who last week won the Cy Young Award as the best pitcher in the American League, won the league's Most Valuable Player Award by a hefty margin over Kirby Puckett of Minnesota and three members of the World Series champion Blue Jays -- Joe Carter, Dave Winfield and Roberto Alomar -- as well as his Oakland teammate Mark McGwire.


Ed Franco, 77, Star On '7 Blocks' Team For Fordham, Dies
Ed Franco, the all-America left tackle on Fordham's legendary Seven Blocks of Granite in 1936 and 1937, died on Wednesday near his home in Bayonne, N.J.
He was 77 years old and suffered a heart attack while walking his dog, according to his daughter Margaret Nostrame.
It was the Fordham publicist, Tim Cohane, who initially coined the name for the linemen who led Fordham to a 15-1-2 won-lost-tied record in 1929 and 1930.
But it was the 1936 and 1937 group that made the Seven Blocks of Granite an enduring legend.


U.S. Agents Limit Corruption Inquiry
The F.B.I. inquiry into the activities of Connecticut's Republican Party chairman during legislative votes on bank regulation in 1989 shows little sign of expanding into a full-scale corruption investigation of either the House or Senate, law-enforcement officials said today.
The investigation has included searches of the home and office of the party chairman, Richard Foley Jr., and interviews with at least 18 present and former Republican members of the House of Representatives.
It has focused on two votes in April 1989 in which at least 26 House members in both parties in the 151-seat chamber switched their votes on a heavily lobbied banking bill during a 24-hour period.
However, Mr.
Foley was not among those who changed their votes.
Waterbury Connection
Investigators are also looking into a business relationship that Mr.
Foley had from the spring of 1989 into 1990 with a real-estate company founded by two men later convicted of bribing the Mayor of Waterbury, who are cooperating with Federal prosecutors.
Mr.
Foley was paid $2,500 a month by the company.


Term Limits Set Us on the Road to Democracy
To the Editor:
Notwithstanding your repeated condemnations, most recently in "Undermining the Right to Vote" (editorial, Nov. 3), California voters approved an initiative to limit terms for its members of Congress on Nov. 3; and so did voters in 13 other states.
There were doubtless good reasons to oppose California's Proposition 164, based on competing principles of governmental design.
However, the dominant criticism of Proposition 164 appealed to the pork-barrel logic of Federal policy making.
Critics like you alleged that limiting terms for California's Congressional delegation would severely undercut California's clout in Congress, resulting in a reduction of pork-barrel projects from the Federal Government.


Seichi Konzo, 87, Dies; A Home Cooling Expert
Seichi Konzo, whose research on home air-conditioning systems predated their commercial debut by almost two decades, died Sunday at Covenant Medical Center in Urbana, Ill., his hometown.
He was 87 years old.
He died after a brief illness, said officials of the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, where he was professor emeritus of mechanical engineering.


COMPANY NEWS
CARMIKE CINEMAS INC., Columbus, Ga., said it had purchased 16 theaters in Utah and Colorado from Cinamerica Theaters L.P., a partnership between Time Warner Inc. and Paramount Communications Inc.
Terms were not disclosed.


Japanese Financial Industry Protests Government's Role
Japanese depositors, concerned over the financial health of the nation's banks and insurance companies, are fleeing these institutions for the safety of the Government-controlled postal savings and insurance systems.
Responding with an unusual display of anger, Japan's financial institutions held a public rally today to attack what they described as unfair competition.
The rally is a sign that the long-accepted direct role of the Government in the economy will come under attack when the private sector finds its own interests threatened.
The Government's participation has brought complaints from the West that Japan operates under a different brand of capitalism.


Term Limits Set Us on the Road to Democracy; Hail, Electoral College
To the Editor:
Maligned and misunderstood, the Electoral College has been whipped from pillar to post on this page in editorials and letters.
Simple justice would require that someone sing its unsung virtues, quietly on display in this Presidential election.
The Electoral College converted President-elect Bill Clinton's paltry 43 percent popular plurality into a far more imposing 69 percent electoral-vote majority.
With the winner-take-all method of allocating votes in 48 states, the College tends to create the impression of a blowout, as another New York newspaper's headline proclaimed.
Whatever partisans may think of Mr.
Clinton, the sober citizen should appreciate the advantage of a new President's taking office with this benign illusion of a blowout.


Ravel's Piano Music
The pianist Jean-Yves Thibaudet is to perform the complete piano music of Ravel in two Sunday concerts at the 92d Street Y on Lexington Avenue.
This Sunday, the program will be "Serenade Grotesque," "Pavane pour une Infante Defunte," "Miroirs," "Sonatine" and "Gaspard de la Nuit." The second recital is scheduled for Dec. 6.
Mr.
Thibaudet used scores with Ravel's own annotations.
Tickets are $10.
Information: (212) 996-1100.


Gregory Markopoulos, Film Maker, 64, Dies
Gregory J. Markopoulos, an avant-garde film maker, died last Friday in Freiburg, Germany.
He was 64 years old.
He died after a long illness, said Robert Haller, a spokesman for Anthology Film Archives in New York City, who announced his death yesterday.


U.N. Troops' Role Widens in Bosnia; 2 Towns Get Aid; British Convoy Arrives
British troops serving with the United Nations escorted a convoy today across the snowbound mountains of central Bosnia to this isolated stronghold of the Bosnian Government.
Along the way, the British soldiers cleared boulders from the roads with their hands, pulled two trucks from gullies and took a detour over especially rugged terrain to avoid coming within range of Serbian artillery.


Term Limits Set Us on the Road to Democracy; Invisible in the East
To the Editor:
"Cloud Over the Election" (editorial, Nov. 3) quite rightly advocates uniform poll closing as a logical way to avoid having Western votes look meaningless.
You write: "Stop voting everywhere at once, that is, 9 P.M. E.S.T., 8 P.M. C.S.T., 7 P.M. M.S.T. and, by extending daylight time for two weeks in the West, 7 P.M. P.S.T."


Review/Film; Taking a Close-Up Look At a Luminary of Jazz
"Texas Tenor: The Illinois Jacquet Story" starts out with a close-up of something fuzzy and spends the rest of its 81 minutes stylishly using close-ups and blurred shots to produce a modernist documentary.
The fuzz turns out to be the chin of the tenor saxophonist Illinois Jacquet; the rest of the opening scene is close-ups of lips, reeds and mouthpiece.
Filmed in black and white from 1988 to 1990, Mr.
Jacquet at various times fills a third of the screen, sometimes less, his skin tone light against the coal-black background.
Sometimes he takes over half the screen, and a huge portion of the screen always remains coal black, contrasting detail against nothingness.
This is a documentary with style.
Directed by the fashion photographer Arthur Elgort and shot by the cinematographer Morten Sandtroen, it has so much style that the narrative portions make much less sense than the plentiful, gorgeous and seemingly improvised scenes, in which the visual sensibility matches the music without cliche.
Mr.
Elgort is a visual sensualist, content with building meaning out of blurs and abstractions.
Mr.
Jacquet, who leads what is probably the best commercial big band in jazz, is purely a musical sensualist.
Music is intrinsically abstract, and the two men are clearly made for each other.


A West Side Book Fair To Benefit the Homeless
Thousands of new books will be sold at reduced prices this weekend at the sixth New York Book Fair for the Homeless at the Goddard Riverside Community Center, 593 Columbus Avenue, at 88th Street.
A preview and auction will open the fair tonight at 6 P.M.; tickets are $30.
Among the items up for auction are original New Yorker cartoons, theater tickets and restaurant dinners.
In addition, the author Roy Blount Jr. will read from his works.


Islander Scorers Are Coasting, Arbour Charges
On to Western Canada trudge the Islanders, losers again tonight, losers in six of their last seven games.
This time the verdict was 5-2, in favor of the Boston Bruins, at old Boston Garden.
Al Arbour, the coach, is shuffling his lines again.
Will Don Maloney, the general manager, soon shuffle the roster with a trade or two?


A.T.&amp; T.'s Leasing Unit to Go Public
A.T.&amp; T. said yesterday that it planned to sell 15 percent of its huge equipment-leasing unit to the public by the second quarter of next year, the first such offering since 1983.
The A.T.&amp; T. Capital Corporation has more than $7 billion in assets and more than $1 billion in annual revenue.
It has grown quickly from a company that leased or financed only its parent's equipment, like phone systems for small businesses, to one where a majority of its business involves goods like desks and office equipment, cars and trucks.
Many of its 600,000 customers are Fortune 500 companies.


Honors
*
Hal Riney, chairman and chief executive at Hal Riney &amp; Partners, San Francisco, received the first George H. Gallup Discovery Award for marketing and communications contributions from the Gallup Organization, Princeton, N.J. *
Phillip Joanou, chairman and chief executive at Dailey &amp; Associates, Los Angeles, was named Advertising Leader of the West by the American Advertising Federation, Washington.


Review/Photography; A City Defines a Style And Perhaps Vice Versa
With its glittering wealth and abysmal poverty, its hubbub and skyscrapers and crime and dirt, New York City has provided photographers with a fascinating subject throughout this century.
The city has witnessed the development of a singular photographic style that features more or less candid pictures of its varied street life, usually depicted in stark black and white.
The style, which developed in the 1930's and continues today, has included among its practitioners such luminaries as Diane Arbus, Robert Frank, Helen Levitt and Bruce Davidson.
Two current shows focus attention on earlier examples of this rich style, which combines the bluntness of newspaper photography with the documentary approach that became popular in the first decades of the century.
The Pace/MacGill Gallery is presenting a selection of work by Weegee, one of the prime shapers of the style, while at the Sander Gallery, a small show called "Troubled Times . . ." features the work of Lisette Model, Louis Faurer and Leon Levinstein, three later adherents.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
Olympia &amp; York lawyers are preparing new proposals to give its creditors the freedom to seize some of Canada's prestigious office buildings.
The bankrupt developer had been warned by banks that its previous plans would be rejected by creditors.  [ Page D1. ]
A.T.&amp; T. plans to sell 15 percent of its equipment-leasing subsidiary to the public by mid-1993.
A.T.&amp; T. Capital has more than $7 billion in assets and $1 billion in revenue.  [ D1. ]


Dr. John Hotson, 95, Unraveler Of Elizabethan Literary Puzzles
Dr.
John Leslie Hotson, a prolific Elizabethan scholar whose sleuthing in dusty record depositories shed light on some old literary puzzles, died on Monday at his home in North Branford, Conn.
He was 95 years old.
He died after a brief illness, his family said.


Shoulder Surfing; Life in Phone Credit-Card Theft
A stampede of travelers left their trains at Pennsylvania Station, walking briskly through dimly lighted corridors.
Many would stop to make routine telephone calls to home or office.
It was work time for Muhammed.
When the travelers opened their next phone bill they might see charges for calls that they did not make, to Islamabad, Dakar, Bogota or Cairo.


Jewish Groups Criticize Remarks By a Governor as 'un-American'
The furor created by Gov.
Kirk Fordice of Mississippi, who pointedly said this week that the United States is a "Christian nation," heated up today as several Jewish groups called the remarks "un-American" and another called on the Republican Party leadership to repudiate the "divisive comments."
A spokesman for Mr.
Fordice, as well as others present when he made his comments on Tuesday, disputed the interpretations that appeared in several news accounts.
And some Republican officials dismissed the furor as the work of groups allied with the Democratic Party who had an interest in portraying the Republican Party as narrowly based.


Desperation. Frustration. Despair. Rangers.
Coach Roger Neilson changed every one of his Ranger lines.
He sent down one defenseman and called up another.
He played both of his tough guys, Tie Domi and Joe Kocur, to combat the Philadelphia Flyers' hard-checking style.
Still, it was hopeless.
To judge the current state of the Rangers, one needed only to sneak a peek at General Manager Neil Smith, who sat in the press box at the Spectrum tonight, the look on his face akin to utter despair.


At the Bar; A woman makes partner the hard way: practicing law only three days a week.
In the last decade women have made numerous inroads into the legal profession.
Now, Millie Kalik has pulled off the latest, and perhaps one of the last, firsts.
Ms.
Kalik, a 44-year-old mother of two, has spent the last 12 of her 20 years in the law practicing only three days a week.
Not so long ago, large law firms, whose profit margin and culture hinge on 50- , 60- or 70-hour work weeks, considered such arrangements subversive.
But earlier this month Ms.
Kalik's professional home, Simpson, Thacher &amp; Bartlett of Manhattan, made Millie Kalik a partner.
No one can think of a precedent.


United Way Says Slump and Scandal Are Bringing Sharp Dip in Donations
Wrestling with the effects of a sluggish economy and of the corrosive scandal at its national association this year, officials at the United Way say they fear that 1992 will bring the sharpest decline in donations in more than 40 years.
The early returns from the fall campaigns of 2,200 local United Ways are mixed, but individual fund-raisers in several large metropolitan areas say the overall numbers are dipping below earlier years.
Total contributions fell in each of the last two years.
But when the figures are adjusted for inflation, not since World War II have they dropped in absolute dollars, too.


Art in Review
Andrew Lord  65 Thompson Street Gallery (near Spring Street) SoHo Through Jan. 9
Andrew Lord continues to wreak elegant havoc with the forms, materials and history of ceramics, fashioning waist-high vases and pitchers that easily pass for sculpture, intrude a bit on painting and extend the tenets of early 70's Process Art.
His new work is terrific.


Books of The Times; No One Loves a Tattler, However True the Tale
The Purloined Clinic
Selected Writings
By Janet Malcolm
382 pages. Alfred A. Knopf. $23.
Janet Malcolm's last two books each created an uproar.
Her 1984 book, "In the Freud Archives," which delineated a continuing intellectual dispute about Freud's theory of childhood sexuality, resulted in a libel suit.
One of the book's primary subjects, Jeffrey Masson, sued Ms.
Malcolm, accusing her of fabricating quotations and sticking them in his mouth and of taking other quotes out of context.
The case is scheduled for a jury trial next year.


Old Friend Gives Knicks A Migraine
Mark Jackson got revenge tonight, and the Knicks got another loss.
In a physical game that featured plenty of trash talking and several near-fights, the Los Angeles Clippers rolled to a 101-91 victory over the Knicks at the Sports Arena.
New York (4-4) finished its three-game West Coast trip without a victory, and they have failed to score more than 94 points in any of their last four games.


Saved by a Whisker, They've Retired
IF you're allergic, you'd better hold today's column a little farther away than usual.
There's a lot of fur in this one.
Jeanne Toomey has 446 cats! (Yes, four hundred and forty-six).


Jury Weighs Evidence In Assault On Athlete
Shannon Siegel shifted uneasily in his chair as his lawyer pointed to him and asked jurors, "Is this the kind of kid who's capable of attempted murder?"
Behind Mr.
Siegel, in the rear of the Nassau County courtroom here, sat an expressionless Alfred Jermaine Ewell, the former high school football star whom Mr.
Siegel is accused of beating nearly to death in what prosecutors called a racial attack last year.


INSIDE
President's Mother Dies
Dorothy Walker Bush died of a stroke at her home in Greenwich, Conn., only hours after a visit by the President.
She was 91 years old.
Page A22.
Peruvian Rebels Are Divided
The police in Peru say that the Shining Path guerrilla movement is riven by internal turmoil but that its final defeat is far from certain.
Page A3.
Hard Times at United Way
United Way officials fear that 1992 will mark the sharpest decline in donations in four decades.
Page A14.


Many Questions Linger Following State Dept. Inquiry
A State Department official helped a Republican Congressman draft a letter seeking documents from Bill Clinton's passport files.
James A. Baker 3d, the White House chief of staff and former Secretary of State, knew about the search through Mr.
Clinton's records but did nothing to stop it or punish those responsible.
Mr.
Baker's aides were kept informed of the operation, but made a concerted effort to avoid contact with those conducting the search.
These and other details of the affair emerged from an internal investigation by the State Department and from interviews with those involved.
But the interviews and the report leave many questions.
For instance, did Mr.
Baker talk to President Bush about the search, which became an issue in the Presidential campaign?
And why did Mr.
Baker take no action to stop the search or punish those responsible?


Butkus Award Finalists
Miami's MICHEAL BARROW, Washington's DAVE HOFFMAN and Florida State's MARVIN JONES were selected yesterday as finalists for the Butkus Award, presented annually to the nation's top college linebacker.
Barrow and Hoffman are seniors, and Jones is a junior.


Pop/Jazz; A Maker of Dark Songs That Dig Beneath Logic
Robin Holcomb was having a hard time being heard.
She was sitting in a busy, noisy East Village restaurant trying to articulate her ideas about being a singer, pianist and composer, but the bustle and activity around her seemed to crowd her words; she was trying to explain some of the feminine themes behind her new album, "Rockabye" (Elektra Musician), but the bright lights from the bar seemed to wash out her thoughts.
Ms.
Holcomb's voice, when speaking or singing, might be placed somewhere in the tradition of women like Joni Mitchell and Emmylou Harris.
But drowning her out on the restaurant's sound system was that behemoth of pop commercialism, Michael Jackson.
Ms.
Holcomb regularly struggles with the problem of being heard.
In September she opened a benefit concert headlined by 10,000 Maniacs.
"I think people really wanted to hear a rock band," Ms.
Holcomb said.
"I hear every sound in the audience, and it was like a big party going on out there. It was almost psychedelic for me."


Enid Schechter; Executive Assistant, 62
Enid Schechter, who served as the executive assistant to four Speakers of the New York State Assembly in the Legislature's New York City office, died on Monday at Mount Sinai Medical Center in Manhattan.
She was 62 years old and lived in Manhattan.
She died after a brief illness, her family said.


U.N. in Bosnia War: Hope of Big World Role May Be a Casualty
The gunfire exchanged between French troops and Serbian forces in Bosnia and Herzegovina today was only the latest difficulty encountered by the United Nations in its attempt to deliver food and medicine to needy civilians trapped in the civil war in the Balkans.
All the difficulties raise questions about the organization's ability to develop new and more ambitious roles for itself in the post-cold-war world.
Peacekeeping soldiers and relief supplies are now pouring into Yugoslavia, Croatia and Bosnia as the largest peacekeeping and aid operation the United Nations has ever begun builds up to maximum strength.


THE TRANSITION: The President-Elect; CLINTON SAYS BUSH MADE CHINA GAINS
President-elect Bill Clinton, who accused President Bush during the campaign of coddling China's dictators, suggested today that Mr.
Bush's policies toward China were showing signs of reducing human rights and trade violations.
Mr.
Clinton did not explain his sudden, striking difference in tone, which came one day after he held a long chat with President Bush, mostly about foreign affairs.
Many analysts had warned during the campaign that some of Mr.
Clinton's more idealistic foreign policy proposals would need to be moderated in a new administration to prevent disruptions in relations with important countries.


The Spoken Word
ENVIRONMENTAL PANEL, Queens Museum of Art, Flushing Meadows-Corona Park, Queens.
Representatives from environmental organizations including the National Audubon Society, the Natural Resources Defense Council, the Nature Conservancy and the Sierra Club will discuss their work and answer questions.
Sunday at 2 P.M.
The program is an adjunct of "Fragile Ecologies: Artists' Interpretations and Solutions," an exhibition on view through Jan. 10.
Free with museum admission, which is by contribution.
Information: (718) 592-5555.
READING, Judith's Room, 681 Washington Street, Greenwich Village.
Leslea Newman will read from her novel "In Every Laugh a Tear." Sunday at 3 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 727-7330.


CHRONICLE
The organizers of a benefit for the Crossroads Theater Company in New Brunswick, N.J., had no idea when they asked DIONNE WARWICK to perform on Sunday that it was the 30th anniversary of the release of her first hit record, "Don't Make Me Over."
But the Dionne Warwick Fan Club informed them, and in the audience at the State Theater will be the most stalwart members of the group, including admirers from Texas, Iowa and Canada, as well as the singer's mother, Lee Warwick.


COMPANY BRIEFS
EQUITY RESIDENTIAL PROPERTIES TRUST, Chicago, bought the 229-unit Preston Willow Bend apartment complex in Plano, Tex.
Terms of the purchase were not released.


A Biting Dissent on Howe Decision
The Steve Howe drug case and the arbitrator's decision overturning his lifetime ban proves the need for a joint drug program created by the clubs and players, baseball's deputy commissioner said yesterday.
In an unusual dissenting opinion, Steve Greenberg harshly criticized the decision of George Nicolau, the arbitrator, who in his 54-page opinion cited the actions of Fay Vincent, the former commissioner, as contributing to Howe's latest drug-related problem.


Shining Path Reeling in Wake of Chief's Capture
Two months after the capture of its leader, the Peruvian rebel group known as Shining Path is riven by dissent, betrayal and an internal power struggle, police officials say.
In a possible sign of the organization's weakness, a strike called in the capital for Wednesday and today, aimed at disrupting congressional elections on Sunday, was largely defied despite a weeklong series of bombing attacks that killed 2 and wounded 45.


New York to Expand Use of Welfare Hotels
Facing contempt charges for leaving hundreds of homeless families to sleep in city offices, the Dinkins administration said yesterday that it is being forced once again to expand New York City's use of hotels to shelter the homeless.
Deputy Mayor Cesar A. Perales said the city had little choice but to move up to 80 families into two Upper West Side hotels after it completes several days of negotiations with the hotels' owners.
He said similar rooming sites, known as welfare hotels, would be chosen soon in other areas.


Family-Style Spreads With the Luxury of Space
MOST diners, no matter how much they pay for a restaurant meal, have remarkable tolerance for undersize tables.
Everyone has grappled with those cotton-draped chess boards where plates hang precariously over the edge as waiters spend much of the meal shuffling drinking glasses and bread plates.
The tiny-table syndrome in New York City can be explained in two words: real estate.
Space is money.


Japanese Stocks Up
Japanese stocks were higher today amid continued buying by public funds.
The Nikkei index of 225 issues closed up 162.29 points, or 0.96 percent, to 17,033.60.
On Thursday, the Nikkei rose 92.47 points.
For the week, the index was up 702.81 points.


Transamerica Decides On Public Offer for Unit
The Transamerica Corporation said today that it would spin off its property and casualty insurance subsidiary, Transamerica Insurance Group, through an initial public offering.
Terms of the offering, which is planned for early next spring, were not disclosed and will depend upon market conditions at the time.
Transamerica shares closed today at $45.125, up $1.50, on the New York Stock Exchange.
Transamerica announced plans to divest itself of the property and casualty unit on July 20 and has been reporting its financial results under discontinued operations.
Any gain or loss from the divestiture will depend on the offering price obtainable next year, but Transamerica currently estimates that its loss on the deal, if any, will not exceed $75 million.


YELTSIN PLANS END TO A-SUB PROGRAM
Seeking to persuade South Korea of Russia's peaceful intentions in Asia and around the world, President Boris N. Yeltsin told the National Assembly here today that his country would halt the production of nuclear submarines in two or three years.
Mr.
Yeltsin, who is on a three-day state visit here, said Russia was cutting in half its production of new submarines and indicated that still more reductions in the military were planned.
"I think in two or three years' time, we will stop making submarines for military purposes," he said, according to news agency translations of his speech.


Market Place; It May Be Time to Shun An Old Stock Indicator
Market strategists, those folks who follow dozens of indicators to help predict the future, are approaching nail-biting time.
But this time, they may be worrying for nothing.
One of the most reliable indicators for the last two decades has been rate movements for the three-month Treasury bill.
And that rate has been climbing relentlessly since early October, raising the yield on the securities from 2.65 percent on Oct. 1 to 3.24 percent late yesterday, or more than 22 percent.


Corruption Cited in Housing Repair Agency
An investigation by a New York City Council committee has found that the agency that renovates and repairs housing for the city's homeless has been rife with corruption that includes "systemic mismanagement and waste, large-scale theft and fraud, poor internal controls and a pervasive lack of accountability."
The 47-page report was released yesterday during a three-hour meeting of the Finance Committee.
Eight current and former employees of the agency testified to the variety of abuses the investigation claims to have found.
Several of the workers also told the committee that tenants were often moved into apartments that did not meet basic building codes.


Making Liberty Look Even Better


Rome Journal; Hitler's Watercolors Too Hot for Italy's Comfort
They may not have shaken the art world, or even caused a quiver, but watercolors by the young Hitler, due to be auctioned in Italy, have stirred other passions, evoking neo-Nazism in Europe, drawing protest from Germany and inspiring a ban on their export, whoever buys them.
The collection of 20 small paintings -- 19 said to be genuine and one certified false by the SS -- is set for auction as a single lot in the northeastern city of Trieste on Friday night.
The auctioneer's estimate of the value of the collection is more than $250,000.


Mitchell Learning to Do His Talking on the Field
In his first pro season, tight end Johnny Mitchell of the Jets has learned a lot, such as proper blocking technique, how to run a precise pass route and how to deal with injuries.
And while he may have mastered how to run the button hook, until this week he hadn't learned how to button his lip.
Now he has.


Topics of The Times; A Model Soviet General
When Mikhail Milstein died on a Moscow tennis court in August, his death received little notice in the U.S.
He deserved more.
For he was a contradiction in a land of contradictions: a Russian Jew who became aide-de-camp to Marshal Zhukov, Commander in Chief of the Red Army during World War II, only to be sidetracked in one of Stalin's anti-Semitic purges . . . a man of the system who managed to think his way out of it.
General Milstein was not widely known to Western officials until he joined the staff of the U.S.A.
Institute in Moscow in the 1970's.
There he impressed many outsiders as one of a new breed of insiders, a Soviet military man of political and technical sophistication, intellectual openness and the wit to puncture pretense.


Lind Is Traded to Royals For Two Pitching Prospects
The Pittsburgh Pirates traded second baseman JOSE LIND to the Kansas City Royals yesterday for two pitching prospects.
Lind, named last week as a Gold Glove winner, was traded for the minor leaguers DENNIS MOELLER and JOEL JOHNSTON.


Navratilova And Seles Win in Three
The theme for the night was attack at all costs in the quarterfinal round of the Virginia Slims Championships; she who hesitated, lost.
In the first quarterfinal, the full-speed-ahead strategy worked like a charm for Martina Navratilova, who subdued Arantxa Sanchez Vicario for the 12th time in 13 meetings.


Olympia May Yield Real Estate
Warned by Canada's leading banks that its three-week-old plan to restructure debts would be rejected, Olympia &amp; York is preparing sweeping new proposals that would allow its creditors to seize some of Canada's most prestigious office buildings, lawyers for the insolvent Canadian real estate giant said today.
The forced change of direction represents another striking setback for the world's largest real estate developer, which has been a participant in property markets for the last two decades, building up assets once calculated at more than $20 billion.


People
*
Anna Fountas was named executive vice president and director of marketing at Simmons Market Research Bureau, New York, succeeding Pamela Baxter, who will serve as a consultant.
Ms.
Fountas was previously vice president for sales and marketing and advertiser agency service at Arbitron Co., New York.


Critic's Notebook; 40 Years of Film Magic
"FASTEN your seat belts. It's going to be a bumpy night." The line has now been so thoroughly absorbed into the collective subconscious that many people no longer remember its origins: the mind of Joseph L. Mankiewicz, who wrote it in the screenplay of "All About Eve" (1950), from which it passed into the public domain, better recognized as the happy hunting ground where one man's wit gains immortality as another man's cliche.
The time is at hand to rediscover the line, the film and the mind behind them: "All About Eve" starts a special one-week engagement today at the Film Forum.
It's the opening attraction in a five-week retrospective devoted to the man who began his career in the 1920's writing intertitles for silent films ("The Mysterious Dr. Fu Manchu"), won his first Oscar nomination in 1931 (as one of the two writers of "Skippy") and produced a string of M-G-M hits, including "The Philadelphia Story" (1940), before he became the Oscar-winning writer and director of his own films.


Seton Hall Scrapes Away Some Rust
Seton Hall, a team most experts pick to have a significant national impact this season, struggled early, then cruised to a 75-54 victory over Delaware tonight in a first-round game of the preseason National Invitation Tournament.
Terry Dehere scored 25 points and Jerry Walker added 14 at Byrne Meadowlands Arena as the Pirates earned a berth in Saturday's quarterfinal game here against Tennessee, which defeated Rutgers.


Suspected Black Hole Shows Its Face
New photographs by the Hubble Space Telescope have given astronomers their best view yet of a huge disk of gas and dust being sucked into what they think is a black hole.
Although astronomers have observed such disks before, the photographs are the first to show details of a disk's size, behavior and other characteristics.
While the new photographs do not prove that the disk surrounds a black hole, elated astronomers said the pictures offered the clearest evidence yet that black holes may be at the core of many galaxies.
The disk, more than 300 light-years in diameter, is remarkably similar to what scientists expected to find around the hypothesized black holes.


Term Limits Set Us on the Road to Democracy; Ditch That Relic
To the Editor:
Re "Cloud Over the Election" (editorial, Nov. 3): The simplest way to make the issue of an early call of the Presidential election moot is to rid us of the outdated and unrepresentative Electoral College.
The large volume of popular votes to be counted in the Pacific time zone when the polls in the Eastern and Central time zones are closed would guarantee that no clear winner could be determined, short of a landslide, before polls in the West close.


Will Dome Stifle Miami?
It wasn't all that long ago, Jan. 1, 1986, that a Miami football team experienced a deafening nightmare in an indoor stadium: Tennessee 35, Miami 7 in the Superdome, a loss in the Sugar Bowl that cost the Hurricanes a national championship.
So it was a little surprising this week when Dennis Erickson, the Hurricanes' coach, dismissed the anticipated noise factor for his team's showdown Saturday against Syracuse (9-1) in the Carrier Dome.
"Actually, I like playing in the Dome because you don't have a weather factor to worry about," he said.


Corrections
A caption yesterday with a picture by The Associated Press about the National Conference of Catholic Bishops referred incorrectly in some editions to two bishops.
They were Bishop Joseph Imesch of Joliet, Ill., left, and Archbishop Edward McCarthy of Miami.


Mansfield Freeman, Insurance Official, 97
Mansfield Freeman, a retired insurance company executive who helped to develop the insurance industry in China in the 1920's and 30's, died on Tuesday at his home in Greensboro, Vt.
He was 97 years old.
Mr.
Freeman died of respiratory failure, said John Wooster, a spokesman for the American International Group.


Doubletree Puts Account in Review
The Doubletree Hotels Corporation in Phoenix said yesterday that it had placed its estimated $11.5 million account in review, anticipating the expiration in April of its contract with GBF/Ayer in Los Angeles.
GBF/ Ayer has handled the lodging chain's account since February 1991.
Edward A. Pritchard, Doubletree's executive vice president for marketing sales, confirmed a report of the review this week in Advertising Age.
He said Doubletree had already talked informally with the Los Angeles offices of BBDO and McCann-Erickson; the latter recently lost its Hilton Hotels account after 25 years.


U.N. Troops' Role Widens in Bosnia; 2 Towns Get Aid; British Convoy Arrives
British troops serving with the United Nations escorted a convoy today across the snowbound mountains of central Bosnia to this isolated stronghold of the Bosnian Government.
Along the way, the British soldiers cleared boulders from the roads with their hands, pulled two trucks from gullies and took a detour over especially rugged terrain to avoid coming within range of Serbian artillery.


Hawaiian Coup of 1893
To the Editor:
"A Century After Queen's Overthrow, Talk of Sovereignty Shakes Hawaii" (news article, Nov. 8) assigns a bum rap to the Marine Corps.
The statement "162 Marines illegally deposed Queen Liliuokalani" in 1893 posits unilateral action.
A.
M.
Schlesinger's Almanac of American History indicates otherwise.
The United States Ambassador to Hawaii, John L. Stevens, and the pineapple planter Sanford P. Dole overthrew the government.
Dole's Committee of Safety sent in the Marines to occupy the palace.
This action and the subsequent treaty of annexation materialized without approval from the State Department.


'Magic Flute' in English
The Brooklyn Lyric Opera, conducted by Per Brevig, is to present Mozart's "Magic Flute," tomorrow at 8 P.M. and Sunday at 3 P.M. at Hirsch Hall, Temple Ansche Chesed, 100th Street and West End Avenue in Manhattan.
The opera, fully staged and orchestrated, will be sung in English, with a different cast for each performance.
Two additional performances will take place next weekend.
Tickets are $15; $10 for students and the elderly.
Information: (718) 837-1176.


Audre Lorde, 58, A Poet, Memoirist And Lecturer, Dies
Audre Lorde, a black feminist writer who became the poet laureate of New York State in 1991, died on Tuesday at her home on St.
Croix.
She was 58 years old.
She died of liver cancer, said a friend, Blanche Cook.


Part Gibraltar, Part Avalanche
Rock Newman was sitting at the long oak table in his living room on Wednesday, doing what a man does when he manages a new heavyweight champion of the world: keeping up.
The black push-button phone was ringing like clockwork, bringing Newman and his fighter, Riddick Bowe, the usual offers and excitations that go with glory in the arena.
An invitation to a screening of "Malcolm X." A business proposition from a man whose merchandise benefits black colleges such as Howard University, Newman's alma mater.
A discussion of arrangements for a parade today for Bowe, which began in Prince Georges County in Maryland and proceeded into Washington before thousands of onlookers.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League  TEXAS RANGERS -- Purchased the contract of Jon Shave, infielder, from Oklahoma City of the American Association.
Signed John Russell, catcher, to a minor-league contract.
TORONTO BLUE JAYS -- Named Richie Hebner minor-league hitting instructor and Geoffrey Horne strength and conditioning coordinator.
Assigned Ken Dayley, pitcher, outright to Syracuse of the International League.
Purchased the contracts of Aaron Small, Huck Flener, Paul Menhart, Ricky Steed and Scott Brow, pitchers; Greg O'Halloran, catcher; and Brent Bowers, outfielder.


Prices of Treasuries Move Lower
The bond market yesterday continued to sound its one sure theme -- volatility.
After a rally in the short end of the market on Wednesday and a rally for several days in the price of the 10-year Treasury note and the 30-year bond, investors did an about-face and sold.


Judge Wachtler Hasn't So Far Received Lenient Treatment
To the Editor:
"The Real Tragedy of Judge Wachtler" (Op-Ed, Nov. 13), Diane McWhorter's perceptions and judgments about the case of Sol Wachtler, are sufficiently mean spirited and distorted to warrant response.
First, she draws a singularly inapposite analogy between the Wachtler tragedy and the Clarence Thomas fiasco.
Clarence Thomas brought ignominy to a court for which he had no particular qualification.
Judge Wachtler resigned from a court he served with intellect, wisdom and compassion, lest he bring dishonor to it.
Justice Thomas counterattacked with the politically convenient charge of racism and sought to sully the character of his accuser.


Juror: Race Had No Role In Acquittal
In the most extensive comments by a juror since Lemrick Nelson Jr. was acquitted last month in the killing of Yankel Rosenbaum, a 25-year-old college student said yesterday that race and general mistrust of the police played no role in the jury's decision.
The juror, Leslie King, who is black, also said one of the two whites on the jury was among the most impassioned voices favoring acquittal of Mr.
Nelson, who is also black.


Diner's Journal
Thanksgiving Out
Here are additonal restaurants around the city that plan to serve Thanksgiving dinner (a selection was listed in this space last week).
Almost all will offer traditional turkey dinners, and many will also serve other items on the regular menu.
CAFE CROCODILE, 354 E. 74th Street, (212) 249-6619.
Prix fixe, $40 with bottle of wine for two; children under 12, $20. 3 to 8 P.M.
LES CElEBRITES, 155 West 58th Street, in the Essex House Hotel, (212) 484-5113.
Prix fixe, $75.
Seatings at 3 P.M. and 6 P.M.
LION'S ROCK, 316 East 77th Street, (212) 988-3610.
Prix fixe $29.50, children under 12, $16. 12:30 to 10 P.M.
PEACOCK ALLEY, Waldorf-Astoria Hotel, 301 Park Avenue, at 49th Street, (212) 872-4895.
Prix fixe, $49, $19.75 for children under 12.
Seatings at 11:30 A.M. and 2 , 4:30 , 6:30 and 8:30 P.M.
SPRING STREET NATURAL, 62 Spring Street, at Lafayette, (212) 966-0290.
Prix fixe $15 or $20 or a la carte. 1 P.M. to midnight.
LE TRIANON, The New York Palace Hotel, 455 Madison Avenue, at 50th Street (212) 303-6032.
Prix fixe, $39.50, children under 12, $19.75. noon to 8 P.M.
MARK'S, Mark Hotel, 25 East 77th Street, at Madison Avenue,(212) 879-1864.
Prix fixe, $55, children under 12, $35. 11:30 A.M. to 5 P.M. and 6:30 to 9:30 P.M.
WINDOWS ON THE WORLD, One World Trade Center, (212) 938-1111.
Prix fixe, $37 to $42 depending on entree chosen; children under 12 half price.
Seatings at 2, 2:30, 4, 4:30, 7 and 7:30 P.M.
WORLD YACHT, Pier 62, West 23rd Street and Hudson River, (212) 929-7090.
Prix fixe cruise, $62, $35 children under 12.
Afternoon cruise boards at noon, evening cruise boards at 6 P.M.


Chinese Angered by French Arms Sale to Taiwan
China warned today that it would "react strongly" if France or any other country sold jet fighters to Taiwan, but the French, the United States and possibly other Western nations seem to be quietly pushing ahead with military sales to the Chinese Nationalists.
Taiwan newspapers, including the semi-official Central Daily News, reported today that the authorities in Taipei, Taiwan's capital, signed a contract on Wednesday to purchase 60 Mirage 2000-5 fighters and 1,000 or more short- and medium-range missiles.
French officials would not confirm the report, and by some accounts they plan not to make an announcement of the deal in hopes of lessening Beijing's anger.


THE TRANSITION: Social Scene; The Clintons Are in Town, and Washington Is Ready to Party
The economy wasn't the only thing that went into decline under George Bush.
When it came to partying, he turned out to be a real pooper, throwing only the required bashes, hardly ever venturing to the salons of Georgetown and hurrying off to Camp David on weekends.
That didn't stop the partying, of course.
But it set the tone for entertainment that was as soporific as a church supper, especially with drawing rooms filled with faces that had been hanging around Washington since Ronald Reagan, who imported old Hollywood buddies and pinstriped businessmen for his parties.
Before that there was Jimmy Carter, who took a dim view of strong drink.


Topics of The Times; A Model Soviet General
When Mikhail Milstein died on a Moscow tennis court in August, his death received little notice in the U.S.
He deserved more.
For he was a contradiction in a land of contradictions: a Russian Jew who became aide-de-camp to Marshal Zhukov, Commander in Chief of the Red Army during World War II, only to be sidetracked in one of Stalin's anti-Semitic purges . . . a man of the system who managed to think his way out of it.
General Milstein was not widely known to Western officials until he joined the staff of the U.S.A.
Institute in Moscow in the 1970's.
There he impressed many outsiders as one of a new breed of insiders, a Soviet military man of political and technical sophistication, intellectual openness and the wit to puncture pretense.


Plot Thickens for Giants' Defense in Disarray
The Giants' defense, which has complained all season about the read-and-react philosophy of its new coordinator, Rud Rust, may take matters into its own hands.
Pepper Johnson, the mercurial inside linebacker, said today that if the Giants started badly Sunday against the Philadelphia Eagles, he was ready to play a freelance rather than a structured defense.
"I'll do whatever it takes," he said.
"I will take full responsibility. You want to keep your job, but you want to win. If things start getting hectic on he field, you're going to see something."


Ex-Officer Shot to Death In Robbery
In a blazing exchange of gunfire, a retired police sergeant who happened to walk into an electronics store in lower Manhattan during a robbery was shot and killed yesterday when he tried to stop the robbers.
One of four robbers used an Israeli-made Uzi machine pistol to gun down the 57-year-old sergeant after he shouted that he was a police officer and pulled his gun.
As the sergeant lay dead or dying on the floor, one of the robbers pumped more bullets into the sergeant's body, the police said.


Review/Dance; Take One: Lights, Cameras, Polka!
Giselle was nowhere to be found.
Clytemnestra was on vacation.
But after you've been having steak for a long time, Champagne -- in the form of the American Ballroom Theater -- tastes just fine.
That waltzing, merengue-dancing company whirled through its opening night on Tuesday at the Joyce Theater (175 Eighth Avenue, at 19th Street, Chelsea), where it plays through Nov. 29, with all its usual grace and spirit.
The company, now in its eighth season, has carved a secure niche for itself in a world that tends to identify dance as ballet or modern and not much else.
As it happens, the program's delectable major premiere, "The Silver Screen," was created for the company by a ballet choreographer, Peter Anastos.
And although it can be enjoyed as simple exuberant dancing or broadly funny parody, there are a good many sly references to signature images in the work of George Balanchine.


Free Interfaith Concert To Recall Holocaust
The third annual Interfaith Concert of Remembrance, an homage to the victims of the Holocaust, will take place tomorrow evening at 8 at the Cathedral of St.
John the Divine, Amsterdam Avenue at 112th Street, Morningside Heights.
Maxim Shostakovich will lead the Brooklyn Philharmonic Orchestra in the world premiere of the Epilogue from "David of Sassoun," by Michelle Ekizian, and in the American premiere of Stephen Lucky's Elegy for Violin, Cello and Orchestra.
The program also includes Beethoven's First Piano Concerto, Shostakovich's Chamber Symphony and "Song Cycle From Jewish Folk Poetry," and Mahler's "Kindertotenlieder." In addition, the folk singer Richie Havens will offer "Songs of Freedom."
Among the guests taking part are Paul Robeson Jr., who will play a recording of his father, the bass-baritone, singing a Warsaw Ghetto folk song in Yiddish, and Kurt Vonnegut, who will introduce the Elegy.
Performing artists are Barbara Ann Martin, soprano; Maro Partamian, mezzo-soprano; Franco Spoto, tenor; Miriam Brickman and Caroline Stoessinger, pianists, and Phillip and Misha Quint, violinist and cellist.
Admission is free.
Information: (212) 692-6060.


Panel Proposes New Rockets to Keep U.S. Competitive
The United States should move quickly to develop a new, more economical and safer family of rockets for launching space payloads to decrease dependence on its current fleet of dated rockets, a special White House panel said today.
The panel, consisting of experts commissioned by the National Space Council, a policy group whose chairman is Vice President Quayle, said the Air Force should be allowed to develop a modular system of rockets.
They say this Spacelifter system could cut by half the cost of launching payloads into space.


Second Woman to Become Episcopal Bishop


Review/Film; How a Sexy Lover Makes A Man Jealous of His Wife
Manuel Gutierrez Aragon's film "The Most Beautiful Night" should reinforce the impression that sex in the cinema of post-Franco Spain is different from the sex in movies that come from anywhere else in the world.
As portrayed in the films of Pedro Almodovar, Vicente Aranda and others, it is usually tempestuous, often fraught with hysteria and surprisingly androgynous.
This devil-may-care flaunting of eroticism suggests a head-on collision between traditional Roman Catholic notions of propriety and the rebellious spirit of a cinema still giddy from its liberation after years of oppression and censorship.
"The Most Beautiful Night," made in 1984, is a dizzy bedroom farce about Federico (Jose Sacristan), a television executive whose life is a parody of the sexual double standard.
Despite his own dalliances, Federico becomes obsessively jealous of his wife, Elena (Victoria Abril), after his mistress, Bibi (Bibi Andersen), dispenses some innocent observations on female behavior.


New Campaigns
*
Ore-Ida Foods Inc. wants french fries fans to turn on their ovens.
The frozen-food company is introducing Ore-Ida Fast Fries, which it says duplicates at home the taste and crunch of fast-food restaurants' french fries.
An estimated $5 million campaign, created by DDB Needham New York, is scheduled to begin running on broadcast and cable television in January.
Ore-Ida plans to spend an estimated $25 million to $30 million on advertising on Fast Fries for the first year.


Mandela, Shifting Strategy, Offers Whites an Assured Share of Power
In an important concession to the Government of President F. W. de Klerk, the African National Congress today published a new strategy for ending white rule that offered the white minority the prospect of an indefinite share of power in the new order.
The black organization, led by Nelson Mandela, emphasized accelerated negotiations, "constructive interaction" with Mr. de Klerk's governing party, and the need for reassurances to prevent anxious white civil servants from undermining a future democracy.


A National Book Award For a Gay Autobiography
Paul Monette won the National Book Award for nonfiction on Wednesday night for "Becoming a Man: Half a Life Story" (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich), an autobiography about his struggle to come to terms with his homosexuality, a work he said "literally kept me alive" after he discovered he had AIDS.
Cormac McCarthy won the fiction prize for "All the Pretty Horses" (Alfred A. Knopf), a novel about a young rancher who becomes cut off from the life he had known and heads off on a dangerous journey to Mexico.
Mary Oliver, the Pulitzer Prize-winning poet, won the poetry award for "New and Selected Poems" (Beacon Press), a collection that deals with questions about nature, life and death.
A Record 561 Submissions
The winners were announced on Wednesday night at a ceremony and dinner at the Plaza Hotel in Manhattan and each winner receives a prize of $10,000.
The winning books were chosen from among a record 561 submissions in the three categories, said Neil Baldwin, the executive director of the National Book Foundation, which sponsors the awards.


Rorem World Premiere At Richard Tucker Gala
Grace Bumbry, Ghena Dimitrova and Thomas Hampson are among the artists who are to take part in this year's Richard Tucker Music Foundation Gala, Sunday at 6 P.M. at Avery Fisher Hall.
The evening will also be the occasion of the world premiere of a song by Ned Rorem, commissioned by the foundation.
Other artists are Francisco Araiza, Lando Bartolini, Paul Plishka and Juan Pons and nine previous Tucker award winners: Susan Dunn, Paul Groves, Alan J. Held, Richard Leech, Diana Soviero, Ruth Ann Swenson, Tichina Vaughn, Deborah Voigt (this years's recipient) and the first winner, the tenor Rockwell Blake.


Two by St. Louis Symphony
The soprano Harolyn Blackwell, the tenor John Aler, the baritone Hakan Hagegard and the Concert Choir of the St.
Louis Children's Choirs are to be the be soloists with the St.
Louis Symphony Orchestra and Chorus tonight at Carnegie Hall for the New York premiere of Maxwell Davies's "Worldes Blis" and a performance of Orff's "Carmina Burana." Tomorrow the orchestra is to be joined by nine soloists for a performance of William Bolcom's full-evening song cycle "Songs of Innocence and of Experience," a setting of the poems of William Blake.
Tickets for tonight's performance are $15 to $55; for tomorrow's performance, $14 to $65.
Information: (212) 247-7800.


Home Care in New York, A Model Plan, Awaits Cuts
After 11 years of extremely close contact, Joseph DiGesu and his home care aide, Salvatore Manno, don't agree on much, from the quality of war movies to the morality of boxing.
But both are convinced that they belong together in Mr.
DiGesu's Queens apartment, and both are scared that New York State is out to split them up.
The affectionately querulous relationship between the two men is at the heart of a battle in New York over how to control costs in the nation's most comprehensive and expensive home care program -- a battle that reflects a national quandary, as Americans live longer and grow more frail in an age of strained budgets, over how best to care for people who cannot care for themselves.


Review/Film; Alone Again: Holiday Mischief In Manhattan
IF "Home Alone 2," the by-the-numbers sequel to the third-biggest hit in movie history, is viewed as a learning experience, its first lesson is that originality is a dangerous thing.
Its second, aimed at any child who ever dreamed of drinking Coca-Cola out of a Champagne glass, is that malicious mischief can be construed as no-fault fun.
Its third, and most interesting, inadvertent notion is that time does not stand still, no matter how profitable it might be to think otherwise.
Between this film and its seemingly very similar predecessor, there is all the difference in the world.
"Home Alone" became a hit by speaking to secret wishes any child could understand: the desire for independence, the novelty of feeling empowered, the triumph of defending one's castle against invading hordes, or at least against two cartoonish bozos.
No one could have predicted that these messages would come through quite so loud and clear, or be presented as so much fun.


James E. Fanning; Investments Manager, 54
James E. Fanning, former president of Rockefeller &amp; Company, an investment-management firm, died Oct. 13 at Morristown Memorial Hospital in New Jersey.
He was 54 years old and had lived in Madison, N.J., for 21 years.
Mr. Fanning died of cancer, a daughter, Ellen, said.


Jury Ruling Shouldn't Be Retroactive
To the Editor:
A Nov. 13 article sounds the alarming note that a decision of the New York State Court of Appeals has "thrown into doubt convictions in thousands of criminal cases." There is good reason, however, to believe such a prediction will prove wrong.
In the People v.
Antommarchi, rendered Oct. 27, the Court of Appeals held (1) that a criminal defendant has a right to be present when the judge speaks individually with potential jurors during jury selection to explore biases and (2) that a defendant need not have asked to be present at such sidebar questioning to raise the issue on appeal.


John W. Sheetz 3d, 73, Academic Fund-Raiser
John W. Sheetz 3d, a fund-raiser and management consultant for academic institutions and other organizations, died on Wednesday at his home in Belmont, Mass.
He was 73 years old.
Mr. Sheetz died of cancer, said a family spokesman, Lewis C. Clapp.


Colombo Turns To Gearon Hoffman
Colombo Inc. yesterday awarded all its frozen Colombo products, including its packaged desserts and soft-serve frozen yogurt food-service division, to Gearon Hoffman Conlon &amp; Nye Advertising Inc.in Boston.
The account, with billings estimated at $5 million, had been handled by Garrison-Lontine Advertisingin Denver for the last two and a half years.


School's Christmas Fair Looks to the Southwest
A Santa Fe-style Christmas is the theme of this year's holiday fair at St.
Luke's School, 487 Hudson Street, Greenwich Village.
A dinner of Southwestern food in the Casa de Cowpoke Lounge (formerly the school cafeteria) will open the fair tonight, with seatings at 5, 6:30 and 8 P.M.
The price is $10; $6 for children and the elderly.


What Did the White House Know?
The State Department report on the ransacking of Gov.
Bill Clinton's passport file reaches a distressing but obvious conclusion: that the search was politically motivated, aimed at influencing the election.
What's also obvious is that the State Department's Inspector General, Sherman M. Funk, cannot plausibly exonerate the White House, given what's known so far.
Mr.
Funk says the White house neither instigated nor encouraged the search, and traces part of the problem to a series of bureaucratic fumbles.


Big Board Short Sales Continue Trend Upward
Continuing a trend that has persisted through much of 1992, the number of shares sold short and not yet covered on the New York Stock Exchange reached a record between mid-October and mid-November, the Big Board reported yesterday.
The short positions, which traditionally indicate pessimism about the condition of the market among investors, totaled 960.5 million shares at the end of the period, up 1.3 percent from the 948.3 million reported for the previous month.


Topics of The Times; A Model Soviet General
When Mikhail Milstein died on a Moscow tennis court in August, his death received little notice in the U.S.
He deserved more.
For he was a contradiction in a land of contradictions: a Russian Jew who became aide-de-camp to Marshal Zhukov, Commander in Chief of the Red Army during World War II, only to be sidetracked in one of Stalin's anti-Semitic purges . . . a man of the system who managed to think his way out of it.
General Milstein was not widely known to Western officials until he joined the staff of the U.S.A.
Institute in Moscow in the 1970's.
There he impressed many outsiders as one of a new breed of insiders, a Soviet military man of political and technical sophistication, intellectual openness and the wit to puncture pretense.


Art in Review
John Divola
Jayne H. Baum Gallery  588 Broadway (near Prince Street)  SoHo  Through Nov. 28
John Divola mixes genres in his latest pictures, producing landscapes, seascapes and city scenes that have both the look and the ominous overtones of surveillance photographs.
Mr.
Divola is showing excerpts from several series in which various subjects, including campers in national parks, dogs in shadowy alleyways and boats at sea, are reduced to tiny figures in the middle of the frame.
The grainy black-and-white prints have a lonely, voyeuristic quality, with the subjects, seen from afar, unapproachable and inscrutable.


MGM Grand Shifting to All-Charter Flights
MGM Grand Air, the luxury airline that pampers its customers with caviar and Champagne, said today that it planned to halt its flight schedule between Los Angeles and New York on New Year's Eve.
In discontinuing its money-losing scheduled passenger service, the airline will cut its work force by 155 people, to 167 employees.


Robert Duvall as Stalin, the Embodiment of Evil
"Stalin," the nearly three-hour HBO Pictures presentation having its American premiere tomorrow at 8 P.M., is a grandly ambitious and lavish project, much of it filmed within the Kremlin even as the Soviet Union was coming unglued in the final months of 1991.
Robert Duvall plays the title role.
The director is the Czechoslovak-born Ivan Passer ("Cutter's Way"); the director of photography is the Hungarian-born Vilmos Zsigmond ("Close Encounters of the Third Kind").
The supporting cast comes from an international A-list.
So what went wrong?


First Look at a Black Hole's Work?


U.S. Sees 'Good Progress' on European Trade
The United States and the European Community failed again today to reach an agreement on a farm subsidy dispute that threatens to explode into a trade war.
But at the end of the talks here, both sides said they had made progress and would meet again soon.
For two years, the dispute has blocked world trade talks aimed at reducing international trade barriers and stimulating the global economy.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
7.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
4.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.00
2.89
4.74
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.15
3.12
4.44
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.36
3.33
4.51
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.43
6.37
6.97
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.54
7.50
7.97
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.50
8.45
8.95
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.40
6.41
6.89
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Occidental to Cut 500 Jobs And Freeze Many Salaries
The Occidental Petroleum Corporation said today that it would cut its operating costs by about $155 million next year by dismissing 500 workers and freezing the salaries of high-paid employees.
The company also intends to reduce capital spending by $150 million.
The planned cuts represent a second round of cost-cutting by Occidental since 1991 and should result in a $10 million charge against earnings in the fourth quarter.


On My Mind; The Bigotry Trade
When everybody shouts nobody listens.
In New York City these days, there's an awful lot of mouth about black and Jew but hardly any ear.
Racial deafness is wonderfully profitable -- for all the political, neighborhood and journalistic bigotry-peddlers, all the eager matchmakers of hatred.


On the Giants' Ponderosa It's Still Hoss Gingerly in the Saddle
When Jeff Hostetler was wheeled off on a stretcher Sunday night against the Denver Broncos with damaged cartilage between ribs, the Giants seemed in deep trouble at quarterback.
Phil Simms was on injured reserve with a strained elbow ligament, and the only other quarterbacks -- Kent Graham and Dave Brown -- were rookies.
But Hostetler survived the injury, the five sacks and numerous other hits, although the Giants lost the game.
Today, Hostetler took all the offensive turns in practice while Graham and Simms ran Philadelphia Eagles' offensive plays for the benefit of the Giants' defense.
The Giants and the Eagles will meet here Sunday, and Hostetler said he felt much better and was ready to play the full game.


An Unpopularity Vote
Sixty-six players on Morgan State's team signed a petition asking for the dismissal of Coach RICKY DIGGS, the school's acting athletic director, JOE McIVER, has confirmed.
The Baltimore Sun reported yesterday that players, unhappy with Diggs's disciplinarian style, had threatened to stage a sit-in at halftime of tomorrow's home game against Bethune-Cookman and not to play at all next season.
The team is 2-8.


Bishops Pledge to Fight Sexual Abuse by Priests
On the closing morning of their semiannual meeting, the nation's Roman Catholic bishops today adopted a resolution pledging to re-examine and reinforce church policies designed to root out priests who sexually abuse minors and to aid victims of such abuse and their families.
It was the bishops' first collective statement on the problem, although it did not go beyond previous statements by top officers of the National Conference of Catholic Bishops or guidelines the conference has been urging on bishops for five years.


Arnold S. Greenspan; Developer, 71
Arnold S. Greenspan, a suburban real-estate developer, died on Wednesday at his home in Briarcliff Manor, N.Y.
He was 71 years old.
He died of cancer, his family said.


On Stage, and Off
Curtains for a Candidate
Two tales that make one wonder whether casting is actually just a fishing term: you know, throw out a line and see who bites.
A couple of years ago, Ralph Waite traded in his acting career to pursue politics.
In 1990, as a Democratic candidate for Congress from California, he narrowly lost to the Republican incumbent, Alfred A. McCandless.


No Headline
"Avoid this crowd like the plague. And if they quote you, make damn sure they heard you." -- BARBARA BUSH, gesturing toward a cluster of reporters.
"I know that feeling already". -- HILLARY CLINTON, laughing before her tour of the White House.  [ A20:1. ]


Restaurants
Offering a $28 roast chicken at most Manhattan restaurants in these frugal times would be considered about as plausible as selling sable coats in a Woolworth outlet.
Yet Felidia, the urbane Italian restaurant on East 58th Street, does just that.
In a city where "all the carbohydrates you can lift plus wine for $15" is the leitmotif in Italian cuisine, how does the relentlessly upscale Felidia pack the house night after night?
Most notably, the quality and range of cuisine here is for the most part far ahead of the competition.
Furthermore, the polished setting and poised staff add to Felidia's allure.
And the rising celebrity status of Lydia Bastianich, the chef, author and television personality who runs the restaurant with her husband, Felix, doesn't hurt either.


EXCEPTION BY U.N. TO BELGRADE CURBS
At American urging, a United Nations Security Council committee voted today to approve an exemption to the embargo against Yugoslavia to allow delivery of television equipment to an independent station in Belgrade.
The action by the Sanctions Committee enables $238,000 worth of equipment to be sent to Studio-B, a small station that has steadily criticized the policies of the Serbian nationalist President, Slobodan Milosevic.


Stray Bullet Hits Boy in Child-Care Center
An 8-year-old boy sitting at a play table in a Brooklyn child-care center was shot in the left arm yesterday when a bullet, fired during a dispute in the street outside, went through the center's front window, and struck the child after it ricocheted off an interior wall.
Housing police said the shooting, in the Billy Martin Child Care Center in the Lafayette Gardens Project, occurred about 3 P.M. during an argument between two groups of men on DeKalb Avenue in Bedford-Stuyvesant.


METRO DIGEST
METRO DIGEST  HOME-CARE PLAN FACES BATTLE OVER COSTS
After turning to home care during the 70's as a cheap, humane alternative to putting people in institutions, New York State is trying to retool the nation's most comprehensive home-care program because the bills have gotten too high.
The battle reflects a national quandary, as Americans live longer and grow more frail in an age of strained budgets, over how best to care for people who cannot care for themselves.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY  POLICE SHAKEN BY OFFICER'S SHOOTING
Two days after a black transit police officer was apparently mistaken for a mugger and shot by white fellow officers who fired 21 shots in withering one-way fusillade, questions continued to swirl yesterday around a case that has profoundly shaken the transit police.
Some were simply factual, but there were other, more profound questions: Did racial perceptions play any role in the shooting?
Is training in racial sensitivity adequate in the transit police?
Did a lack of training contribute to the shooting?
A1.
RACE DEBATED AS FACTOR IN SHOOTING
The chief of the transit police said that race was not a factor in the mistaken shooting of a black plainclothes officer.
But the head of the black police fraternal organization said the incident showed that black officers working undercover face special dangers.
B2.
Stealthy Credit-Card Thieves
Thieves read telephone calling-card numbers and sell the numbers to others, mainly to immigrants, as they often are themselves.
B3.
INQUIRY FINDS FRAUD IN HOMELESS AGENCY
A six-month investigation by the City Council finance committee has found that the agency to renovate and repair housing for homeless appeared to be rife with corruption that included "systemic mismanagement and waste, large-scale theft and fraud, poor internal controls and a pervasive lack of accountability." B3.
Businessman pleads guilty to bribing United States Marshals Service employees.
B3.
REGION  BANKING INQUIRY IS LIMITED
The F.B.I. inquiry into the activities of Connecticut's Republican Party chairman during legislative votes on bank regulation in 1989 shows little sign of expanding into a full-scale corruption investigation of either the House or Senate, law-enforcement officials in Hartford said.
B4.
LONG ISLAND BEATING CASE GOES TO JURY
A jury began deliberating in Mineola, L.I., in the case of a white man, Shannon Siegel, who is accused of beating a black high school football star, Alfred Jermaine Ewell, nearly to death in what prosecutors called a racial attack last year.
The assault followed an end-of-the-school-year beer party.
B4.
CHILD-PORNOGRAPHY RAID AT CORNELL
F.B.I. agents raided the dormitory room of a Cornell University sophomore in an investigation into the distribution of child pornography through NetNews network, a major computer bulletin board that is used internationally.
B4.
New Brunswick, N.J., halt use of K-9 patrols for crowd control.
B6.
Our Towns by Andrew H. Malcolm B4  Chronicle B6


Peace Corps Is Due to Send First Volunteers to Russia
The Peace Corps is sending its first volunteers to Russia this week.
On Friday, 102 business executives and graduates of business schools will arrive in Moscow for three months of language training before being assigned to small business centers throughout Russia.


Sports of The Times; Even Wilt's Coming Out For Shaq
JUST how big is Shaquille O'Neal?
Seven feet one inch and 301 pounds only begin to measure and weigh the immediate impact of this enormous young man.
Two weeks into his professional basketball career, he has aroused such curiosity that even Wilt Chamberlain is coming out to take a look.
Tomorrow night, when the Orlando Magic's rookie giant has his first close encounter with an All-Star center, the Knicks' Patrick Ewing, Chamberlain is planning to squeeze his 7-1 frame and still-sculptured 275 pounds into a seat designed for more normal-sized human beings at Madison Square Garden.


Henry B. Keiser Entrepreneur, 65
Henry B. Keiser, a lawyer and businessman in Washington, died Monday at Suburban Hospital in Bethesda, Md.
He was 65 years old and lived in Bethesda, Md.
Mr. Keiser died of cancer, said his son, Matthew R. Keiser, of Washington.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-12  U.N.
TROOPS ATTACKED IN BOSNIA  U.N. troops got into an exchange of gunfire with Serbian forces while making their first overland deliveries of food to a besieged town in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
A1  News Analysis: Doubts about the U.N.'s ability in meet new roles.
A8


Sounds Around Town
Texas Tornados
Texas Tornados.
Tramps, 51 West 21st Street, Chelsea, (212) 727-7788.
Texas Tornados are the ultimate border band: permanent residents of a roadhouse somewhere between Tex and Mex, rock and boogie, tequila and sunrise, heaven and a teardrop.
The group's brand new third album, "Hangin' by a Thread" (Reprise), jumps from revved-up electric guitar to conjunto accordion, from a version of Bob Dylan's "To Ramona" to the saucy "Guacamole." Individually, any of the four main members -- Doug Sahm on vocals and guitar, Freddie Fender on velvet-voiced soul, Augie Meyers on cheesy organ, and Flaco Jimenez on accordion swirl -- could be relied on for loco energy and a buzzing good time.
Together, they waltz towards perfection.
Tonight and tomorrow night at 8:30.
Tickets are $15.
Ice T and Chuck D
Public Enemy, Ice T and House of Pain.
The Ritz, 254 West 54th Street, (212) 541-8900.
Combining power and provocation, this bill doubles up Chuck D of Public Enemy and Ice T, two of the strongest voices in rap.
Public Enemy is coming off a greatest-hits collection, "Greatest Misses" (Columbia); Ice T is coming off a year of contention.
House of Pain, whose members are white and Irish, act as tough as their heroes.
Tomorrow night and Monday night; doors open at 7.
Tickets are $25.


Sounds Around Town
Sir Roland Hanna
Sir Roland Hanna Trio, Chestnut Room, Tavern on the Green, Central Park, at West 67th Street entrance, (212) 873-3200.
Sir Roland, who was knighted by the Liberian Government in 1970, is one of the most fully rounded pianists in the contemporary jazz world.
His studies at both the Eastman and Juilliard Schools and his experience performing with Charles Mingus and the Thad Jones-Mel Lewis Band, combined with the influence of pianists like Tommy Flanagan, Hank Jones and Art Tatum, have given him a background from which he draws unusually colorful and provocative performances.
With the bassist Paul West and the drummer Eddie Locke, he is to perform tonight at 9 and 10:30 and at midnight.
There is a $10 music charge but no minimum.
Afternoons of Music
"Saturday Afternoon Jazz," with Chuck Folds, George Kelly and Bucky Calabrese, Sweet Basil, 88 Seventh Avenue South, above Bleecker Street, Greenwich Village, (212) 242-1785.
The pianist Chuck Folds has descended from a 10-year stretch in the rarefied atmosphere of Windows on the World to join a trio at street level that has taken over the Saturday afternoon jazz sessions at Sweet Basil.
Mr.
Folds has made a career of playing jazz on weekend afternoons: for 6 years at the Cookery, Barney Josephson's celebrated room on University Place at Eighth Street, and for more than 12 years at Sweet Basil, performing with Doc Cheatham's Sunday brunch group.
From 2 to 6 P.M. on Saturdays he is joined by the tenor saxophonist George Kelly, a member of the memorable Savoy Sultans in the 1940's, and the bassist Bucky Calabrese as they mix the stride piano tunes of James P. Johnson and Fats Waller with the very different world of Billy Strayhorn and others.
At the tables there is a $6 minimum for food and drink but no cover charge.
On Tenor Saxophone
Joe Henderson Quartet, Fat Tuesdays, 190 Third Avenue, at 17th Street, (212) 533-7902.
The consistently fresh style of the tenor saxophonist Joe Henderson is sparked by the influence of Sonny Rollins and a background of soul music and free jazz that gives him a strong, commanding originality.
The drive and force of his playing is heightened by a brilliant rhythm section made up of the pianist Larry Willis, the bassist Dave Holland and the drummer Al Foster.
They are to perform tonight and tomorrow night, at 8 and 10 and at midnight, and on Sunday evening at 8 and 10.
The cover charge is $20, and the minimum is $10.


W. David Streeter; Financial Manager, 75
W.
David Streeter, an expert in hospital financial management, died on Monday at his home in Cuddebackville, N.Y.
He was 75 years old.
He died of cancer and emphysema, said his wife, Harriette.


Abroad at Home; Action or Death
"There are a lot of bad situations. This is the worst. It is a national disgrace, a world disgrace."
An old Foreign Service hand was talking, a man you would think inured to disaster.
But he was driven to outrage by what is happening today -- and what the United States and the world are not doing about it -- in Somalia.


Irish Leader Confident on Abortion Changes
Prime Minister Albert Reynolds is insisting that voters in a national referendum on Nov. 25 will approve a constitutional amendment that will expand the grounds for legal abortion in this predominantly Roman Catholic country.
But none of the combatants in the national debate on the issue seem confident of victory or defeat, and polls are inconclusive.


Eric Burroughs; Stage and Radio Actor, 81
Eric Burroughs, a stage and radio actor from the 1930's to the 50's, died on Nov. 12 at the Bronx Veterans Administration Hospital.
He was 81 years old and lived in Morrisania, the Bronx.
Mr.
Burroughs was Manhattan trained as an actor in Berlin.
He performed in many stage and screen productions there before returning to the United States in 1930.
Orson Welles, in his 1935 production of "Macbeth," for the Federal Negro Theater Project, cast Mr.
Burroughs as Hecate after he enlarged the role and changed the character to that of a man.


For Children
'One at a Time'
Museum of Modern Art  11 West 53d Street  Manhattan  (212) 708-9400  Recommended ages: 5 and up  Through May 1, 1993
The emphasis, of course, is on modern artworks, whose playfulness children quickly grasp.
The family-art program encourages children to look for the "story" in, say, a Kandinsky.
"We try to stimulate a dialogue with art," said Joyce Raimondo, the family program's coordinator.
"They're not learning art-historical facts."


Retired Officer Slain In Robbery Shootout
In a blazing exchange of gunfire, a retired police sergeant who happened to walk into a Manhattan electronics store during a robbery was killed trying to stop the crime.
One of four robbers used an Uzi machine pistol to gun down the sergeant after he shouted that he was a police officer.
As he lay dead or dying, more bullets were pumped into the sergeant's body.
Article, page B1.


Big Board Short Sales Continue Trend Upward
Continuing a trend that has persisted through much of 1992, the number of shares sold short and not yet covered on the New York Stock Exchange reached a record between mid-October and mid-November, the Big Board reported yesterday.
The short positions, which traditionally indicate pessimism about the condition of the market among investors, totaled 960.5 million shares at the end of the period, up 1.3 percent from the 948.3 million reported for the previous month.


Tandy Selects Texas Agency
The Tandy Corporation named GSD&amp;M in Austin, Tex., to create advertising for new products such as Tandy computers that are sold at Tandy's Radio Shack stores.
GSD&amp;M's initial assignment will be to work with Tandy's in-house marketing team to develop a campaign for a new Tandy computer called Sensation.


Plainclothes Blacks Wary Of a Special Set of Risks
Michael F. O'Connor, the chief of the New York City transit police, said yesterday that race was not a factor in the mistaken shooting of a black plainclothes officer by other officers in Brooklyn on Tuesday.
But an official of the black police fraternal organization said the incident showed that black officers working undercover face special dangers from white colleagues.
The Brooklyn District Attorney is investigating possible criminal charges in the shooting, in which two transit officers sprayed 21 bullets at a colleague standing about 10 feet away and holding a gun on a female suspect.
All the officers were in plain clothes.


Review/Film; An '87 Mock Documentary by Fellini
Federico Fellini's "Intervista" (Interview) can be described as an impromptu fiction, a mock documentary or simply a divertissement.
There are some who have suggested that it's just something Fellini turned out when he had nothing better to do, as if the cinema master had become a Sunday painter.
In whatever way you classify "Intervista," it is an enchanting work, a logical extension of all the films that have gone before it, and one of the unequivocal delights of the current season.
The 1987 film, ignored by American distributors until now, opens today at the Lincoln Plaza Cinema under auspices of Martin Scorsese and Julian Schlossberg, the English version (meaning the excellent subtitles, I assume) supervised by Paul Mazursky and Leon Capitanos.


Hayes Laments Lack of Yanks' Courtesy Call
Charlie Hayes of the Colorado Rockies is still waiting to hear from his old team, the Yankees.
He does not expect an explanation as to why he was left unprotected during the expansion draft and, in the sometimes cold world of baseball, maybe he does not deserve one.
Still, Hayes expected some gesture from the club.
He conceded yesterday that he was puzzled that the Yankees did not bother to inform him that he was drafted in the first round by the Colorado Rockies.
Hayes watched the draft on ESPN, but he expected someone like the managing partner, Joseph Molloy, General Manager Gene Michael or Manager Buck Showalter to deliver the news.


Marines Find Racial Disparity in Officer Programs
The Marine Corps has discovered, virtually by accident, that minority members drop out of their officer training programs at higher rates than white candidates, and the service is baffled about why that is.
Alarmed by the trend among minority officer candidates and by a broader pattern of increasing attrition among all candidates, Gen.
Carl E. Mundy Jr., the Marine Corps Commandant, ordered major studies in January to assess the process by which the service recruits and selects officers, and the attrition problem in particular.


Disney Net Up on U.S. Theme-Park Results
The Walt Disney Company reported today that fiscal fourth-quarter net income increased 29 percent, mainly because of strong attendance at United States theme parks and the success of animated films.
For the quarter ended Sept. 30, Disney, based in Burbank, reported earnings of $223.7 million, or 42 cents a share, compared with $174.1 million, or 33 cents a share, in the period a year earlier.
Revenue rose 21 percent, to $2.08 billion from $1.72 billion.


O'Neal Show Continues
Magic 126, Warriors 102
ORLANDO, Fla., Nov. 19 (AP) -- The Golden State Warriors took their turn against Shaquille O'Neal and found out what the rest of the National Basketball Association is learning in a hurry: He's virtually unstoppable when Nick Anderson and Dennis Scott are also on their game.
The N.B.A.'s hottest rookie had 29 points and 16 rebounds and Anderson and Scott scored 30 and 25 tonight, respectively, to pace the Orlando Magic's 126-102 rout of the struggling Warriors, who have lost five of their last six games.


U.N. Bans Arms Sales to Liberia And Dispatches a Special Envoy
The Security Council today authorized an arms embargo against Liberia and directed Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali to send a special representative there to report on the civil war.
At the same time, the 15 members of the Council made it clear in their unanimous decision that the weapons ban would not apply to West African peacekeeping forces in the country.


Alan H. Balsam; Film Editor, 42
Alan H. Balsam, a Hollywood feature film editor, died last Friday at his home in Los Angeles.
He was 42 years old.
He died of AIDS, said his companion, Stephen Schneider.


Suburban Life in the Hectic 1990's: Dinner Delivered
Once or twice a week, Judy Chabala and her family sit down to a hot dinner delivered to their Westfield, N.J., home from a local restaurant.
Some nights it is a bucket of fried chicken; other nights, grilled shrimp with whole-grain mustard sauce from one of the fancier places in town.
"There are times when you're just too busy with work to cook," said Mrs.
Chabala, a freelance editor, "or too tired to go shopping and do the food prep. My daughter knows how busy we are, and as long as she gets a good hot meal, she doesn't care whether I cooked it or my husband cooked it. We wind up having better meals because of the selection we're offered."


Washington Talk; In F.B.I. Agent's Novel, It's 'Humps' vs. 'Suits'
With a .38-caliber snubnose wedged into his ankle holster, Special Agent Mike Devlin of the Federal Bureau of Investigation catches fugitive killers and crooks in the grimy reaches of Detroit.
But an invisible enemy stalks his trail: a suffocating law enforcement bureaucracy at the F.B.I.
Mike Devlin is the trouble-prone fictional sleuth created by a real agent, Paul Lindsay, whose recent first novel, "Witness to the Truth," published by Random House, has given voice to the cynicism and resentment that many rank-and-file agents feel toward their employer but rarely express to outsiders.


S.I. Businessman Admits Bribing U.S. Marshals Employees
The former president of a Staten Island security company has admitted bribing employees of the United States Marshals Service to help rig bids for more than $100 million in contracts for providing security officers for dozens of Federal courthouses in New York and across the country.
The defendant, Nicholas Pastoressa, a former New York City detective who had been assigned to guard City Council Speaker Peter F. Vallone, pleaded guilty to charges of bribery, conspiracy and tax evasion.


The Art Market
During the heady boom years of the late 1980's, when auctions became public spectacles and prices rose to heights that astonished even the experts, some in the art world bemoaned the fact that it was no longer the art that mattered.
Record prices were what made headlines.
"There were too many people who had no idea what they were buying," one dealer proclaimed; caught up in the excitement and frenzy of buying at public auction, they were "simply bidding on pretty colors across a crowded room."


Lawyer Insists Man on Trial In Berlin Is Honecker Double
A lawyer for a plaintiff in the manslaughter trial of the ex-East German leader, Erich Honecker, said today that the elderly man in the dock was Mr.
Honecker's double.
The lawyer, Hanns-Ekkehard Ploger, who represents relatives of a man killed fleeing East Germany, said he suspects Mr.
Honecker is in Chile.


Review/Theater; Gags and Songs in a Revue Whose Star Is Brooklyn
Jackie Mason begat "Catskills on Broadway," which begat "3 From Brooklyn," and in the third generation of comedy shows, there is a definite thinning of the line.
This revue, which opened last night at the Helen Hayes Theater, is a random series of lounge acts and second bananas who pass time until the headliner appears.
But in this case, there is no headliner, only Sal Richards, a comedian who conceived and directed the show.
His first words ring with accuracy.
Addressing the audience, he says, "I know you people have no idea who the hell I am."
"3 From Brooklyn" takes place on a mock street lined with front stoops.
A four-piece combo is crowded into a corner marked garage.
The opening act on the bill is a trio called the B.Q.E.
Dancers; they are the three in the title.
Guy Richards, whose father is Sal Richards, and his two partners do an athletic street dance that is no better or worse than that given by the average outdoor performers in Times Square.


Alabama Executes Nun's Killer; Inmate Is Put to Death in Texas
An Alabama inmate was executed early today for the 1977 slaying of a Roman Catholic nun in a cemetery where she had gone to pray.
The inmate, Cornelius Singleton, 36 years old, died in Holman Prison's electric chair at 12:20 A.M., said a prison spokesman, John Hale.


Now, Jerry Della Femina Redux
When Clark Gable returned to movie-making after World War II, M-G-M crowed, "Gable's back and Garson's got him." Yesterday, the news was that Jerry's back and Newsweek's got him.
Yes, Jerry Della Femina, whose colorful campaigns have delighted and dismayed consumers and competitors since the 1960's, is returning to advertising, five months after leaving his previous agency, Della Femina, McNamee Inc., in a bitter dispute with its French owners.


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows, performances and art exhibitions in the New York metropolitan region that are to close soon.
Closing This Weekend  "CAMP PARADOX," WPA Theater, 519 West 23d Street, Chelsea.
A drama by Barbara Graham about the relationship between a counselor and a camper at a girls' camp.
Through Sunday.
Performances: today and tomorrow at 8 P.M.; Sunday at 3 and 7:30 P.M.
Tickets: $22.
Information: (212) 206-0523.


KLM Agrees To Support Northwest
KLM Royal Dutch Airlines committed itself yesterday to putting $50 million into Northwest Airlines.
The step should help the carrier's effort to get its banks to put together a new credit line of $300 million.
In addition, all six of Northwest's unions said they saw a need to grant the carrier concessions of $300 million a year and that they were prepared to begin negotiations.


Reviews/ Film; For the Converted Only: A Phenomenon Arrives
Way back in the summer of 1991, Sonic Youth and Dinosaur Jr. were collegiate cult favorites, while Nirvana, Gumball and Babes in Toyland were among dozens of largely unknown independent rock bands.
Just over a year later, Nirvana has sold four million albums, teen-age girls crowd Sonic Youth's concerts and record companies are betting heavily on bands that would have been dismissed a year ago as just too noisy.
Sonic Youth and other bands toured European rock festivals for two weeks that summer, and Dave Markey's film "1991: The Year Punk Broke" documents their last season as insider idols.
It also captures the raucous, disheveled, self-mocking, noncommittal and ironically triumphant alternative-rock pose.
The music is a squall, turning feedback and distortion into both assault and victory cry, sometimes tuneful, sometimes just a blare.
And the musicians work hard to prove they don't take themselves too seriously.
"Our audience is expanding," says Thurston Moore of Sonic Youth.
"My mind is turning into a fine gelatinous ball of pepper."


Johannes Holtfreter, Embryology Pioneer And a Professor, 91
Johannes F. C. Holtfreter, a pioneer in the study of embryo development, died last Friday at Strong Memorial Hospital in Rochester.
He was 91 years old and lived in nearby Brighton.
He died of pneumonia, said a spokeswoman for the University of Rochester, where he taught and directed research from 1946 until his retirement in 1969.


At Sea, Still, on Bleeding Bosnia
It took six months and 100,000 deaths in Bosnia for the United Nations finally to order a maritime blockade, backed by NATO, on Serbia, the aggressor against beleaguered Bosnia.
This resort to arms, while welcome, ought not to be confused with effective action.
Even with this naval blockade, the West is still at sea.
The belated tightening of economic sanctions is no substitute for forceful pressure to stop the bloodletting in Bosnia.
And it won't stop Serbia from blowing up more of the Balkans.
It's only one of several strong steps the world needs to take, inside Bosnia.
Serbian planes still attack unprotected Bosnian cities, in defiance of a no-fly order declared by the U.N.
When will the West bestir itself long enough to
enforce
this order?


EASTERN COLLEGE REPORT
Lafayette
It will be easy to arrive late for the kickoff tomorrow of the 129th Lafayette-Lehigh game, the annual renewal of the most-played series in college football.
The starting time at Fisher Field in Easton, Pa., is 10:45 A.M.
Because excessive drinking and rowdyism plagued recent meetings, the earlier starting time was seized upon by school officials.
Lafayette (7-3) has won five games in a row this season and at least a tie for the Patriot League championship.
Should Lehigh (3-7) win, the Leopards would share the title with Holy Cross, provided the Crusaders (5-5) beat Fordham (1-8).


CHRONICLE
Will they ever be done hiring at The New Yorker?
Now ART SPIEGELMAN will join the magazine in its incarnation under Tina Brown as editor.
The Pulitzer Prize-winning creator of the two "Maus" books, which relate in comic-book (though not comic) form the story of his family's experiences in Nazi concentration camps, he will be a contributing editor and artist.
Mr.
Spiegelman, whose sketches for the books opened in an exhibition at the Galerie St.
Etienne in Manhattan this week, said he would be "exploring things that comics haven't done much, which includes doing essays on social and political themes and reportage" at the magazine.
His first strip will be in the Dec. 7 issue.


Darkness and Disorder in Subway: Questions Swirl in Police Shooting
It was already dark, nearing the end of the homebound rush Tuesday night.
Trailing a suspected thief, the transit officers, two men and a woman in plain clothes, came down the steps from the elevated mezzanine of the Brooklyn subway station.
At the street, they emerged from the station door and immediately stumbled upon a shocking tableau in the shadows.
About 10 feet away, in a small dimly lighted area formed by the station wall and a fence, they saw what appeared to be two men mugging a woman.
The men, their backs to the officers, were silhouetted in the half light.
One pointed a gun at the woman, the other had the hood of his sweatshirt over his head and was rifling through the woman's blue carryall bag.
Rapid Firing of Gun


Money Fund Assets Are Up
The total assets of the nation's 617 retail money market mutual funds increased $1.17 billion, to $389.61 billion, for the week ended Wednesday, the Investment Company Institute said yesterday.
The assets of the 386 taxable retail money market funds rose $979.0 million, to $310.76 billion, while the assets of the 231 retail tax-exempt funds increased $194.3 million, to $78.85 billion.


Art in Review
Robert Farber
Artists Space  223 West Broadway  (near Franklin Street)  SoHo  Through Dec. 1
Robert Farber's installation titled "I Thought I Had Time . . ." approaches the subject of AIDS on historical and personal terms.
One point of reference, as obvious as it is inescapable, is the plague that swept Europe in the 14th century.
The other is the artist's own experience of illness.


2 TOWNS GET AID
Deepening the involvement of United Nations forces in the Balkan war, French troops exchanged gunfire with Serbian forces today while bringing food and medicine to this besieged town.
It was the first United Nations relief convoy to reach a Bosnian town outside Sarajevo.
The United Nations thus began a major expansion of the mission authorized last September when the Security Council voted to use force if necessary to protect relief convoys in Bosnia.


Hong Kong Risks China's Anger in Giving Airport Go-Ahead
In a move certain to increase tension between China and Britain over the future of Hong Kong, the colonial Government announced today that it would spend $1.2 billion to prepare the site for a new airport here despite Beijing's refusal to approve the financing of the project.
Hong Kong Government officials said that postponing a decision on the site preparation contract while it negotiated with China would have been too costly and caused too much of a delay in the airport construction schedule.


Common Stock
*
DesignsInc., Chestnut Hill, Mass., an operator of specialty retail stores that sell Levi Strauss &amp; Co. clothing and accessories exclusively, is offering two million common shares to the public at $23.25 each through Paine Webber Inc.


Dell Computer Profits Up Sharply in Quarter
The Dell Computer Corporation's profits more than doubled in the third quarter, soaring beyond analysts' expectations, and the company's shares rose today to a new high at $38.375, up $2.125, in very active over-the-counter trading.
Net income was $28.6 million, or 72 cents a share, compared with $13 million, or 35 cents a share, in the comparable quarter a year ago.
Analysts' estimates had ranged between 48 cents and 65 cents a share.


Art in Review
Yousuf Karsh
International Center of Photography, Midtown  1133 Avenue of the Americas, at 43d Street  Through Jan. 24
For more than half a century, Yousuf Karsh has practiced a singularly grandiloquent style of photographic portraiture.
The Karsh look is unmistakable: carefully lighted and posed, sitters are turned into monumental, heroic figures.


Sweden Abandons Its Effort To Prop Up the Krona's Value
After a long and expensive battle against the markets to maintain the strength of its currency, Sweden gave up the fight today and allowed the krona to fall in value.
The surrender came after an unsuccessful attempt to head off speculators by raising Sweden's benchmark interest rate to 20 percent from 11.5 percent earlier in the day.
After giving up and allowing its currency to float in value, the Government pushed the interest rate back down to 12.5 percent.


New President Named For House of Seagram
Steven J. Kalagher, an 18-year employee of the Seagram Company, will be the next president of House of Seagram, the beverage giant's United States spirits subsidiary.
His appointment, one of several senior management changes disclosed yesterday, will take effect at the start of the company's next fiscal year on Feb. 1.


Topics of The Times; New York's Global City Council
Forget about mundane local problems.
Those world affairs experts on the New York City Council have struck again.
Yesterday the Council approved a resolution calling on the U.N.
Secretary General to ask the U.S. to grant amnesty to all Puerto Rican political prisoners.
Among the "political prisoners" are nine members of the violent Los Macheteros nationalist group.
They are serving time not for their political beliefs but for crimes related to the $7.1 million Wells Fargo robbery in West Hartford, Conn., in 1982.


Diana Hirsh, Editor and Author, 77
Diana Hirsh, an editor and author, died on Nov. 14 at St.
Vincent's Hospital and Medical Center of New York in Manhattan.
She was 77 years old and lived in Manhattan.
Miss Hirsh died of pneumonia, said her sister, Hadassah Hirsh of Manhattan, who reported her death yesterday.


Battle Over TV Reruns Is Rerun in Court
Hollywood producers and the television networks squared off yesterday in a Federal court in Chicago in their long-running battle over the networks' bid to enter the $5 billion-a-year market for television reruns.
In a filing with the United States Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit in Chicago, the networks urged the court to free them from regulations that have blocked them from owning lucrative reruns rights to popular programs like "The Cosby Show" and "M*A*S*H." The producers, in turn, asked the court to keep the rules in place, arguing that the networks would stifle competition if they were allowed to re-enter the business.


Hills Department Stores reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Bliss &amp; Laughlin Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Can It Be?


Horizon Resources Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Chambers Development reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Fervid Debate on Gambling: Disease or Moral Weakness?
As Joe S. strained through a lifting fog of anesthesia, his first thought was the realization that he had survived 10 hours of heart surgery.
His second thought was to summon a relative to his bedside to ask him about a promised $10,000 he needed to settle a gambling debt.
"I got a tube down my throat and can't talk," said Mr.
S., a 45-year-old convicted embezzler who spoke on the condition that his full name not be published.
"I asked for his hand and with my finger I traced a question mark in his palm and then I made a dollar sign."


CRI Insured Mortgage Assn reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Analyst's Remarks Hit Dell Computer Stock
A securities analyst suggested today that the Dell Computer Corporation, one of the stock market's hottest companies, had accounted improperly for foreign-currency trades, and Dell's stock slid nearly 10 percent.
Dell officials strongly denied the allegations, and by late afternoon lawyers for the fast-growing maker of personal computers were threatening David R. Korus, the analyst who questioned Dell's actions, and his firm, the Kidder, Peabody &amp; Company unit of the General Electric Company, with lawsuits.
An Unrecognized Loss
Dell's shares plunged $3.75 in the over-the-counter market, to $34.625, with a huge volume of more than 10 million shares traded.
The stock had reached a record $39.25 in trading Thursday after the company reported that sales and profits more than doubled in the third quarter.


Classical Music in Review
Alicia de Larrocha Pianist Carnegie Hall


No Relief In Return For Knicks
At the conclusion of the Knicks' disturbing three-game Western trip, Mark Jackson and Kiki Vandeweghe were smiling.
Pat Riley and the Knicks were seething.
It was undoubtedly a long plane ride home yesterday for the Knicks (4-4), who did not win on the trip, which ended Thursday night with an emotional 101-91 loss to the Los Angeles Clippers at the Sports Arena.
The game belonged to Jackson, the former Knicks point guard who was traded in September, a trade that will be second-guessed all season if the Knicks do not perform more consistently.


Wilfred P. Cohen, 93, A Clothing Executive
Wilfred P. Cohen, a retired men's-clothing executive and a philanthropist who helped hospitals, universities and other causes, died on Thursday at his home in Sands Point, L.I.
He was 93 years old.
For more than 30 years, Mr.
Cohen headed Joseph H. Cohen &amp; Sons in Manhattan, manufacturers of men's suits and sport coats.
In 1956 he sold the company, which became part of Botany 500.


Reform Defense Now
If war, to paraphrase Clausewitz, is the continuation of national policy by other means, then the triumph of democracy in the cold war without bloodshed must rank as one of history's greatest military victories.
The question now is what to do with our military.
There are three options: our military structures can be maintained, they can be reduced or they can be reformed.
The Clinton Administration should choose reform.
This option sounds easier than it is.
No modern nation has reformed its military without a major military defeat.
The military is a disciplined, well-entrenched bureaucracy with enormous economic and industrial power.
George Bush's promise of new contracts for F-15's and F-16's for foreign sales and Bill Clinton's support for those sales along with his commitment to the Seawolf submarine and the V-22 Osprey -- none of which are necessary for our future security -- testify to the military's power.


Augusta: A Dispute Within a Dispute
Augusta National Golf Club in Georgia is lined with dogwoods, but unseen social boundaries are again making it the target of more than just Titleists.
By volunteering its sacrosanct grounds for the proposed men's and women's golf competitions of the 1996 Summer Olympics in Atlanta, Augusta has caused sharp debate in Olympic and community circles.


Yale Acquires Cole Porter Notebooks
A trove of Cole Porter material, written while he was a college student and discovered in a house in Kennebunk, Me., has been acquired by the music library of Yale University.
The collection includes notes, lyrics and doodles as well as the score and lyrics for a football song and the outline for college musical, both previously unknown.
The 700 manuscript pages were written in pencil in Porter's neat, loopy hand while he was at Yale, from which he graduated in 1913.


Times Accord With Pressmen
A tentative contract agreement was reached yesterday between The New York Times and the pressmen's union, an important step in hastening the full operation of the newspaper's $450 million printing plant in Edison, N.J.
A spokeswoman for The Times, Nancy Nielsen, said last night that the agreement, which must still be voted on by the membership, was achieved after three days of around-the-clock negotiations.
Terms of the contract were not revealed.


Sabatini Goes to the Net to Put Capriati Away
Finesse met fury last night in the quarterfinals of the Virginia Slims Championships, and Gabriela Sabatini, once she added fearlessness to the quotient, was able to tame Jennifer Capriati, 6-1, 3-6, 6-4.
"I think that's all I could do, was come to the net," said Sabatini, who felt she needed to resort to some risky heroics against the onslaught of the teen-ager's groundstrokes.


Disney (Walt) Co. (N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Justice Dept. Jolted by Leak In Los Angeles Beating Case
The Justice Department has been shaken by the disclosure of an internal memorandum to a defense lawyer laying out strategy for prosecuting four Los Angeles police officers in the beating of Rodney G. King.
But lawyers on both sides of the politically charged case said today that they doubted the disclosure would seriously undermine the case.
It occurred at least three months ago at a very early stage, soon after a grand jury indicted the officers on Federal civil rights charges last Aug. 4.


Veto the Chiropractors' Power Play
Score one for the special-interest lobbyists.
The New York State Legislature has sent to Gov.
Mario Cuomo a bill that would require group health insurance policies to include
unlimited
chiropractic services.
The bill has everything to do with the lobbying power of the American Chiropractic Association -- and nothing to do with proper health care.
It deserves a swift veto.
Recent studies in Britain and the U.S. show that chiropractic care for some types of lower back and other musculoskeletal pain is cost-effective, but that other services are not demonstrably better than a placebo.
Currently, insurers can let customers decide which, if any, chiropractic services they want covered.
But if the Legislature gets its way, everyone in a group plan will be forced to pay for the entire range of chiropractic services.


Donaldson Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Pro-Israel Group Gets Leader
A leading pro-Israel group, the American Israel Public Affairs Committee, has selected a new president with close ties to the Democratic Party.
On Thursday, the organization chose Steve Grossman, a Massachusetts businessman and chairman of his state's Democratic Party, to replace David Steiner, who resigned on Nov. 4.


FRENCH WITHHOLD SUPPORT; Grapes of Gallic Wrath
By settling a bitter farm trade dispute with the United States today, the European Community has chosen to ignore strong French objections to the deal, but it is still unclear whether France will invoke its right to veto the agreement.
In its first response tonight, France, which is Europe's largest exporter of farm products, criticized the accord, which was worked out by the community's negotiators.


Gendis Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 24


Officer Cleared in Bushwick Death
A Brooklyn grand jury decided yesterday not to indict a police officer in the death of a Bushwick man shot when the officer mistook a bottle of beer the man held in a paper bag for a gun, Charles J. Hynes, the Brooklyn District Attorney, said last night.
The grand jury was the second to consider charges in the death of Hector Rivera, 47 years old.
On May 26, the first grand jury returned an indictment of second-degree manslaughter against the officer, John Tavarez, 21.


Gencor Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Big Fire in Windsor Castle Raises Fear About Artwork
A fire swept through a part of Windsor Castle today, causing extensive damage and raising concern about one of the world's great collections of art and furniture.
Several hundred firefighters managed to contain the fire to one section of the vast structure, which has been a home of British monarchs for more than 850 years.


Corrections
A brief report in Weekend yesterday about a free Interfaith Concert of Remembrance for victims of the Holocaust, tonight at 8 at the Cathedral of St.
John the Divine, included an incorrect information telephone number provided by the publicity agent.
The correct number is (212) 662-2133.


Corrections
A brief report in Weekend yesterday about the holiday fair at St.
Luke's School, 487 Hudson Street, Greenwich Village, misstated the fair days in some copies.
The fair ends today; it will not be open tomorrow.


Yankees Sign Stanley to Two-Year Deal
The Yankees eliminated the prospect of salary arbitration with MIKE STANLEY yesterday by signing the catcher to a two-year contract.
The 29-year old Stanley earned $145,000 last season as the right-handed backup to MATT NOKES.


Winning Courier Stays No. 1
Boris Becker strode proudly to the net with his fellow citizens roaring and his right index finger stretched high toward the ceiling.
But because of Becker's efforts, that gesture applied neither to him nor his vanquished opponent, Stefan Edberg.
Becker's 6-4, 6-0 victory tonight in the final session of round-robin play at the ATP Tour championships did more than clinch him a spot in Saturday's semifinals.
It clinched the year-end No. 1 ranking for Jim Courier, the first American to do so since John McEnroe in 1984.


Nonrefundable Bonds Can Indeed Be Refunded
BONDS go down when things are good and up when things are bad.
So it seems fitting that bonds get refunded even when they're not refundable.
Only Alice in Wonderland could really feel at home in bond land.
And even if Alice owned bonds, she'd be a tad curious about what's been happening lately.


Nobody Benefits From Moratorium on Social Service Facilities
To the Editor:
I wish that "The West Side Has Lost Patience" by Susan Sandler (Op-Ed, Nov. 7) had been headlined "A Few West Siders Have Lost Patience." That would more accurately describe the reaction of my community to the establishment of social service facilities here.


Arabs' Warning to Clinton: Prod the Israelis Over Talks
Staking out their negotiating position vis-a-vis the Clinton Administration, Arab delegates to the Middle East peace talks warned today that unless the new President moves quickly to prod Israel into concessions, they would abandon the discussions early next year.
But at the same time, the head of the Syria's delegation to the talks signaled his country's willingness to take part in another round of negotiations next month.


Yankees Tell Hayes They Made a Mistake
Three days after the Yankees lost CHARLIE HAYES to the Colorado Rockies in baseball's expansion draft, club officials finally spoke with the third baseman.
Hayes said that General Manager GENE MICHAEL called him yesterday and said the Yankees made a mistake by leaving him unprotected and also apologized for not calling Hayes sooner.
Manager BUCK SHOWALTER left a message for Hayes, but Showalter was not home when Hayes returned the call.
"Gene said they made a mistake," Hayes said.
"He thanked me for everything and I thanked him for everything."


4 DINKINS OFFICIALS FOUND IN CONTEMPT ON HOUSING DELAY
A state judge fined New York City yesterday for what she called the Dinkins administration's repeated failure to shelter homeless families adequately.
She also ordered four city officials to spend a night in the same offices where hundreds of homeless families have had to sleep.
Justice Helen E. Freedman of State Supreme Court in Manhattan, who has been presiding over the case against the city for its treatment of the homeless for seven years, repeatedly expressed frustration at the city's failure to follow her orders to provide decent shelter for such families.


LTV Agrees To Changes On Pensions
The LTV Corporation, which operates the nation's third-largest steelmaker, said yesterday that it had reached an agreement with the Federal agency that insures pensions that would reduce by $100 million the cash amount the steel company will repay its employees' pension funds.
But the Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation and LTV also agreed that proceeds from the settlement of a lawsuit involving the steel company's railroads would go to the pension plans, rather than be allocated to creditors, as previously agreed.


Jewish Law Isn't Based on Patriarchs; Reconstructionist Way
To the Editor:
Re "Debating Intermarriage and Jewish Survival" (front page, Oct. 18): Reconstructionist synagogues, which set their own policies, have developed innovative responses to integrate non-Jewish spouses into congregational life and Jewish tradition.


Clinton's Point Man on Economics
From among a welter of advisers, a noneconomist -- Robert B. Reich of Harvard's Kennedy School of Government -- is emerging as one who has President-elect Bill Clinton's ear on economic policy.
The two are struggling with ideas that appear to go well beyond the market-oriented economics that became standard in the Reagan and Bush years.


Fire Sweeps Through Windsor Castle


Zolak the Unfathomable To Lead Pats Against Jets
In the back rooms, the coaches preparing for the next opponent endlessly click, click, click the tape machines: back and forth, freeze-frame, let's see that again.
But sometimes a team comes up against a quarterback who has played only one game in his National Football League career.
Sometimes there is simply not enough footage for a team to study.


Lincoln Autograph Sells for $1.3 Million
An autograph album signed by Abraham Lincoln about a month before his death was sold yesterday at Christie's in New York for $1.3 million, a record at auction for an American manuscript and document.
In signing the book, Lincoln included the 75-word sentence that begins, "With malice toward none; with charity for all," which was the concluding paragraph of his Second Inaugural address, delivered on March 4, 1865.
He died on April 14.


Canadians Refused Solutions That Didn't Solve
To the Editor:
As a faithful reader, I was taken aback by the tone and content of "Canada, Still Divided," your Oct. 28 postreferendum editorial.
You seem to chide Canadians for rejecting the Charlottetown Accord, a series of amendments that proposed fundamental changes to the Canadian Constitution.
You imply that alienation from politics and an unwillingness to accommodate the views of others were the only reasons that led more than 54 percent of Canadians to reject this "good compromise."


Wilbur H. Ziehl, 74, An Ex-Federal Official
Wilbur H. Ziehl, a retired Federal Government and United Nations official, died on Wednesday in Iron River, Wis.
He was 74 years old and lived in Pompano Beach, Fla.
He died of injuries in an automobile accident, a funeral home spokesman said.


Information Resource Engineering Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


A Trade War Averted
The trade deal reached yesterday by the U.S. and the European Community ends a bitter six-year dispute over European farm subsidies.
The agreement not only averts a ruinous trade war, but also unleashes the all-important international trade talks, known as the Uruguay Round, that were stalled by the farm dispute.
Yesterday's settlement will benefit consumers around the world.
Though details are sketchy, the agreement appears to be a reasonable compromise.
Neither France, the most recalcitrant of the European nations, nor the U.S. got everything it wanted, but each got something important.


FRENCH WITHHOLD SUPPORT; 2 SIDES COMPROMISE
After six tortuous years of confrontation, the United States and the European Community found a compromise today on how to reduce farm subsidies, clearing the way for broader world trade talks to proceed.
In France, which has been uncompromising in its opposition to American demands, Agriculture Minister Jean-Pierre Soisson quickly said he could not accept the deal.
But he stopped short of saying his country would invoke its right under community rules to veto the agreement.


Federal Officials Allow Caravan of Aid to Head for Cuba


FRENCH WITHHOLD SUPPORT; 2 SIDES COMPROMISE
After six tortuous years of confrontation, the United States and the European Community found a compromise today on how to reduce farm subsidies, clearing the way for broader world trade talks to proceed.
In France, which has been uncompromising in its opposition to American demands, Agriculture Minister Jean-Pierre Soisson quickly said he could not accept the deal.
But he stopped short of saying his country would invoke its right under community rules to veto the agreement.


Bush Aides Say They Won't Relax Wetlands Rule
The Bush Administration will not try to relax regulations that protect wetlands from development, White House officials said today.
Shortly after the election, members of the staff of the White House Council on Competitiveness, which is headed by Vice President Dan Quayle, discussed the possibility of changing the wetlands regulation.
But they abandoned the idea in the face of resistance from environmental officials in the Bush Administration.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Trade Accord
A compromise was reached on reducing farm subsidies in Europe, clearing the way for broader world trade talks to proceed.
But the French Agriculture Minister quickly said he could not accept the deal.
The compromise calls for deep cuts in the European Community's subsidized grain exports and subsidized production of soybeans and other oilseed crops.  [ Page 1. ]
The European Community ignored strong French objections in settling the farm dispute.
But it is still unclear whether France will invoke its right to overturn the agreement.
News Analysis.  [ 1. ]
Soybean futures prices fell as traders were said to be disappointed with the scope of the agreement on farm subsidies.  [ 44. ] Companies
Monsanto announced a retrenchment that includes asset sales, operational changes and spending cuts that would reduce total employment by about 3,200, or 10 percent.  [ 33. ]
An analyst accused Dell Computer of improper accounting for foreign currency trades.
The company hotly denied the report, but its share price fell almost 10 percent.  [ 33. ]
Olympia &amp; York's restructuring plan should not be harmful to the Canadian property market, analysts say, even if secured creditors seize office buildings.  [ 33. ]
LTV reached an agreement with the Government's pension agency that would reduce by $100 million the cash amount its steel subsidiary will repay its employees' pension funds.  [ 35. ]
Minnesota plans to review the financial condition of Northwest Airlines before it issues $350 million in bonds to help the carrier build a maintenance and engine repair center.  [ 35. ]
Marriott bondholders must combine their suits against the hotel chain and delay interviews with potential witnesses until Jan. 8, according to a ruling by a Federal judge in Baltimore.  [ 35. ]
Westinghouse Electric has offered to reduce the costs to the Philippines for operating a nuclear power plant.  [ 35. ]
Federal officials believe vehicle fire safety standards do little, but no changes have been proposed.
The standards could be an issue in the debate over the fire safety of certain G.M. pickups.  [ 7. ] The Economy
Hollywood and the TV networks squared off in a Federal court in their battle over the networks' bid to enter the $5 billion-a-year market for television reruns.  [ 39. ] International
Mexico's President says he will negotiate a solution to problems created by the North American Free Trade Agreement soon after Bill Clinton takes office in January.  [ 1. ] Markets
Pressure for devaluation mounted in Europe, focusing on some of the weaker currencies.
The new wave of uncertainty occurred after Sweden gave up a long fight to support its currency.  [ 33. ]
Stocks ended higher in heavy trading.
The Dow Jones industrial average rose 17.83 points, to close at 3,227.36, and the Standard &amp; Poor's 500-stock index closed at a record high.  [ 34. ]
Treasury bond prices were little changed in uneventful trading.
Analysts said there was no fresh news to move the market.  [ 43. ] Your Money
A new law may create a roadblock for people making deposits in I.R.A.'s.
The measure, which takes effect on Jan. 1, imposes a 20 percent withholding tax on lump-sum distributions.  [ 31. ]
Bondholders are being surprised by early redemptions.
It is impossible to protect against every redemption possibility, but knowledge of refunding loopholes may help a bit.  [ 31. ]
It usually pays to take a tax deduction as soon as possible, but this year a delay is essential for taxpayers who are considering big gifts of property.
John H. Cushman Jr.: Taxes.  [ 32. ]


Penguins Get Defensive And Frustrate Devils
The Pittsburgh Penguins showed total disrespect for the Devils' three-game winning streak tonight.
The two-time defending Stanley Cup champions took control from the outset and posted a 4-1 victory at Byrne Meadowlands Arena that extended Pittsburgh's Patrick Division lead to 9 points over second-place New Jersey.
Shawn McEachern and Rick Tocchet had two goals each for the Penguins, and Mario Lemieux had three assists to boost his scoring lead in the National Hockey League to 55 points.


Around the Field in 800 Days: Johnson Is Ready to Play Third
The public signals have become loud and insistent.
The manager offers his late-season lineup proposal for 1993, and it includes Howard Johnson at third base.
The Mets lose a young third-base prospect in the expansion draft and barely manage a shrug.
The Mets are asked about Dave Magadan, and they imply that they don't even intend to offer salary arbitration to the free-agent infielder.
To all the signals, Johnson had for months offered a public silence.
He had not confirmed his willingness to accept the reassignment.
He had not addressed his flat assertion of a year ago that he would not return to the infield.
He had not talked about his fears or excitement regarding his sixth position change in the last three seasons.


Executive Changes
NEW ENGLAND INVESTMENT MARKETING, Boston, a unit of New England Investment Cos., appointed Joseph Briggs president and chief executive.
OHIO EDISON CO., Akron, Ohio, named Willard R. Holland, president, to the additional post of chief executive.


Evangelical Update
At the Republican governors' conference this week in Wisconsin, Gov.
Kirk Fordice of Mississippi said, "The United States of America
is a Christian nation." After his remark, Gov. Carroll A. Campbell Jr. of South Carolina
said: "The value base of this country comes from the Judeo-Christian heritage, and that is something we need to realize. I just wanted to add the 'Judeo' part." Governor Fordice replied, "If I wanted to do that I would have done it."
The issue, bearing on the divisive role of religion in the party and President Bush's defeat, came up on CNN's "Crossfire" program on Thursday.
Here are excerpts of an exchange between Michael Kinsley, a host, and
Governor Fordice.


No Headline
We focused on where the real power is: in the states and in the precincts and in the neighborhoods where people live and work. -- RALPH REED, head of the Christian Coalition, describing election successes.  [ 1:2. ]


Charming Shoppes reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Con Ed Pact to Reduce Planned Rate Increases
Consolidated Edison announced today that it had reached an agreement to buy electricity from a natural-gas-fired plant in upstate New York at lower rates than it had negotiated previously, saving ratepayers $300 million over five years.
The 40-year contract should also go a long way toward meeting New York City's energy needs for at least 15 years, as well as helping the utility reduce its reliance on the older, dirtier electricity plants in New York City, officials said.


'We Don't Allow Strollers,' Said the Clerk
To the Editor:
There is a group of people in New York who are regularly denied access to dining facilities, places of business and even worship.
Some facilities state their prejudice with signs on their doors.
Others discreetly turn away the individuals at the entrance.
Usually, no explanation is offered the victims of this discrimination.
Even if they manage to gain entrance, they are often met with hostile glances.
I am talking about mothers of infants and small children in strollers.


This Game May Rattle the Richter
The fireworks should start early at the Carrier Dome today (3:30 P.M., Channel 7), where Syracuse will try to be a nasty host to the University of Miami and its winning streak of 27 games.
The streak is the longest in college football, but it's hard to find a member of the confident Hurricanes who considers that a burden.
Both teams want to score first for different reasons.
Syracuse (9-1-0) wants to encourage the crowd; Miami (9-0) wants to quiet it.
The noise in the dome gives the home team an advantage in the opinion of coaches like Pittsburgh's Paul Hackett, who says visiting players have trouble hearing their quarterback's signals.
When Syracuse has the ball, the crowd turns silent.


City Continues Effort to Prevent Sexual Harassment


News Summary
International 2-6 A BREAKTHROUGH ON TRADE
The U.S. and the European Community agreed on a way to reduce farm subsidies, clearing the way for broader world trade talks.
But the French Agriculture Minister said he could not accept the deal.  1


Canam Manac reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Vanessa S. Lynn, 42, A Gallery Director
Vanessa S. Lynn, a New York gallery director who wrote about contemporary American crafts, died yesterday at New York University Medical Center.
She was 42 years old and lived in Valley Stream, L.I.
The cause of death was cancer, her family said.


Dumping at a Park in Queens Angers at Least One Resident


Q &amp; A
Brokerage Accounts
Q How do the managed accounts offered by brokerage firms work?
MARY ANN HILTERHAUS, GLEN RIDGE, N.J.
A Managed accounts are often called wrap accounts because they wrap the investment adviser's fee and stockbroker's commission into one all-inclusive fee.


Boston Technology Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Bahr May Miss Eagles Game
Matt Bahr has a strained right knee and might not be able to kick for the Giants on Sunday against the Philadelphia Eagles.
If he cannot, he will be replaced by 33-year-old Raul Allegre, who kicked for the Giants from 1986 to 1990, or 26-year-old Ken Willis.
Coach Ray Handley said Bahr hurt the knee early in Thursday's practice and kept kicking, hoping the pain would disappear.
When it did not, the Giants called Allegre, who was waived by the Jets in the final preseason cutdown, and Willis, who was waived two weeks ago by the Tampa Bay Buccaneers.


RESULTS PLUS
N.H.L.
Red Wings Stage Rally  The Detroit Red Wings scored three goals in a 4-minute-16-second span in the third period to overcome a two-goal deficit and beat the slumping Washington Capitals, 7-5, last night in Landover, Md.
Mike Ridley's second goal of the night had given Washington a 5-3 lead with 11 minutes 13 seconds left in the period.
But Steve Yzerman got his 16th goal on a 40-foot slap shot with 8:01 left, and Sheldon Kennedy tied it on a shot in the slot off a pass from Mike Sillinger with 4:27 remaining.
Paul Ysebaert's 20-foot slap shot with 3:45 left gave the Red Wings the lead, and Shawn Burr capped the scoring with an empty-net goal.
Peter Bondra also scored two goals for the Capitals, who have lost four straight.
Washington blew a two-goal lead in the third period of its last game, against Minnesota.
Washington goaltender Don Beaupre, the victim of the Detroit comeback, hasn't won since Oct. 17, the last time Washington won at the Capital Centre.
Beaupre has dropped six straight decisions.
Dino Ciccarelli, in his first appearance at the Capital Centre since being traded by Washington during the off season, got his team-high 17th assist for Detroit. (AP) COLLEGE BASKETBALL  Female Player Scores  Everyone who wondered when they would see Melissa Burden play men's college basketball did not have to wait long.
Burden got into last night's game in the first two minutes, and finished with 1 point and 1 assist as Savannah (Ga.) College of Art and Design lost its season opener to Maryville College, 135-51, in Maryville, Tenn.
Burden, a 5-foot-7-inch senior guard, played 11 minutes 48 seconds as Savannah lost its opener in the Maryville Invitational Basketball Tournament.
She made one of two foul shots, and also committed a foul. (AP) BOXING  Hernandez Keeps Title  Genaro Hernandez of the United States retained his World Boxing Association junior lightweight title and kept intact his unbeaten record by stopping Yuji Watanabe of Japan in the sixth round yesterday in Tokyo.
Referee Enzo Montero halted the bout 59 seconds into the sixth round with Hernandez punishing Watanabe with a barrage of lefts and rights.
There were no knockdowns in the match at the Tokyo Metropolitan Gym.
The victory was Hernandez's third defense of his title and his 27th victory.
It was Watanabe's first defeat after 10 victories, all by knockouts. (AP) GOLF  Peoples Leads by 2  David Peoples of the United States extended his lead to two shots in the Dunlop Phoenix tournament when he shot a two-under-par 70 yesterday in the event in Miyazaki, Japan.
Peoples, playing in his first tournament in Japan, has a 136 total after two rounds and leads by two over Kiyoshi Murota of Japan, who also shot a 70.
Larry Mize, a two-time former champion, was among four players tied for third at 139.
Larry Nelson, the defending champion, moved into contention with a 69 and a 141 total. (AP)


Correction
A Topic of The Times yesterday on the New York City Council reported incorrectly that Councilman Charles Millard cast the sole vote against a Council resolution in February opposing the extradition of Joseph Doherty, the Irish Republican Army member who was a fugitive from a murder conviction.
Councilman Sheldon Leffler also voted against the misguided measure.


Olympia's Woes May Aid Canadian Market
Although secured creditors may seize many office buildings throughout Canada under new restructuring plans of Olympia &amp; York Developments Ltd., many analysts believe the immediate impact on the Canadian property market could actually be positive.
Most financial institutions have been in repossession situations before, though perhaps not to the extent faced with Olympia's collapse, and are well aware that properties cannot be dumped suddenly on a marketplace already rocked by high vacancy rates and plunging values.


Mexico's Leader Seeks to Address Clinton's Concerns on Trade Pact
President Carlos Salinas de Gortari, seeking to calm President-elect Bill Clinton's concerns about the free-trade agreement with Mexico and Canada, says he is eager to negotiate a solution to problems created by the accord soon after Mr.
Clinton takes office in January.
In an interview Thursday evening, Mr.
Salinas said he shared Mr.
Clinton's belief that steps must be taken to protect the environment from damage that might be caused by the accord known as the North American Free Trade Agreement.


Observer; Met a Man Who Wasn't There
I have a wonderful idea for today's article, and will write it down as soon as I remember what it is.
You are certain to be enthralled by it.
That's what I said to myself when the idea came to mind.
"Now that," I said to myself, "is an idea that will enthrall every reader." That much I remember with some accuracy because I was in the midst of saying it to myself when the phone rang.


David McAdams, 61, A Senior U.N. Official
David McAdams, a senior official of the United Nations Development Program, died yesterday in a hospital in Bloemfontein, South Africa.
He was 61 years old and lived in Lusaka, Zambia.
Mr.
McAdams died of complications after undergoing surgery for an aneurysm, said his wife, Dominique.


Maple Leaf Foods reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


BGS Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Religion Notes
Tarnished Halos
The image of the clergy, once one of the most respected groups in the nation, continues to slip in the public eye.
A survey by the Princeton Religion Research Center has found that public confidence in the nation's priests, ministers and rabbis has reached an all-time low.


Pistons Suspend Rodman Without Pay
The Detroit Pistons yesterday indefinitely suspended DENNIS RODMAN without pay.
The suspension is retroactive to Thursday night's 99-87 loss at Denver, a team spokesman, MATT DOBEK, said.
Rodman earns about $2.35 million this season, or about $30,000 per game.


When Police Shoot Police
When a group of Transit Police officers opened fire Tuesday on two of their fellow officers, they taught New Yorkers two sobering lessons.
One is that racial stereotyping can distort judgment.
The other is that giving police more firepower doesn't necessarily enhance public safety.
Officers Derwin Pannell and Kenneth Donnelly, both in plainclothes, were in the process of arresting a fare beater at gunpoint when three other officers arrived and drastically misread the situation as an armed robbery.
Two of them, John Napolitano and Robert Green, quickly fired 21 shots, inflicting a neck wound that could leave Officer Pannell paralyzed.


Bridge
The Fall Nationals of the American Contract Bridge League began here this afternoon with thousands of players from North America, and a handful from other continents, looking forward to 10 days of tournament play.
There will be 11 major titles at stake and a host of minor ones.
When the championships were held a year ago, the prestigious Reisinger title was up for grabs with three deals remaining.
On the first one, shown in the diagram, David Berkowitz of Old Tappan, N.J., landed in three no-trump after a competitive auction.
He ran into a tricky defense from the British partnership of Andy Robson, East, and Tony Forrester, West.


Rosen Resigns From the Giants
A tearful AL ROSEN resigned yesterday as president and general manager of the San Francisco Giants, saying the team's new owners should pick their own management.
The move was a clear indication that the sale of the team to a local group is virtually done.
"It's been a great seven years," said Rosen, who led the Giants to two National League West titles and the league's pennant in 1989.
Rosen, 68 years old, said he did not think he would be very far from the game.
"I'll be available," he said.


Toon Placed On Injured List
For Al Toon, the Jets' wide receiver, the season has effectively ended.
Toon, troubled with post-concussion headaches and wooziness since being injured against Denver 12 days ago, was placed on injured reserve today and must miss at least the next four games.
Only six remain.


W.T.A. Tries to Make Parents Behave
They aren't calling it the Jim Pierce rule, but the most overwrought tennis father on the women's tour does figure prominently in its inception.
Because of repeated reports of disruptive on-site behavior by the coaches and relatives of several professional players in 1992, such behavior at any Kraft Tour event will not go unpunished next year.
Ejection and possible fines for offenders were written into the rulebook this week by the governing body of women's tennis.


Corrections
A Man in the News article yesterday about Sherman M. Funk, the State Department's inspector general, misidentified the author and subject of a poem that he described as a guide to his work.
The poem, "I Paint What I See," is by E. B. White, not Carl Sandburg; its subject is the Mexican muralist Diego Rivera, not Diego Garcia.


Avoiding New Withholding on Nest Eggs
When Louis E. Riva of Yorktown Heights, N.Y., retired from his job as an instrument technician four years ago, he took the $200,000 in his company retirement account and soon thereafter put it into an individual retirement account.
Because he has since earned about 10 percent a year on his I.R.A. through investments in stock mutual funds and Treasury notes, he has been able to withdraw $900 a month to supplement his Social Security and other income -- and still wind up with more than $240,000 in the account today.
Moreover, he pays tax only on the money he withdraws.
The rest continues to work on a tax-deferred basis.


John C. Foreman, 67; Was Movie Producer
John C. Foreman, the producer of the 1985 hit movie "Prizzi's Honor" and other films, died yesterday at his home in Beverly Hills, Calif.
He was 67 years old.
His doctor, Charles Kivowitz, said he died of a heart attack.


New York City Is Called Lax In Preventing Harassment
A year after Mayor David N. Dinkins ordered all New York City agencies to adopt policies and training to prevent sexual harassment, many agencies are struggling to achieve the goal, according to a report released yesterday.
The report, presented by the city's Department of Personnel at a City Council subcommittee hearing, showed that only about 30 percent of the 40 city agencies directly under the Mayor have completed the required annual training for their workers on sexual-harassment issues this year.
Sixty-two percent of the agencies reported they had done some of the training, which is supposed to be completed by the end of next month.


Flight International reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Excerpts From Joint Statement by U.S. and Europe
Following are excerpts from the text of the joint statement issued by the Commission of the European Community and the United States on the completion of their trade negotiations, as transcribed by The Associated Press:
The United States and the Commission of the European Community intend to pursue a successful conclusion to the Uruguay Round.
As a result of our discussions, we believe that we have achieved the progress necessary to assure agreements on the major elements blocking progress in Geneva, notably in agriculture, services and market access.
A successful outcome will be a positive factor for the trade and economic growth of the economies of the world.


Genovese Drug Stores Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 6


Jewish Law Isn't Based on Patriarchs
To the Editor:
I agree with Rabbi Emily Korzenik (letter, Nov. 5) that the Jewish community should reach out to intermarried families "with love instead of initial rejection."


INSIDE
New Twist to Passport Case
The White House has told aides that they may destroy telephone logs, documents that Congressional investigators say they need.
Page 7.
Auto Anxiety in Hong Kong
More than 1,300 expensive cars were stolen in the colony in the first nine months of this year, many of them taken to China by speedboats.
Page 4.
Mad About 'Lucia'
The Metropolitan Opera audience waxed indignant at a new staging of "Lucia di Lammermoor." Edward Rothstein's review is on page 11.


Plane Noise Faces Limits From F.A.A.
The Federal Aviation Administration yesterday announced measures intended to better protect residents of the New York region, who live beneath the busiest airspace in the world, from aircraft noise.
The measures, which will affect people from Newburgh, N.Y., to Newark, include shifting aircraft approaches to La Guardia and Kennedy International Airports, making helicopters fly higher over Westchester County and making air traffic controllers more solicitous to residents' eardrums.


Suns Waive Rambis and Activate Johnson
Forward KURT RAMBIS was waived yesterday by the Phoenix Suns, who also activated guard KEVIN JOHNSON from the injured list.
Rambis, an 11-year veteran played in 153 games for the Suns over two and a half seasons and averaged 4.2 points and 5.1 rebounds per game.


Hungary Participates In Danube Project
To the Editor:
In "West and East, Dams Threaten Environments" (letter, Oct. 31), Bela Liptak tries to blame Slovaks for the Gabcikovo Nagymaros project on the Danube River.
Mr.
Liptak states that Slovaks are rerouting the Danube (the border river) into their own territory, yet at the same time he claims "Greater Slovakia" is being built.


International Electronics reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Experience Required, but Not Too Much of It; For Job Applicants 55 and Over, the Search for Employment Is Often Frustrating
Thomas McGovern walked into the job fair in midtown Manhattan clutching his glossy leather briefcase and chasing a dream he had deferred for decades.
Since he sold his liquor business two years ago, he has been searching for a job as a paralegal, to get a start in the profession he was too poor to join as a young man with family obligations.
Now, at the age of 63, after about a hundred unsuccessful applications, he wonders if he waited too long.


Transactions
Baseball American League
BALTIMORE ORIOLES -- Promoted Jerry Narron, manager at Rochester of the International League, to an undefined position with the major league club.
BOSTON RED SOX -- Purchased the contract of Jim Byrd, infielder.


Schott Said She Didn't Mean to Offend
MARGE SCHOTT, the owner of the Cincinnati Reds, said yesterday that her use of the word "nigger" and that her possession of a swastika armband were not meant to offend, but a baseball official said the matter was of concern.
Schott made the remarks in a deposition on Dec. 6, 1991, as part of a lawsuit by TIM SABO, a former Reds employee.
Sabo, who is white and not related to Reds third baseman CHRIS SABO, said that one of the reasons he was dismissed was that he disapproved of Schott's use of racial and religious slurs and discriminatory hiring practices.


State Plans Review of Northwest
The State of Minnesota plans to review the financial condition of Northwest Airlines before it issues $350 million in bonds to help the carrier build a maintenance and engine repair center, an aide to the state's Governor said yesterday.
"Due to the uncertainties facing Northwest, we're going to take another look," said Robert Benner, who has been Gov.
Arne Carlson's representative in dealing with the airline.


Sir Arthur Forbes, Earl of Granard, 77
Sir Arthur Patrick Hastings Forbes, the Ninth Earl of Granard, died on Thursday in Morges, Switzerland.
He was 77 years old and lived in Morges.
Lord Granard, born in England of Irish ancestry, was educated at Eton and Trinity College, Cambridge.
He received a bachelor's degree from Cambridge University in 1937.


When Police Shoot Police
When a group of Transit Police officers opened fire Tuesday on two of their fellow officers, they taught New Yorkers two sobering lessons.
One is that racial stereotyping can distort judgment.
The other is that giving police more firepower doesn't necessarily enhance public safety.
Officers Derwin Pannell and Kenneth Donnelly, both in plainclothes, were in the process of arresting a fare beater at gunpoint when three other officers arrived and drastically misread the situation as an armed robbery.
Two of them, John Napolitano and Robert Green, quickly fired 21 shots, inflicting a neck wound that could leave Officer Pannell paralyzed.


Pinckney Out for Two Months or More
ED PINCKNEY, a Boston Celtics forward, was lost for at least two months yesterday after undergoing arthroscopic surgery on his left knee.
Pinckney, who played in seven of the Celtics' eight games this season, underwent surgery performed by the team physician, Dr.
ARNOLD SCHELLER, at New England Baptist Hospital.
A team statement implied that Pinckney might be lost for the season.  (AP)


Chief of Pall Corporation To Be Its Chairman, Too
Maurice G. Hardy, president and chief executive of the Pall Corporation since 1989, has also been elected chairman, the company announced yesterday.
Pall, a maker of specialized filters, is based in East Hills, L.I.


Review/Opera; Love Among the Ruins: the Met's New 'Lucia'
Metropolitan Opera audiences tend to proclaim hosannas more than hoots, but on Thursday night, during the curtain calls for a new "Lucia di Lammermoor," the booing that greeted the production team was so passionate that it immediately elevated the production into the rank held by just two others in recent memory: Sir Peter Hall's "Macbeth" and Jean-Pierre Ponnelle's "Flying Dutchman."
There was some justice to this reception.
Francesca Zambello, making her directing debut at the Met, conceived a production that was intent on "eliminating the traditional visual cliches so often visited upon this opera." As she explained in the notes, the idea was to jettison any realistic suggestion of Scotland, and instead present the work as "a tale of psychological terror, of emotional blackmail, and of sexual politics set in the half-seen realm of the unconscious."


Corrections
An obituary yesterday about Dorothy W. Bush, the mother of the President, misstated the day the President traveled from Washington to Greenwich, Conn., to visit her and the day he returned to Washington.
It was Thursday.


In Building a Fund for a Child, Tax-Free Investments Make Sense
When is a gift a burden instead of a boon?
When grandparents make gifts of money to young grandchildren for college.
Many do not know that the interest and dividends earned by the gifts are taxable income that must be paid by the parents.
For young parents struggling with mortgage payments and other bills, the tax burden imposed by the gifts can be a budget breaker.
Even if the money is placed in a custodial account for the child, the income could generate taxes for the parents.


Dr. Leo H. Criep, 96, a Founder Of Clinical Immunology, Is Dead
Dr.
Leo H. Criep, who did research on allergies and asthmatic conditions, died Thursday at his home in Pittsburgh.
He was 96 years old.
He died of cancer of the prostate, said his daughter, Susan C. Santa-Cruz of Pittsburgh.


Georesources Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


THE TRANSITION: The President-Elect; Clinton Plans Call-In Shows And Other Outreach Efforts
Taking a cue from his straight-to-the-people campaign, President-elect Bill Clinton plans to hold at least one televised question-and-answer session with ordinary Americans before his inauguration.
Transition officials said the television spectacle presages a broad communications strategy for the Clinton Presidency that will use techniques pioneered during the campaign.
They said they expect Mr.
Clinton to appear on call-in shows as well as to make frequent radio addresses, and plans are being made for an 800 telephone number where people can make suggestions.


Erly Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article in Business Day on Thursday about Wednesday's stock trading misstated a disclosure by Andrea Electronics.
The company said that it was negotiating to sell its active noise cancellation products to several telecommunications companies and that it had named John and Douglas Andrea as co-presidents to succeed their father.


Dell Computer Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 1


Killers Hunted as Ex-Officer Is Recalled
In his 23 years as a New York police officer, he never fired his gun in making an arrest.
But yesterday investigators were searching for four men who shot and killed James F. O'Sullivan -- who retired from the police force 12 years ago -- when he pulled out a licensed gun and tried to stop a robbery in a lower Manhattan electronics store Thursday evening.


4 DINKINS OFFICIALS FOUND IN CONTEMPT ON HOUSING DELAY
A state judge fined New York City yesterday for what she called the Dinkins administration's repeated failure to shelter homeless families adequately.
She also ordered four city officials to spend a night in the same offices where hundreds of homeless families have had to sleep.
Justice Helen E. Freedman of State Supreme Court in Manhattan, who has been presiding over the case against the city for its treatment of the homeless for seven years, repeatedly expressed frustration at the city's failure to follow her orders to provide decent shelter for such families.


Eagle Food Centers reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Officials Did Little, Despite Report Saying U.S. Rule Wasn't Cutting Fatal Car Fires
Two years ago Federal officials concluded that Government fire safety standards for cars and pickup trucks did little to save lives, but no one moved quickly to change them.
Recent disclosures about a rash of fatal fires in General Motors pickups have brought a new urgency to the task.
Now highway safety officials are scrambling to consider tougher standards.
About 1,800 people die and 3,500 more are seriously injured every year in vehicles that crash and catch fire, according to Federal data.


Review/Dance; Kistler in 'Andantino': Deja Vu, but Different
When Jerome Robbins choreographed "Andantino" for the New York City Ballet's Tchaikovsky Festival in 1981, he had a perfect cast.
Darci Kistler, barely 17 years old, and Ib Andersen, a recent import from the Royal Danish Ballet who was then 26, brought their youthful exuberance to a memorable performance.
Together, they turned a slight pas de deux into a glittering showpiece with an unconventional mix of lyricism and fiercely contemporary virtuosity.
Those elements, with a difference, were present on Wednesday night at the New York State Theater when Miss Kistler again danced the rarely performed duet, this time with a new Danish cavalier: the 25-year-old Nikolaj Hubbe.


El Paso Electric Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


THE TRANSITION: Reporter's Notebook; Ahhh! The Old Democrats Feel Young Again
As giddy as debutantes, the princes and the satraps of the Democratic Party gathered Thursday night at Pamela Harriman's house to tell Bill Clinton and each other how happy, how overjoyed, how positively transported they were to see power on the horizon at last.
Robert S. Strauss, late of Moscow, and Katharine Graham, ever of The Washington Post, were there, and of course Warren M. Christopher and Vernon E. Jordan, the panjandrums of the transition.
Representatives were there, and senators enough to stock a ball club, pinch-hitters and relief pitchers included -- Sasser and Bentsen and Lieberman and Mikulski and Harkin and Graham and Biden and Kerrey and Bumpers and Ford and Byrd and Mitchell and more.


Suffolk's Budget Restricts Increase in Property Tax
Defying County Executive Robert J. Gaffney, the Suffolk Legislature late Thursday adopted a final budget that will raise county property taxes an estimated 5.8 percent, far less than the 20 percent Mr.
Gaffney had proposed in September.
As a result, a homeowner's county taxes will go up an average of $37, rather than $110 as Mr.
Gaffney had proposed.


COMPANY BRIEFS
COMPUTERLAND CORP., Pleasanton, Calif., will close its 70-employee Atlanta distribution center in an effort to reduce inventory investment and operational costs with expectations of saving almost $5 million a year.
KOLLMORGAN CORP., Simsbury, Conn., sold some assets of its Micro-Flir Thermal imaging products business to the Electronic Systems Group of Westinghouse ElectricCorp., Pittsburgh.
The purchase price was about $5.7 million, plus additional payments tied to future sales of Thermal Imaging products.


Applied Materials reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 25


Ernest Weiss, Marble Importer, 95
Ernest Weiss, president of International Marble and Granite, the largest importer of marble and granite in the United States, died yesterday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 95 years old.
Mr.
Weiss established the company in 1945, after he fled his native Austria to escape Nazi persecution.
He had been president of his own marble and granite company there.


Giants' 'D': Rebels Just Because
The Giants defensive players are rebelling against the philosophies and formations they are being asked to employ this year.
Pepper Johnson has become their self-appointed spokesman, and he followed his potentially explosive discourse of Thursday with more frustrations today.
On Thursday, the former Pro Bowl inside linebacker said the Giants defensive players might take Sunday's game against the Philadelphia Eagles into their own hands and play their own defense rather than their coaches' defense.
Today, he said it was not quite that.
But he did say the players might depart at times from the defense installed by Rod Rust, the defensive coordinator, and Dave Brazil, the linebackers coach, both of whom are new to the Giants this year.


Angelica Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 26


Unhappy Accord in Trenton on Health Care for Indigent
Ending weeks of frequently strained negotiations, Gov.
Jim Florio and the Republican leaders in the Legislature today announced a plan to divert $1.6 billion from the state's unemployment insurance fund to restore New Jersey's outlawed system for financing health care for indigent patients.
The plan, under attack from labor and business groups alike and called "inadvisable" by the Federal Department of Labor, now goes before both houses of the Legislature for a vote on Nov. 30.
The outcome has grown increasingly uncertain.


Christian Conservatives Counting Hundreds of Gains in Local Votes
In a nationwide push for power at the state and local levels, conservative Christian candidates won hundreds of races on Election Day, establishing themselves as a grass-roots political force and giving them a base from which to push for control of the Republican Party.
Tallying the results of the sometimes obscure races for seats on school boards, city councils, state legislatures and the like, both they and their opponents agree that what is known as the religious right scored significant gains.
Difficult to Identify
The liberal lobbying group People for the American Way, which has led the fight against the religious right around the country, said fundamentalist Christian candidates had won about 40 percent of the 500 races it monitored nationwide.
The fiercest battleground was California, but the movement also scored successes in states like Iowa, Kansas, Florida, Texas and Oregon.
And People for the American Way estimated there were thousands more races in which it had not been able to identify the affiliations of the candidates.


Mother Pressed on Daughter's Sexual Past in Glen Ridge Case
The defense in the Glen Ridge sex-assault trial today renewed its efforts to portray the mildly retarded woman at the center of the case as the sexual aggressor, pressing the young woman's mother again and again for information on her daughter's sexual history.
In two hours of questioning focusing exclusively on sex, one of the defense lawyers, Alan Zegas, asked the mother why her daughter was placed on birth-control pills in 1987 and again in mid-March 1989, two weeks after the incident, and why she and her husband took their daughter to a gynecologist after the incident without first notifying the police.


Campbell Soup reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 1


METRO DIGEST
COMPULSIVE GAMBLING: SIN OR SICKNESS?
The question of whether pathological gambling should be considered a disease or a moral weakness is a matter of much debate in academic and addiction-treatment circles these days.
The answer will likely have major implications for how money is spent on research into compulsive gambling and for employers and insurers who have resisted paying for intensive inpatient treatment.
Page 1.
NEW YORK CITY
GRIDLOCK ALERTS
RUN OFF THE ROAD
Yes, the end-of-the-year gridlock alert day, a New York holiday fixture for a decade, has been discontinued, a victim of the recession and its own effectiveness.
The city Department of Transportation says traffic has declined enough to make the public announcements urging motorists to stay out of Manhattan unnecessary.
Page 23.
OFFICIALS ORDERED TO SLEEP IN OFFICES
A state judge, ruling that the Dinkins administration has repeatedly failed to adequately shelter homeless families, fined the city yesterday and ordered four officials to spend a night in the same city offices where hundreds of homeless families have had to sleep.
Page 1.
HUNTING FOR POLICE SERGEANT'S KILLERS
Investigators were searching for four men who shot and killed a retired police sergeant when he tried to stop a robbery in a lower Manhattan electronics store Thursday evening.
Page 23.
SCHOOLS CHANCELLOR SEEKS SUPPORT
Schools Chancellor Fernandez said yesterday that the seven-member Board of Education would have to give him near-unanimous support and mute its bickering if it wants him to stay on after his contract expires in June.
Page 23.
Times in accord with pressmen's union.
Page 22.
REGION
AGREEMENT ON HEALTH CARE
Ending weeks of frequently strained negotiations in Trenton, Governor Florio and the Republican leaders in the Legislature announced a plan to divert $1.6 billion from New Jersey's unemployment insurance fund to restore the state's outlawed system for financing health care for indigent patients.
Page 24.
SUFFOLK ADOPTS LOWER-TAX BUDGET
Defying the County Executive, Robert J. Gaffney, the Suffolk Legislature adopted a final budget that will raise property taxes an estimated 5.8 percent, far less than the 20 percent Mr.
Gaffney had proposed.
Page 24.
MOTHER PRESSED FOR SEXUAL DETAILS
The defense in the Glen Ridge, N.J., sex-assault trial renewed its efforts to portray the mildly retarded woman at the center of the case as the sexual aggressor, pressing the young woman's mother again and again for information on her daughter's sexual history.
Page 24.
NEW JERSEY EDUCATION HEAD RESIGNS
The stormy tenure of the New Jersey Education Commissioner, John Ellis, ended when Governor Florio, accepted his long-predicted resignation.
Page 25.
CON EDISON ANNOUNCES ELECTRICITY DEAL
Consolidated Edison announced that it had reached an agreement to buy electricity from a natural-gas-fired plant in upstate New York, saving ratepayers $300 million over five years.
Page 24.
About New York by Michael T. Kaufman 22


Monsanto Plans 10% Cut in Staff
The Monsanto Company said today that it planned several asset sales, operational changes and spending cuts that would reduce total employment by about 3,200, or 10 percent.
It attributed the retrenchment to weak economic conditions and the poor outlook for price increases in its main businesses, especially pharmaceuticals.
Monsanto said the changes would result in a $425 million charge against earnings in the current quarter and generate an annual saving of $200 million before taxes by the time they were completed in 1994.


CHRONICLE
Dieters rejoice: this has been a week for not eating -- or eating sparsely -- for worthy causes.
Tonight, more than 650 people are to sit down at a "Dinner Without Dinner" in the Puck building in SoHo to aid an organization called Mazon: A Jewish Response to Hunger.


Classical Music in Review
Anssi Karttunen Cellist Merkin Hall


Wounded Officer's Wife Says No One Is to Blame
The wife of Derwin Pannell, the plainclothes officer who was mistakenly shot by other officers at a Brooklyn subway station Tuesday night, said the shooting was an accident and that no one should be blamed, a transit police chaplain said.
After leaving the wounded officer's bedside, the chaplain, the Rev.
Hardy Longwood, said that the officer, who was shot in the neck, and had initially been paralyzed, was now able to move both legs and his left arm.
Officials at Brookdale Hospital, though, said Officer Pannell, who is in critical condition, may never regain full use of his right arm.


Enviroq Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 26


Corrections
A list of companies yesterday, with an article about pension funds and their underfinanced liabilities to retirees, misstated the extent of underfinancing for each corporate plan.
The Associated Press, which supplied the list, transmitted a corrected version in time for use, but it was overlooked by The Times.
A corrected list appears today on page 40.


Hong Kong Journal; Out Go the Stolen Cars, On a Fast Boat to China
The best way to learn about the growing economic links between Hong Kong and China is to leave a new Mercedes-Benz on a street overnight.
In the morning, it may well be in China.


The Winners and Losers This Year
This year has not been an especially good one for mutual funds, with the marked exception of those that invest in financial services companies, mainly banks, where declining interest rates have helped performance.
Among other winners are equity-income and utility funds with income components to increase their returns even when stock prices stall.
Option-income funds, which sell call options on stock portfolios, do best in flat markets like today's.
Even so, all these funds have a lot of catching up to do by year-end to reach a respectable annual return of 10 percent.


From Cradle To College: A Long-Term Savings Plan
How the Schiesses of Indiana hope to amass $300,000 for young Maris and Justin.
Page 32.


Groundwater Technology Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Review/Music; An 'Einstein' in Repose (Relatively Speaking)
The trick to loving "Einstein on the Beach" is knowing how it works and not inquiring too deeply into what it means.
For in the end, the mystery of Robert Wilson's stage pictures and Philip Glass's music is in its guilelessness: the glassy chitchat, a bus driver's sappy love story, a judge's bad jokes, the music's endless major and minor triads, the blown-up photos of Albert Einstein, a children's-book illustration of a train in the countryside.
Indeed, beneath the solemn ritual, "Einstein" has a folksiness.
Nothing is obscure even if little makes sense.
Like Einstein's theory of relativity -- in which objects swell or shrink according to the observer's vantage point -- "Einstein on the Beach" isn't hard to understand; it's hard to believe.


Canadians Refused Solutions That Didn't Solve; Agreement Compulsion
To the Editor:
"Canada, Still Divided" (editorial, Oct. 28) is dead wrong.
The Charlottetown Accord, rejected Oct. 26, was neither "a good compromise" nor "an opportunity missed."


Applied Microbiology reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Marriott Bondholder Suit Delayed
A Federal judge in Baltimore ruled yesterday that a group of Marriott Corporation bondholders must combine their suits against the hotel chain and delay interviews with potential witnesses until Jan. 8.
The suits grew out of Marriott's announcement last month that it would split the company into two components -- Marriott International Inc., its profitable hotel management services company, and Host Marriott, a real estate company that would be assigned almost $3 billion of the company's debt, as well as the hotels.


Canadians Refused Solutions That Didn't Solve; Agreement Compulsion
To the Editor:
"Canada, Still Divided" (editorial, Oct. 28) is dead wrong.
The Charlottetown Accord, rejected Oct. 26, was neither "a good compromise" nor "an opportunity missed."


Classical Music in Review
Chamber Music Society Alice Tully Hall


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
7.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
4.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
2.93
2.94
4.75
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.19
3.15
4.43
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.38
3.36
4.45
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.45
6.43
6.99
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.52
7.54
7.97
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.50
8.50
8.95
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.40
6.41
6.90
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


THE TRANSITION: The Economy; Aides Say Clinton Might Back Deficit Spending as Growth Stimulus
President-elect Bill Clinton might favor increasing the budget deficit in this fiscal year to stimulate the economy and generate new jobs quickly, members of his staff said today.
George Stephanopoulos, Mr.
Clinton's spokesman, told reporters that the President-elect and Congressional leaders had agreed during Mr.
Clinton's visit to Washington this week on a two-pronged approach: an economic stimulus, like new public works spending, to give an immediate jolt to the economy combined with deficit reduction "over the long haul."


Ares-Serano reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Life Medical Sciences reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


YELTSIN VOWS CURB ON NORTH KOREANS
Concluding a three-day visit here, President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia promised today to put pressure on North Korea to give up its effort to develop nuclear weapons.
Speaking at a news conference with President Roh Tae Woo of South Korea, Mr.
Yeltsin said Russia had already stopped supplying North Korea with nuclear technology and materials.
Without Russian help, he said, North Korea would not be able to develop nuclear arms.


Autodesk Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


A Clinton 'Town Meeting'
The President-elect plans to hold at least one televised question-and-answer session with the American people before his inauguration.
Page 8.


Correction: Corporate List Of Underfinanced Pensions
A list of companies yesterday, with an article about pension funds and their underfinanced liabilities to retirees, misstated the extent of underfinancing for each corporate plan. (The Associated Press, which supplied the list, transmitted a corrected version in time for use, but it was overlooked by The Times.)
Here is a corrected list of the 50 companies with the largest underfinanced plans, according to the Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation.
The companies and the potential amount by which their federally guaranteed pension benefits are underfinanced are listed in order of financing ratio, starting with the most underfinanced.
The financing ratio is the percentage of assets that the company has contributed to the plan compared with the plan's guaranteed liability.


Germans Uphold Krabbe's Four-Year Ban
The German track and field federation decided yesterday in Dierhagen, Germany, to follow international rules requiring a four-year suspension for the 1991 world sprint champion, KATRIN KRABBE, because she had taken a banned substance.


A Family's Savings Strategy Spreads College Costs Over 20 Years
Mark Schiess, 40, a medical technologist in Carmel, Ind., and his wife Christine, 38, a nurse, have charted a long-term savings plan to finance the college education of their two children.
Their goal: $150,000 for each child, to meet the projected cost of four years of college.


School Head In New Jersey Is Resigning
The stormy tenure of the New Jersey Education Commissioner, John Ellis, ended today when Gov.
Jim Florio, who appointed him just 31 months ago to carry out the sweeping Quality Education Act, accepted his long-predicted resignation.
Dr.
Ellis, who is 63 years old, came to Trenton from Austin, Tex., to lead Governor Florio's ambitious plan to improve education across the state, particularly in the embattled urban districts.
But he quickly found himself at the vortex of a political storm over whether huge infusions of state money would be spent in the cities, as Mr.
Florio, Dr.
Ellis and the courts wanted, or in the suburbs, as the newly dominant Republicans in the Legislature wanted.


CHRONICLE
PAMELA J. MARALDO, the chief executive of the National League for Nursing, has been named president of the Planned Parenthood Federation of America, the federation announced yesterday.
In a seven-month search, the federation considered more than 90 candidates to succeed FAYE WATTLETON, who resigned in April to be the host of a television talk show.
Dr.
Maraldo, who is 45 years old, will take over on Feb. 1.
Planned Parenthood provides reproductive health services to five million people and has an annual budget of $450 million, including some Federal funds.


Classical Music in Review
Trevor Pinnock National Arts Center Orchestra Carnegie Hall


Tricky Timing Choices On Charitable Giving
WITH changes in the tax code in the wind, many tax advisers are telling clients to delay charitable gifts until next year.
But there is only one group of people for whom delay is essential.
They are taxpayers who are considering a big gift of property, especially if the value of the property has increased over the years.
Making such a gift now would subject many donors to the alternative minimum tax and a considerable penalty.


Fernandez Asks Support From Board
New York City Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez said yesterday that the seven-member Board of Education would have to give him near-unanimous support and mute its bickering if it wants him to stay on after his contract expires in June.
Whether he stays, Mr.
Fernandez said in an interview, will hinge on discussions with board members that will start in January over a new contract.
While he declined to discuss what terms he would demand, he said that his decision would not turn on salary and benefits but on such issues as the contentiousness on the board and its relationship with him.


Go Digital for Terminal
To the Editor:
Instead of having a big clock that will be hard to set at the new Staten Island Ferry terminal (news article, Nov. 7), a practical alternative would be a digital clock with bright red digits.
It would be easier to set and easier to read.


A Hero Who Refuses to Act Like One
THE phone rang.
It was Dr.
Marek Edelman, the only surviving leader of the Warsaw Ghetto uprising, calling from the Bronx.
"Come, I have something to say," said Dr.
Edelman, who was on a five-day visit from his home in Poland.
A normal person would no more ignore a summons from Dr.
Edelman than from Andrei Sakharov, Martin Luther King, Nelson Mandela or Gandhi.
The 71-year-old cardiologist is a true hero with that kind of moral authority.


Sports of The Times; The Pitcher's 'Psychiatric Disorder'
THE Steve Howe case echoes that of Alex Johnson, the odd outfielder.
Some 20 years ago, Johnson was acting weirdly.
He was taciturn.
He seemed not always to be hustling.
He was sometimes unapproachable and fought with teammates.
He was fined and suspended by his club, the Angels.
The players' union fought the club's moves, asking that Johnson be placed on the disabled list with full pay, and won in arbitration.
The deciding factor, supported by expert medical testimony, was that Alex Johnson was suffering a mental or emotional illness.


Rooting for Russian Reform
Soaring inflation and plunging production have provided opponents of reform in Russia with plenty of ammunition with which to attack President Boris Yeltsin and his reformist allies at the upcoming Congress of People's Deputies.
But don't count Mr.
Yeltsin out yet.
He is allying with reform-minded industrial managers in an effort to beat back the hard-liners.
Last weekend he lashed out at "scandalous" opposition groups backed by "practically no social base, and not many ideas" who "seek to sow panic, to destroy reforms, to wring from that some political capital." That was a bold rebuff to the hard-liners.
But it was also a caution to the industrial managers not to demand too high a price from him for their support.


Freeing Drivers From the Ghost of Gridlock Past
As surely as snow will fall in Buffalo and squirrels will hide nuts, November brings signs of what every New Yorker fondly knows as the Holidays.
A Christmas tree at Rockefeller Center.
Menorahs in store windows.
Gridlock alert days.
Alas for the harried commuter: one of these is no longer. (Hint: the tree is up and no embargo has been declared on menorahs.)


Swedish Devaluation Roils Europe's Monetary System
Europe's monetary system was swept by a new wave of uncertainty today after Sweden decided on Thursday to allow its currency to fall in value.
Economists said there was mounting pressure on governments to agree to a devaluation of some of the weaker currencies, including the Spanish peseta, the Portuguese escudo and possibly the Irish pound.


The Rangers Wonder: Where's That Safety Net?
Nobody really knows if this is the bottom.
Can it get worse?
Can the Rangers keep losing?
Can they fall below .500?
Can they be any more embarrassed than they were against Tampa Bay last Monday -- in the first game of this four-game losing streak -- or against the Flyers, who beat them, 7-3, Thursday night?
The confidence level in the Rangers' locker room can be called shaky at best.
Players wonder if they can beat the Jets, 7-12-1 and near the bottom of the Smythe Division, in Winnipeg tonight.
Players are saying that, perhaps, the Rangers don't deserve to win any hockey games at this point.


Classical Music in Review
Sergei Edelmann Pianist Colden Center, Queens College


CHRYSLER PRICES $912 MILLION IN CERTIFICATES
The Chrysler Corporation yesterday priced for sale to the public $912 million worth of certificates in two parts backed by receivables from its car and light trucks through the ML Asset Backed Corporation, an entity set up by Merrill Lynch, the lead underwriter for the issue.
Traders said the financing included $218.5 million of money market asset-backed notes due 1993 that were priced to yield 3.90 percent, with $693.5 million in total rate of return notes due in 1998 priced to yield 5.612 percent, with an average life of 2.09 years.
The money market notes, which have an average life of 0.37 year, are rated triple-A by Moody's Investors Service, Duff &amp; Phelps Credit Rating and Fitch Investors Service.


Ilse Sass, Music Teacher, 84
Ilse Sass, a pianist and voice teacher, died on Wednesday at Roosevelt Hospital in Manhattan.
She was 84 years old and lived in New York City
She died of a pulmonary embolism, said her sister, Leine Seligmann.


Eastco Industrial Safety reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Drug Screening reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


NATO and European Warships Blockade Yugoslavia
Both NATO and the Western European Union ordered their warships in the Adriatic today to carry out a full naval blockade on the former Yugoslavia to enforce a United Nations embargo.
The effect of the naval action remained unclear, however, because only a small limited amount of the strategic trade to Serbia and Montenegro covered by United Nations embargoes arrive by sea, diplomats in Rome said.


Dewey Electronics Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Bush's Lawyer Says Aides May Destroy Records
The chief White House lawyer has told President Bush's aides that they may destroy telephone logs and other personal records during the transition.
Congressional aides say the legal opinion will hinder their investigation of the search through Bill Clinton's passport files.
Telephone calls between the State Department and the White House have emerged as a potentially valuable source of evidence for Congressional investigators trying to find out whether the White House was involved in the search for information that might have damaged Mr.
Clinton's Presidential campaign.


THE TRANSITION: Reporter's Notebook; Ahhh! The Old Democrats Feel Young Again
As giddy as debutantes, the princes and the satraps of the Democratic Party gathered Thursday night at Pamela Harriman's house to tell Bill Clinton and each other how happy, how overjoyed, how positively transported they were to see power on the horizon at last.
Robert S. Strauss, late of Moscow, and Katharine Graham, ever of The Washington Post, were there, and of course Warren M. Christopher and Vernon E. Jordan, the panjandrums of the transition.
Representatives were there, and senators enough to stock a ball club, pinch-hitters and relief pitchers included -- Sasser and Bentsen and Lieberman and Mikulski and Harkin and Graham and Biden and Kerrey and Bumpers and Ford and Byrd and Mitchell and more.


Police Chief Laments the Rumors
A barrage of rumors is causing delays in the investigation of rape charges against Minnesota North Stars forward DAN QUINN, says the Bloomington police chief.
According to the chief, BOB LUTZ, a decision on whether to bring formal charges against Quinn has been slowed because reporters have come up with a lot of rumors and investigators have been obliged to chase them down.


Sins of the Nins
INCEST
From "A Journal of Love." The Unexpurgated Diary of Anais Nin 1932-1934.
Illustrated. 418 pp.
New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich. $24.95.


Patricia Held and George Grunebaum
Patricia Held, the daughter of Barbara Held and Dr.
Barry T. Held, both of New York, was married last evening to George Peter Grunebaum, the son of Gladys B. Grunebaum of Monte Carlo, Monaco, and Peter K. Grunebaum of Harrison, N.Y.
The Rev.
Winston B. Charles, an Episcopal minister, officiated at St.
James' Church in New York.
Rabbi Charles Lippman took part in the ceremony.
Mrs.
Grunebaum is the catalogue manager at J. Crew Inc., the clothing company, in New York.
She and her husband graduated from Hamilton College.
Her father is a radiologist in Flushing, Queens, where he is also the chairman of the radiology department at Booth Memorial Medical Center.
Her mother is the bridal consultant in New York for Barneys New York, the clothing retailer.
The bride is a stepdaughter of Melinda Sweet Held of New York.


Viewpoints; Anthropology for the Board Room
James F. Moore, is president of GeoPartners Research Inc., a business consulting firm in Cambridge, Mass.
Mr.
Moore, while a doctoral student at Harvard, had been greatly influenced by the thinking of the late Gregory Bateson, an anthropologist, and in his consulting practice, Mr.
Moore has been applying Bateson's theories about co-evolution, culture and addiction.
He spoke with Joel Kurtzman, an editor at The New York Times.
Question: What ideas does an anthropologist like Gregory Bateson bring to business?


The Transition: Reporter's Notebook; Shaping Nation From Little Rock Cafe
Anyone who doubts that a power dinner could be held in this riverside capital about 1,100 miles from the Potomac should have been at Cafe Saint Moritz on Friday evening.
Barely noticed in a dimly lighted dining room as they shared a modest bottle of Clos du Bois chardonnay were two of the most influential figures on President-elect Bill Clinton's team working to assemble a new government: Warren M. Christopher, director of the transition, and Eli Segal, the chief financial officer.


Woman Is Held in Slaying of Roommate
A 36-year-old Brooklyn woman with a history of arguments with her roommate was arrested early yesterday on charges that she had stabbed her roommate to death with a kitchen knife, the police said.
The victim, Gail Gardner, 35 years old, had been found by neighbors on a stairwell near her apartment in the Pink Houses, a New York City Housing Authority project at 1305 Loring Avenue in East New York, a Housing Authority Police spokesman, Officer Michael Silvestri, said.


The Ivy Is Half Green, Half Princeton
Jay Fiedler, the Dartmouth quarterback, conducted a seminar on how to run an offense today before an audience of 24,120 in Palmer Stadium that included the Princeton defense.
Fiedler's skills were the difference as the Green defeated the Tigers, 34-20, and thus gained a share of the Ivy League championship with Princeton.
Fiedler, a junior from Oceanside, L.I., passed for 272 yards and two touchdowns, and scored once himself.
And that wasn't all.
He made seven big plays on third downs that took Dartmouth out of tough situations and then directed a seven-minute scoring drive near the end that wiped away any Princeton chance at a rally.


Update; 2 Convicts Who Escaped Plead Guilty in Connecticut
Two convicts who cut their way out of a maximum-security prison in Connecticut last New Year's Eve, setting off a three-state manhunt that ended in the parking lot of a New Jersey shopping mall, have pleaded guilty to escape charges as their trial was about to begin.
Frank Vandever and Ronald Rutan entered their pleas on Wednesday in State Superior Court in Vernon, Conn., just as a jury was about to be selected.


Martha L. Sarlie, Jerry Kravat
Martha Leonard Sarlie, the president of Vicky Tiel, a Paris-based women's-clothing design and manufacturing concern, was married on Friday to Jerry Kravat, the chairman and chief executive of Jerry Kravat Entertainment Services Inc., a theatrical-production company in New York.
The Rev.
Dr.
Melvin Hawthorne officiated at the ecumenical ceremony at the New York Palace Hotel.
Mrs.
Kravat, who works in New York, graduated from the University of Cincinnati.
She is a daughter of Ruth Leonard of Cincinnati and the late William Leonard.
The bride's first marriage ended in divorce; her second husband died.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
LET THE GAME BEGIN
At 1:30 this afternoon the torch will be lit, the fanfare sounded, and the gobblers will be off and running in the 12th annual Turkey Olympics at the Inn on Lake Waramaug in New Preston.


Making a Difference; The Brothers Brue and the Fresh Bagel
THE University of Iowa's recent homecoming parade here had marching bands, energetic cheerleaders and pom-pom squads.
Then there was the bagel float.
Brought to Iowa by Bruegger's Bagel Bakery, it had large signs urging the hometown Hawkeyes to seize the Purdue Boilermakers football players and "BOIL 'EM AND BAKE 'EM."


Bernalillo Journal; A Tiny Tribe Preserves Itself by Returning to Farming Tradition
The fields north of Albuquerque farmed by the Santa Ana Indians have turned brown, and 19 remaining acres of blue corn are being harvested.
But already the tribe has reaped a profit from its agricultural operations.
The corn will be ground in a new grain mill financed with help from a British concern that is turning Santa Ana's organically grown corn into a sophisticated line of cosmetics for international marketing.
The tribe recently received a $20,000 prize for enterprise from the Ford Foundation, one of 25 winners picked from 1,600 competitors.
Along with the prize came national recognition and a raft of requests for advice.


Hilary J. Lerner and Peter E. Shaev
Hilary Judith Lerner, a daughter of Frances Lerner of White Plains and the late Stephen D. Lerner, was married in White Plains last evening to Peter Eric Shaev, the son of Nancy Elsas of Mamaroneck, N.Y., and Dr.
Sanford R. Shaev of New York.
Rabbi Jon Hadden performed the ceremony at the Stouffer Westchester Hotel.
Mrs.
Shaev, 25 years old, is the promotion director for video and alternative music at EMI Records Group North America in New York.
She graduated from Duke University.
Her father was the executive vice president at Phoenix Clothing Inc., a former New York manufacturer of men's wear.


Technology; If Fire Fails Against Cancer, Try Ice
In their anticancer arsenal, surgeons and oncologists have long made do with the scalpel blade, radiation and chemotherapy.
But now, when the old weapons fail, doctors are finding success with a new one: killing tumors by freezing them.
Killing cancer with cold is not a new concept; dermatologists have treated skin lesions this way for decades.
But the ability to treat deep-seated tumors effectively and precisely is very recent, and is equally dependent on advances in the cryosurgical tools themselves and in ultrasound imaging technology used to see inside the body.


She's the First Lady, Not the Little Lady; Hillary Clinton's Salary
To the Editor:
In light of our apparent expectations, isn't it time we started paying the First Lady?
In "Support, Advice, Candor" (Op-Ed, Nov. 11), James Rosebush counsels Hillary Clinton: "You have signed up to work for the American people . . . Put your own stamp on the job."


In the Baltics, There May Be No Home for Russians
It looked like a scene from the October Revolution, which brought the Bolsheviks to power in Russia, with thick snow falling on the fur hats and angry faces of demonstrators shouting for work and bread.
But these Russians, stranded by history in a now-independent Estonia, are frightened about their future -- not merely about their jobs, as a deep recession bites, but about their political and civil rights.


Once a Black Panther, Always a Cause
ON a recent day at Thomas Sweet Coffee Shop in New Haven, George Edwards sat with his back to a brick wall and talked about, among other things, the American electoral process.
"It's like the whole carrot and the stick scenario," the former Black Panther said while Ella Fitzgerald scat songs warbled through the speakers.
"It's like everyone gets together and says, 'Let's get this bad actor off the stage, then bring in someone new who smiles a little and makes us all feel a little entertained.' Problem is, Clinton, Bush and Perot are all part of the same beast with a different face. So once again the American people are duped."
Every few minutes someone tapped on the window and waved or nodded to Mr.
Edwards, a man well known for his work in the community as well as for his frank political parlance.
Mr.
Edwards -- who as the result of a back injury is on medical leave from his job as an outreach worker for the city's AIDS needle-exchange program -- has continued to defend the legacy of the Black Panther Party, which had its roots in the teachings of Malcolm X.


Centuries Are Kind to the Japanese Maple
THIS has been the autumn of the Japanese maple, whose brilliant foliage has been spectacular.
Lucky, indeed, are those who have a tree or have one growing in their neighborhood.
Japanese maples are known for their interesting foliage in any season.
In fact, unusual leaf forms are one of the prime reasons for their selection.


Richard Ellmann, Superspy?
To the Editor:
I was surprised to see your treatment of Eliot Weinberger's confection of fact and fancy in his tale of what was called "literary espionage" (Oct. 4).
A passing reference -- which I believe inaccurate -- to my late brother, "Richard Ellmann, the future Joyce scholar," provoked inclusion of an old photograph of Dick in what was a veritable rogues' gallery of reputed master spies.
Neither Dick nor your readers deserved such treatment.


For Three Whole Days, Everything That's New
PHOTO '92, the big photographic trade show at the Jacob K. Javits Convention Center from Dec. 4 to 6, promises to be a crash course on what's happening in the kaleidoscopic photography world.
The programs and displays cover topics ranging from economic changes in photography to digital imaging technology, from new products to copyright law.
For the serious photographer, careful planning is advised because more is offered than one can easily handle.
The $25 three-day general-admission badge permits entrance into the four exhibition halls: Computer Graphics, Pro Lab, Presentation Products and Professional Photography.
In all, more than 60 events and programs are planned for the show, which is being sponsored by the magazine Photo District News.
T


Our Immortal Vice President
To the Editor:
In her review of Joe Queenan's "Imperial Caddy" (Oct. 11), Molly Ivins cites the book's observation that "almost all vice presidents  [ have been ]  borderline nincompoops. . . . lechers, drunks, crooks, traitors and whoremasters." The heartbeat-away man has traditionally been the butt of satirists' abuse and condescension, and has frequently been richly deserving of this ritual scorn.
Yet it is worth mentioning that one Vice President, Charles Gates Dawes, managed to achieve something that no President, senator, congressman or Supreme Court justice has ever come close to doing.
He wrote a piece of music that reached No. 1 on the hit parade.


Corrections
A picture caption in the Evening Hours column in Styles of The Times last Sunday rendered the name of a guest at Rolling Stone magazine's anniversary party incorrectly.
He is Martin Scorsese, the film director.


Wachtler Case Delayed Until '93 for Medical Tests on Judge
A Federal judge in New Jersey has delayed court action in the prosecution of Sol Wachtler, the former Chief Judge of the New York State Court of Appeals, until Jan. 6 so Mr.
Wachtler can undergo medical tests that may be relevant to the case.
On Friday, Judge Stanley Chesler of Federal District Court in Newark suspended court action in the case, including a hearing before a magistrate set for Nov. 27, so that Mr.
Wachtler could undergo tests for an unspecified medical condition.
The tests are to be performed at a New York area hospital, which was not named.
Mr.
Wachtler, who is 62 years old, will be allowed to temporarily remove an electronic monitoring bracelet -- a device he must wear as part of his bail agreement -- for the hospital visits.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
70 Years of Scouting
IT has been a while since he donned the knee socks.
The legs aren't quite as shapely as they once were, Leonard G. Littmann of Melville says.
But his three-finger salute is as crisp as ever.


World Markets; A Certain Glow on Sweden's Astra
IT IS not as big or as well known as competitors like Glaxo and Smithkline Beecham, and unlike many other large foreign drug companies, its shares are not traded in the United States.
But Astra A.B., the Swedish pharmaceutical concern, is fast becoming very popular indeed, and not just in its home markets of Stockholm and London.
If its growth plans pan out, it will soon have a much higher profile on both sides of the Atlantic.
"Astra is our favored stock in the drug group globally, with exceptionally strong sales and earnings growth as well as an extremely attractive valuation," said a recent report by Paul Krikler, an analyst at Goldman, Sachs in London.


It's Becker and Courier Going Down to Wire
They played two matches here today, one infinitely more memorable than the other.
But in the end, symmetry was well served.
The ATP Tour World Championship final on Sunday will be contested between Jim Courier, the American who dominated men's tennis at the beginning of 1991, and Boris Becker, the German who has been dominant at the end.


Two New Airlines Vie for New York-Florida Trade
TWO new companies operating at Newark Airport, Kiwi and Skybus, have grabbed attention recently by advertising $99 unrestricted one-way air fares to Florida.
Kiwi goes to Orlando nonstop six times a day and also to Atlanta and Chicago, using three leased planes.
Skybus, a charter operator that uses someone else's planes and crews, goes to Fort Lauderdale and back twice a day now; it plans to increase frequency to four times a day by Dec. 18.
Earlier this month, I flew Skybus from Newark to Fort Lauderdale, and then went up to Orlando and flew Kiwi back to Newark.


Why So Many Ridicule the Overweight
On the unsavory spectrum of bigotry, some slurs are considered worse than others.
Insults to a person's race, ethnicity or religion rank as completely unacceptable.
Making fun of a woman for being female or a gay person for being homosexual may be somewhat less taboo, but it is certainly frowned upon.
Children are taught not to point at a handicapped person, and only the most callous would jeer at a down-and-out drunk.
But a fat person is fair game.
People who would never publicly confess to racism have no qualms about expressing revulsion for the obese.
And that just may be because the fat threaten the thin down to the deepest levels of the psyche.


Art Appreciation
Helping to assure that there will be ever more 'Nevermores.'


Brazilians Fret Over New Chief's Slow Start
Almost two months after Brazil's Congress impeached President Fernando Collor de Mello, politicians and the press are expressing concern that his successor is failing to take charge.
Vice President Itamar Franco assumed the powers of the presidency after Mr.
Collor was impeached on Oct. 2, and it appears inevitable that Mr.
Collor will be convicted in the impeachment trial scheduled to conclude in the Brazilian Senate by Dec. 22, allowing Mr.
Franco to serve out the remainder of Mr.
Collor's term.


From Russia to Briarcliff, With Music
WHEN Anna Rabinova last visited the Todd Elementary School here in May 1990, she was a 25-year-old state artist of the Soviet Union, one of a handful of young musicians nurtured since childhood to represent the country on the world stage.
In an assembly held then in the Todd School gymnasium, Ms.
Rabinova -- a first- and third-prize winner of two international violin competitions -- performed for the students and talked about her dream of moving to the United States with her husband and baby daughter, who had stayed behind in Russia.


CHILDREN'S BOOKS
DRYLONGSO
By Virginia Hamilton.
Illustrated by Jerry Pinkney. 54 pp.
New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich. $18.95. (Ages 8 to 12)


For Staten Island, A Ferry Terminal Rooted in the Past
It's about time.
That's one way to read the big clock that adorns the winning entry, announced this month, in the competition to design a new Manhattan terminal for the Staten Island ferry.
No, our Swatch-infested city doesn't need another clock.
But a building by Robert Venturi and Denise Scott Brown is long overdue.
These Philadelphia architects have been on the verge of building in New York many times over the years: a housing project for Brighton Beach; a juicy Big Apple for Times Square; neighborhood parks for Westway.
And their influence has long been felt here.
Buildings as diverse as the A.T.&amp; T. headquarters and the new Stuyvesant High School look as they do because of the path Mr.
Venturi blazed out of the International Style with his 1966 book, "Complexity and Contradiction in Architecture." Now New York will have a Venturi, Scott Brown original.
And the architects (in association with Anderson/ Schwartz Architects of Manhattan) have outdone themselves to make this the Venturiest, Scott Browniest building ever.


Olympic Skier Confronts An Uphill Challenge
There had never been any fear before.
There had been only this logical downhill progression for Donna Weinbrecht, that began at the top of a bumpy moguls slope and ended with a gold medal at the 1992 Albertville Winter Olympics and a victory parade in her hometown of West Milford, N.J.
Weinbrecht had never been injured in her dangerous sport.
She had never thought twice about trying out the latest trick in the freestyle skiing event.
But Weinbrecht suffered a serious knee injury last Tuesday while practicing new moves at Breckenridge, Colo., and now faces reconstructive surgery on Monday that poses an intimidating barrier to her participation in the 1994 Olympics in Lillehammer, Norway.


When a Clown Leaves the Highway Of Pratfalls Behind
One of the most gifted songwriters to emerge out of Bob Dylan's shadow in the early 1970's, Loudon Wainwright 3d has always played the clown in a genre overrun with poetic soul-searching.
His turning of his own experience into a brainy Jerry Lewis comedy instead of an offshoot of "East of Eden" may explain why his recording career has paled commercially beside those of performers like Dylan, Bruce Springsteen and Joni Mitchell.
To a mass audience, searching for paradise has seemed more romantic than doing pratfalls down a highway lined with banana peels.
Since 1970, Wainwright has released 13 albums of spare, mostly first-person vignettes.
Those records have accumulated into an extended pop journal unprecedented in its confessional candor.
The songs recount everything from childhood and prep-school adventures to marriage, parenthood, divorce, career crises, living abroad and, in 1988, the death of his father, a noted Life magazine columnist and editor.
As Wainwright has matured, his light verses have steadily grown in depth and poignancy.
In "History" (Virgin CDV 2703; CD and cassette), his latest album -- and his first major-label recording since the late 1970's -- the best songs transcend the jokiness of his often self-deflating epigrams.


Two Problem Teams And One Goal in Mind
Not long ago, both teams were the best or close to the best.
Now both are fighting for respectability and, if they achieve that, a playoff berth.
And both are trying to overcome dangerous situations that threaten their fiber and unity.
That is the somewhat sad status of the Giants and the Philadelphia Eagles, who will meet Sunday at Giants Stadium.
Their 1 P.M. game will be carried by CBS television (Channel 2) and WNEW radio (1130 AM).


Alyce P. Simon, Craig G. Grossman
Mr. and Mrs.
Robert Simon of Encino, Calif., have announced the engagement of their daughter Alyce Paige Simon to Craig Geoffrey Grossman, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Morton A. Grossman of Montville, N.J.
A June 1993 wedding is planned.
Miss Simon, 23 years old, is a nursery school teacher at the Farm School in Woodland Hills, Calif.
Her father is the senior partner in Simon, Kesner &amp; Friedman, a law firm in Los Angeles.


By Any Other Name, Joe's
Joe's.
Simply Joe's.
That's all Joe McKenna, a top stylist in the fashion business, is calling his new magazine.
"Bruce Weber said I had to call it Joe's," said Mr.
McKenna, who worked with Mr.
Weber, the photographer, on the most recent Banana Republic ad campaign.


On Sunday; A Wary Return To a World That's Memory
ROBIN MILLER started as June Bleich's dancercise instructor.
"And now Robin's my dearest friend," June said.
With Robin's help, June, a "full-time mommy" married to a contractor, has gone from size 7 to 4.
They were riding in June's Mercedes to Staten Island.
"We're constantly on the phone," said Robin, who teaches at several hot studios, including Steps in Manhattan.
"June can talk the ears off a brass monkey."


The House Inflation Built
To the Sports Editor:
Receiving my renewal notice for a Yankees partial season-ticket package, I found that the Yankees are putting an additional squeeze on their fans.
Ticket prices have been raised from $14.50 a year ago to $16 for 1993, a $3.50 increase since over 1991.


Steven Holl and Janet Cross
WHEN Steven Myron Holl proposed to Janet Olmsted Cross, a fellow architect, he didn't give her an actual ring; he gave her a rendering of a ring.
"At our engagement party, we passed the drawing around among the guests," recalled Ms.
Cross, who works with Mr.
Holl in New York and whose great-great-grandfather was Frederick Law Olmsted, the designer of Central Park.
Like many of the buildings that Mr.
Holl and Ms.
Cross are developing -- a recent commission of his is the renovation of Columbia University Law School -- their wedding was simple and spartan, with references to poetry, music, nature and mathematics.


Home and the Homeless: P.C. Meets Nimby
New York City's plan to move 50 homeless families into the Cambridge House hotel on the Upper West Side has created a dilemma for residents torn between two cherished local traditions: progressive social compassion and folksy neighborhood charm.
For residents of the shabby-genteel hotel at 333 West 86th Street, the situation has been confronted in typical Upper West Side style: intellectual debate and soul seaching.
"This is really going to tell me who I am," said Deborah Gordon-Brown, a psychotherapist who has lived in the residential hotel between West End Avenue and Riverside Drive for 12 years.
"I have to stand up for what I believe in. I have to put my name to it."


All About/Contracting Out Drug Research; Speeding New Drugs to Market
RACING to get their latest products approved, pharmaceutical companies are increasingly farming out much off the crucial testing on people that determines if a new drug is safe and effective.
In doing so, the drug makers say they can get reliable results faster and cheaper, and free their own researchers to discover the next lucrative batch of heart pills.
The independent contract research laboratories say that, with the equivalent of standing armies of scientists and experienced administrators, they can shave a year or more off the costly process.
Not only can that save millions of dollars, it can also quickly propel the new drug to the marketplace, where it can start earning its keep.


Mounties Take Class A Catholic Title
With their head coach, Vinny O'Connor, in a hospital suffering from anemia since Friday morning, St.
Francis Prep fell to Mount St.
Michael, 26-0, yesterday in the Class A Catholic High Schools Football League championship game at St.
John's University.
Chris Mayo, Mount St.
Michael's senior running back, rushed 18 times for 135 yards, giving him 1,245 for the season.
His two touchdown runs, of 75 and 8 yards in the first and third quarters, gave him 18 touchdowns on the year and at least one in every game for Mount St.
Michael.


POSTINGS: Carrere &amp; Hastings House: $22 Million; Tweed Island, Too
No, for $22 million, one might expect something more.
And so the Whitehead estate is offering not only the six-bedroom house but also a nine-car garage (with a clock tower and two apartments), a dock, a pool, a squash court, a tennis court, a greenhouse, a seven-acre peninsula and the three-acre Finch Island on Indian Harbor, formerly known as Tweed Island.
"Prospective buyers, without exception, have said that it's the most incredible waterfront property in the Northeast," said Robert Wilder, manager of the Greenwich office of Coldwell Banker Schlott, the broker representing the Whitehead estate.
"It is in an area that's strictly single-family residences, so the target purchaser would have to be someone who would use it according to zoning regulations."


Eagles Try to Set Limits on Their Turmoil
From the coach to the quarterback to the players in the pits, the Philadelphia Eagles will play out a series of dramas at Giants Stadium today.
Most notable, of course, is the quarterback drama.
The irrepressible Randall Cunningham, who has expressed opposite reactions of surprise and agreement at being benched two games ago, is starting for a second straight game.
He wonders, though, whether "I'll have to look over my shoulder."


Recording Women In Power
DO women who run countries have to be domineering and spiteful?
How do mothering skills enter the formula for women in leadership roles?
What if women ruled the world?
In documentaries on "mothers in charge of countries," Mary Scott of Port Jefferson is starting to examine such questions.
The first film, "Chief Wilma Mankiller," a pilot for the series, is a 28-minute examination of the first elected female chief of the Cherokee Nation in Oklahoma.
It was filmed in and around Stilwell, Okla., in "four amazing days in 1990," Mrs.
Scott recalled.


Residential Resales
Closings in the week ended Nov. 7  MANHATTAN  Chelsea 230,000
420 West 23d Street  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,100-sq.-ft. condo in a 9-year-old building; 24-hr. doorman, dining area, 2 balconies, 2 exposures; common charge $806, taxes $3,144 (Broker: Silverman Group)  SoHo 730,000
117 Prince Street  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 2,400-sq.-ft. co-op in a loft building; elevator, central air-conditioning, 2 exposures; maintenance $1,100, no tax-deduction (Brokers: Meislin Real Estate-Sinvin Realty)  Upper East Side 890,000
60 East 88th Street  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 1,850-sq.-ft. postwar condo; 24-hr. doorman, dining room, terrace off master bedroom; common charge $1,897, taxes $4,656 (Brokers; Stribling &amp; Associates-Corcoran Group)  Upper West Side 680,000
180 Riverside Drive (90th St.)  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 2,300-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, 2 maid's rooms, dining room, Hudson River view; maintenance $1,598, 40% tax-deductible (Broker: Klara Madlin Real Estate)  Upper West Side 295,000
161 West 75th Street  2-bedroom, 3-bath, 1,800-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; part-time doorman, maid's room, dining room, 3 exposures; maintenance $1,241, 60% tax-deductible (Broker: Solarz Realty)  BRONX  Riverdale 325,000
6125 Delafield Avenue  2-family detached brick house; 2 bedrooms, 1 bath, eat-in kitchen in each unit; finished attic and basement, 2-car garage, 20- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $2,550 (Broker: Charles G. Brophy &amp; Associates)  Soundview 172,000
1016 Elder Avenue  2-family attached brick house; 3 bedrooms in primary unit; 2 bedrooms in other; dining room, 1 bath in each; hospitality suite on first floor, 1-car garage, 20- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,400 (Broker: Marland Real Estate)  BROOKLYN Cobble Hill 550,000
341 Clinton Street  2-family, 5-story bvrownstone; 4 bedrooms, 3 baths, c/a in primary triplex unit; 3 bedrooms, 2 baths in duplex; dining room in each; rear garden, 21.2- by 112-ft. lot; taxes $2,478 (Broker: Harborview Realty)  Kensington 270,000
596 East 2d Street  4-family semi-attached brick house; 2 bedrooms in three units; 1 bedroom in other; dining room, 1 bath in each; full basement, 2-car garage, 25- by 125-ft. lot; taxes $2,300 (Broker: Homes R' Beautiful)  Midwood 170,000
1441 East 15th Street  4-bedroom, 1-bath, one-family detached wood-frame house; dining room, eat-in kitchen, front porch, full basement, 1-car garage, 20- by 75-ft. lot; taxes $850 (Broker: Century 21/Homefront)  QUEENS  Astoria 185,000
14-07 27th Avenue  2-family attached brick house; 2 bedrooms, 1 bath, eat-in kitchen, dining room, finished basement, 1-car garage, 20- by 78-ft. lot; taxes $800 (Broker: Century 21/Triboro Terrace Realty)  Elmhurst 110,000
94-30 1/2 46th Avenue  4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, one-family attached frame house; enclosed porch, dining room, full basement, 15- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $960 (Broker: Veterans Realty)  STATEN ISLAND  Bull's Head 213,500
44 Commerce Street  4-bedroom, 2 bath, one-family detached high-ranch; dining room, eat-in kitchen, family room, 1-car garage, 40- by 105-ft. lot; taxes $1,870 (Broker: Coldwell Banker/ DeSimone Realty)  Westerleigh 167,000
260 Neal Dow Avenue  4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, one-family detached ranch; dining room, eat-in kitchen, finished basement, 1-car garage, 40- by 75-ft. lot; taxes $1,500 (Broker: Foreman-Rand Properties)


Lorna Luft, on the Road Again
IT HAPPENS EVERY TIME THE CURTAIN GOES up.
"Looks like her mother."


An Account Book Full of Humiliations
THE CERTIFICATE
By Isaac Bashevis Singer.
Translated by Leonard Wolf. 231 pp.
New York: Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $22.


Maybe the Media DID Treat Bush a Bit Harshly
DURING the final days of the election campaign, President Bush appeared at rallies waving a red bumper sticker: "Annoy the Media: Re-elect Bush." The gesture always got a big cheer from partisan crowds.
Over the last few decades, press-bashing has become a standard feature of political campaigns.
Political scientists and media monitoring organizations have taken up the cause, producing studies every four years designed to prove -- depending on the outlook of the group -- that the election coverage was tilted to the left or to the right.


Daria Pace, David Lamb
Sophie Pace Petretti of Stony Brook, L.I., has announced the engagement of her daughter Daria Kathryn Pace to David Robinson Lamb, a son of Carol H. Lamb of Oyster Bay, L.I., and Stephen B. Lamb of Friday Harbor, Wash.
A January wedding is planned.
Miss Pace is a food industry marketing consultant in New York.
She graduated from the University of Chicago.
She is also a daughter of the late Thaddeus W. Pace and a stepdaughter of the late Bruce A. Petretti.


Southwestern Bell's Move: Gloom and Glee
Two months ago Southwestern Bell Corporation sent spirits flying in San Antonio, spread dejection in the St.
Louis area and demonstrated again Mexico's importance to the economy of the Southwest.
The mixed reaction came on the heels of an announcement by Edward E. Whitacre Jr., its chairman, that the $9.3 billion communications giant, which has had a long presence in St.
Louis, would move its corporate headquarters and 500 jobs to San Antonio.


House-Hunting by Interactive Computer
WALTER PERKINS wants to buy a home but, unlike most house-hunters these days, the last place he will look is in a local multiple listings service guide.
Instead, Mr.
Perkins, a freelance television sportscaster who lives in South Boston, has been shopping at a HomeView office, where he will sit down in front of an interactive computer system connected to a digital picture database that includes vastly more listings and more detail than any other source of information.


Willis Set to Kick for Giants
The Giants signed Ken Willis today to kick in their game Sunday against the Philadelphia Eagles.
Willis will replace Matt Bahr, who strained his right knee kicking off in Thursday's practice.
Bahr will remain on the active roster.
When Bahr was hurt, the Giants brought in the 26-year-old Willis and their former kicker, 33-year-old Raul Allegre, for tryouts Friday.


Jennifer Irwin, Matthew Filos
Mr. and Mrs.
William Irwin of Larchmont, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter Jennifer Anne Irwin to Matthew Filos, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard Filos of New York.
A January wedding is planned.
Miss Irwin, 28 years old, is a recruiting coordinator in Wilton, Conn., for Deloitte &amp; Touche, the accounting firm.
She graduated from Iona College.
Her father is a senior account executive at Colin Service Systems Inc., a building maintenance company in New York.
Her mother, Marianne S. Irwin, is a mathematics teacher at Hommocks Middle School in Mamaroneck, N.Y.


Which Inn Is Older? Well, It Depends...
AT the front of the Curtis House on Main Street in Woodbury an elaborate sign proclaims it as Connecticut's oldest inn.
Occasionally, said the innkeeper, Chester C. Hardisty, diners will question the sign.
"People come in and say 'Are you really the oldest? We remember another inn that said it was the oldest, too."'


A Czechoslovak Bohemian


Looking for Laughs


Carter Schmitt, M.D.W. Learnard
Alice Megerlin of Locust Valley, L.I., and Alfred J. Schmitt Jr. of Syosset, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter Catherine Carter Schmitt to Matthew Douglas-Willan Learnard, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
William E. Learnard of Philadelphia.
A September wedding is planned.
Miss Schmitt, 24 years old, is known as Carter.
She is an executive assistant at the National Gallery of Art in Washington.
She graduated from Rollins College.
Her father is a senior vice president and an investment banker at Daiwa Securities America, a securities brokerage in New York.
Her mother is a certified public accountant in Locust Valley.
The bride's stepfather, David R. Megerlin, is an engineer at the Miltope Corporation, a computer equipment manufacturer in Melville, L.I.


News Talks May Change Union Roles
Mortimer B. Zuckerman's effort to take over The Daily News is becoming a behind-the-scenes battle that could redefine the role of unions in the New York City newspaper business.
Mr.
Zuckerman has embarked on a path that could, if it succeeds, strip the unions of much of their remaining power at The News and could trigger new pressures from other newspaper publishers in New York to effectively de-unionize an industry with decades of labor history.


Term Limit for the Man of Steel: Yes, It's Time for Him to Go
IF the American public was beside itself with grief over the demise of Superman last week, the sorrow was not conspicuous.
In death, the Man of Steel was reduced to the same clammy, mercantile status as such other extinct American icons as Moxie, the Packard and the 45 R.P.M. record: he became a collectible.
The teen-agers who lined up at the nation's newsstands and comic book stores on Wednesday had dollar signs, not tears, in their eyes.
The issue of Superman in which the superhero from Krypton is killed by Doomsday, a villainous escapee from a cosmic insane asylum, was bound to be worth more than its face value of $1.25 someday.
Or so its publishers would have young consumers believe.
Superman may come back to life in some form or other in any event.
The DC Comics people are only guaranteeing that he will stay dead until March 1993.
But will anyone care about a resurrection, should there be one?
Superman was a goner long before Doomsday arrived, as was the heroic ideal ("very phallic, glossy, gleamingly hard-edged, hyper-masculine" in the words of the writer Camille Paglia) he symbolized in American culture.


Seeing New Turmoil, Europe Devalues 2 Weak Currencies
Faced with mounting strains on its monetary system, the European Community agreed early today to devalue two of its weaker currencies in an attempt to head off another round of chaos in the financial markets.
After an 11-hour meeting in Brussels, central bank and finance ministry officials said that the Spanish peseta and the Portuguese escudo would be assigned lower values within the community's system of semi-fixed exchange rates.
The action amounts to a 6 percent devaluation for each currency.


Westchester GUIDE
AIDS MEMORIAL QUILT
The AIDS Memorial Quilt has been displayed in dozens of communities nationwide, and now portions of it can be seen at the Hudson River Museum in Yonkers from Saturday through Dec. 13.


A Complex Equation Is Needed to Yield 4
More than four months away from the hasty construction of a victory stand on a Monday night in New Orleans, the earliest signs of a celebration seem to be taking place.
The University of Michigan Wolverines appeared Thursday night in a game against the Russian national basketball team at the Palace of Auburn Hills.
The glorified scrimmage attracted 19,229 customers, some of whom had to search for parking spots until halftime.
Everyone seemed happy just to get a glimpse of the Fab Five as sophomores and eager to write in their young heroes for nothing less than a spot in the Final Four.


Slims Replay: Seles and Navratilova
With the vicious competitive resolve she reserves for special occasions and talented opponents, top-ranked Monica Seles screeched past Gabriela Sabatini, 7-6 (8-6), 6-1, yesterday and will defend her Virginia Slims Championships title today for the second consecutive year.
The victory was also lucrative.
The 18-year-old Seles guaranteed that she will break her own record for yearly earnings.
She has won $2,492,352 this year, up from $2,457,758 in 1991.
Seles, attempting to play out her own personal version of the queen of mean on the royal blue carpet for the third straight year, will meet her 1991 victim, Martina Navratilova, in today's best-of-five set finale at Madison Square Garden.
By downing underdog Lori McNeil in straight sets, 7-6 (7-5), 6-4, Navratilova earned another crack at Seles, who leads their series, 8-6.


Arnold K. Davis, Insurer, 76
Arnold K. Davis, a prominent insurance broker in Manhattan, died yesterday at the Palm Beach Hospital in Florida.
He was 76 years old and lived in Palm Beach.
He died of complications of diabetes, his family said.


In Westport, an Update of 'No Frills'
IN a psychiatrist's office an agitated patient is recounting last night's dream.
She is throwing a party for the singer Yma Sumac.
In come a flow of unexpected celebrity guests, all bearing nearly sound-alike first names.
Her forced repetition of tongue-tripping introductions -- Aba (Eban), Oona (O'Neill), Ava (Gardner), Ulu (Grosbard), Ali (McGraw), Uta (Hagen) -- escalates into a desperate hostess's nightmare.
It isn't just this sample of vintage giddiness dreamed up by Thomas Meehan for a New Yorker piece in 1967 and turned into a television sketch for Anne Bancroft two years later that is being delightfully recreated by Mana Allen at the Westport Playhouse.


BUT WHO WON ON LANGUAGE?
For William Safire to nit-pick about the three Presidential candidates' grammar and use of words during the televised debates seemed a waste of time.
Considering that these men were speaking in front of television cameras, responding to a barrage of questions on numerous subjects and, at the same time, virtually fighting for their political lives, it was amazing that they were as coherent, cool and calm as they managed to appear.
JESSICA M. PAROLY
Bronx


Conversations/Frank Cashen; Mr. Mets Takes a Swing At the Baseball He Misses
IT was a crummy week for baseball purists.
With the expansion draft, the revelation that the average annual major league salary was, this year for the first time, over a million dollars, and the opening of the annual spendthrifts' bazaar, the free-agent market, the game continued to bend itself out of shape.
Indeed it was a week that, in the future, might well be seen as a swivel, the exact moment that baseball, long in modulation, finally became unrecognizable.


The Uneasy Sleep of the Homeless


With a New V8, Lincoln Introduces an All-New Mark VIII
If you are a manufacturer, New York is a good place to introduce a car.
You can always find a backdrop that connects with your vehicle, as Dodge did last month when it trotted out its new Intrepid on the pier next to the carrier-cum-museum of the same name.
On Wednesday, it was Ford Motor Company's turn, and the introduction of the '93 Lincoln Mark VIII jammed traffic at 77th Street and Madison Avenue, which is the location of -- what else? -- the Hotel Mark.


Corrections
A map on Nov. 8 with an article about excursions from Santa Fe, N.M., misidentified a national forest.
It is the Carson National Forest.


Brightening the Season With Adobe Style
SAGEBRUSH CAFE in Georgetown has such sunny, Southwestern decor -- desert pink and turquoise walls, matching bentwood chairs, clever murals stretching over the entire long wall in three dining areas -- that after a few minutes there, a guest almost involuntarily starts dropping g's and drawling "Howdy, pardner."
The cafe occupies space that formerly featured another type ethnic restaurant, the Indian Kismet.
Ample space has been sectioned into three comfortable dining areas, and a small bar called Tequila Sheila's, which is cheerfully wholesome despite its desperado-like name.
The murals bear such titles as the Jackalope Stampede, Mojave Mirage and Renowned Red Rocks and cover entire walls.


Moving the Vegetables Out of the Shadow of the Turkey
BECAUSE so much attention is paid to the turkey on the Thanksgiving table, vegetables sometimes get short shrift.
Steamed brussels sprouts and sweet potato puree topped with marshmallows are all very well, but they aren't dishes I think many people will lose sleep over if they fail to appear.
I like to serve a variety of different vegetables with turkey, and I choose them both for their color and their texture.


Shipbuilding That Soothes the Psyche
GEORGE LOWERY stood before the group and shared his experiences: "I spend all my free time on this," said the retired Peekskill police officer.
"After 20 years of stress, this has just unwound me. Sometimes I work 16 to 18 hours a day. Sometimes I forget to eat."
The crowd of mostly middle-age men listened intently.
Oh, to be so obsessed, their eyes seemed to say.
Then Steven Nathanson spoke.
"I have them all over the house," he said.
"There's no clock, nobody really watching you. Until Frank passes the judgment, good or bad . . ."


Teeth on the Sidewalk
Newsweek, in "The Inside Story" of the '92 campaign, points out proudly that "Mark Miller was given extraordinary access to the inner workings of the Clinton campaign, thanks to the permission of the candidate himself."
Miller reports an episode of interest to students of vivid figures of speech in general, and of Southern American dialect in particular.


Chief Honcho Romps In Brooklyn Handicap
It was the last hurrah, the $350,000 Brooklyn Handicap, the last Grade I stakes in New York until next April, and it drew 11 war-horse types who run in all seasons.
And it gave this season a late touch of theater yesterday when Chief Honcho dashed through the homestretch at Aqueduct to win it by 5 1/2 lengths.


Making a Difference; From the Utility Business To U.S. Energy Secretary?
After an appendectomy in September, while groggily awakening from the anesthesia, Michael R. Peevey's first words in the recovery room were "Vote for Clinton-Gore."
While Mr.
Peevey said he has no memory of the incident, friends say it is typical of the 55-year-old who has just quit as president of the SCE Corporation, the parent of the Southern California Edison utility company.
They call Mr.
Peevey an anomaly in a conservative industry where most executives have engineering or financial backgrounds.


Man Guilty Of Attacking Black Athlete
A 22-year-old Long Island man charged with savagely beating a black high school football star with a baseball bat in what the authorities described as a racial attack was found guilty today of first-degree assault.
But the defendant, Shannon Siegel, who is white, was acquitted of attempted murder and violating the civil rights of the victim, Alfred Jermaine Ewell, 18.
Mr.
Siegel stood motionless and fighting back tears at the defense table as the jury announced its verdict on the nine charges against him.
Mr.
Ewell, who sat several seats behind him in the spectator section of the courtroom, showed no emotion.
Later, outside the courtroom, Mr.
Ewell said that he was "very satisfied by the judicial process."


Corrections
A listing of Caribbean resorts on Nov. 1 referred incorrectly to the Treasure Island Resort on St.
Maarten.
It is near the Cupecoy Beach Club, which consists of condominiums on sandstone cliffs overlooking Cupecoy Beach.
The Treasure Island itself does not look out on the beach.


A Few More Harsh Words for the Payroll Tax
In "The Payroll Tax Is Getting Out of Hand" (Viewpoints, Nov. 8), Norman Ornstein, a scholar at the American Enterprise Institute in Washington, discussed shortcomings in the Social Security system.
Basically, he wrote, F.I.C.A. taxes earmarked primarily for Social Security and Medicare have become a large burden on working people.
The payments are not only a hidden tax, he argued, but a very regressive one.
Mr.
Ornstein's criticism drew a heavy response from readers.
Some of their thoughts and suggestions follow.
A Dole for the Old
To the Editor:


Major Choral Works Are Focus of the Day
TODAY may be one of the busiest Sundays of the entire musical year.
One can start the day with "Music for a Thanksgiving Sunday" at South Congregational Church in Hartford: Richard Donohue will play the Allegro from Widor's Organ Symphony No. 6, then conduct the choir and brass ensemble in Bach's Cantata No. 137.
Elgar's "Ave Verum" and congregational singing of several holiday hymns conclude the 10 A.M. service (249-8627).
Another major choral work, Dvorak's "Stabat Mater," will be sung today at 3 in St.
Peter's Church in Danbury, with the soprano Pamela Hoffmann of Brookfield among the soloists, Charles Matz conducting and Louis L. Perazza, music director at St.
Peter's, accompanying at the organ (748-1716).


Florence Frescoes
To the Editor: I read the article by Susan Lumsden, "Florence Recalls the Magnificent One" (Sept. 6) with great interest and enjoyment.
As a Ph.D. candidate in the department of art history and archeology at Columbia University, recently returned from a year in Florence, I am completing my dissertation on Florentine art in the period after the death of Lorenzo de'Medici.
I found Ms.
Lumsden's article most informative but take great exception to one comment: "Frescoes were the television commercials of the day." No, absolutely not!
Though I can certainly appreciate her intentions, she would have been better advised to describe these frescoes as the Steven Spielberg extravaganzas of the period.


Bad Times For Mesa, but Not for Pickens
TIMES are getting hard for investors who stuck with T. Boone Pickens, the one-time scourge of corporate America and self-appointed representative of individual shareholders.
But for Mr.
Pickens, the money is still rolling in.
Mesa Inc., Mr.
Pickens's company, is in danger of going broke.
Its share price has plummeted, and now its auditors are questioning whether it can continue as a going concern.


Badillo Is Considering His 4th Mayoral Race
Politics isn't baseball, which may be why, after three strikes since 1969, Herman Badillo says he expects to decide for certain early next year whether to take a fourth swing at the mayoralty of New York.
"Increasingly, a substantial group of people say they will raise money for a campaign because they're concerned about the city going downhill -- especially in terms of jobs," said Mr.
Badillo, the former Housing Commissioner, Bronx Borough President, Congressman and Deputy Mayor to Edward I. Koch.


No Headline
We're running out of  people that we're allowed to hate, and to feel superior to.
Fatness is the one thing left that seems to be a person's fault -- which it isn't. -- DR.
SUSAN C. WOOLEY of the eating disorders clinic at the University of Cincinnati.  [ 38:5. ]


In the Region: Westchester; Recent Sales
Eastchester, N.Y. 336,000
93 Joyce Road  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 41-year-old colonial; living room, fireplace, dining room, laundry, flagstone patio; taxes $5,455.
Ossining, N.Y. 200,000
62 Croton Dam Road  4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 28-year-old raised ranch; dining room, laundry room, 2-car garage, fenced yard; taxes $5,000.
Yorktown Heights, N.Y. 239,000
2847 Avis Court  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 36-year-old contemporary; family room, dining room, fieldstone fireplace, sun room; taxes $6,200.
Hamden, Conn. 176,400
475 Tom Swamp Road  4-bedroom, 3-bath, 5-year-old raised ranch; kitchen with vaulted ceiling, newly finished lower level, 1.5 acres; taxes $3,768.
Guilford, Conn. 150,000
77 Beech Road  3-bedroom, 2-bath, newly built Cape Cod; dining room with stone fireplace, lake view, electric heat, 0.25 acre; taxes $2,361.
Madison, Conn. 212,000
61 Church Lane  5-bedroom, 2-bath, 33-year-old contemporary; cathedral ceilings, fireplace, large windows, 90,000-square-foot lot; taxes $3,026.
OTHER AREAS Jackson, N.J. 90,000
27 Oakland Drive  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 20-year-old ranch; woodstove, 1-car garage; taxes $2,800.
Livingston, N.J. 210,000
32 Crescent Road  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 33-year-old colonial; family room, eat-in-kitchen, 1-car garage, patio, fireplace; $3,913.
Bayville, L.I. 162,000
6 Pine Park Avenue  5-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 69-year-old colonial; dining room, eat-in kitchen, fireplace, basement; taxes $2,100.


The Transition: The Democrats; Party Chairmen Meet, This Time Without Grieving
Democrats, who grew adept in the arts of black humor and stoic losing in the 1980's, are learning to swagger again.
Here on a hill overlooking the harbor of Charlotte Amalie, the state Democratic chairmen held their quadrennial post-election conference this weekend and began to plan for their party's return to power.
In two days of meetings here, the party leaders talked of concerns small and large, from securing good seats at the inauguration to dealing with the deluge of resumes many of these leaders are getting from hopeful home-state Democrats who want a job in the Administration.
But the biggest concern here, the quiver of anxiety beneath all the rum, steel-band music and political euphoria, was making sure that the Democrats don't blow an opportunity so painfully won.


Update; Bronx Woman Is Sentenced In Killing of Her Niece
A 36-year-old Bronx woman who pleaded guilty last month to killing a 6-year-old niece in her care as a foster child has been sentenced to 4 to 12 years in prison.
The incident raised questions at the time about how the state monitors what is known as kinship care, in which a family member, usually a grandmother, becomes a foster parent.
In 1991, three children died in foster care, two of whom were in kinship care families, according to the city's Human Resources Adminstration.


Clinton Treading Cautiously As Trade Talks Move Ahead
President-elect Bill Clinton is holding off on embracing the agreement on farm subsidies between the United States and Europe that was announced on Friday, recognizing that the broad and complex world trade talks are fraught with political dangers for him.
The farm subsidies compromise, unless it is vetoed by France, is expected to allow global trade talks involving 108 nations to move forward quickly, seeking to reduce trade barriers in a broad range of goods and services, including banking and telecommunications.


Gypsy Rose Lee
To the Editor:
Upon completion of the exterior renovation of the house at 153 East 63d Street, reported in your "Streetscapes" column of Oct. 25, I hope for the return of the informative and delightful historic plaque, removed a few years ago, which marked Gypsy Rose Lee's former occupancy.


Play Sharpens Wits (Or Vice Versa)
THERE is a chicken-and-egg problem about bridge players: Does the game improve their reasoning power?
Or did they become bridge players because they are good reasoners?
The question was posed, but not answered, in some recent research by two California psychologists, Louise Clarkson-Smith and Alan Hartley.
They tested 50 players and 50 nonplayers, ages 55 to 91, for memory, reasoning, reaction time and vocabulary.
The results showed that players outperform nonplayers in memory and reasoning but not in reaction time and vocabulary.


Q and A
Cruising Asia Minor


Moving the Vegetables Out of the Shadow of the Turkey
BECAUSE so much attention is paid to the turkey on the Thanksgiving table, vegetables sometimes get short shrift.
Steamed brussels sprouts and sweet potato puree topped with marshmallows are all very well, but they aren't dishes I think many people will lose sleep over if they fail to appear.
I like to serve a variety of different vegetables with turkey, and I choose them both for their color and their texture.


There's Nothing Like a Dame
DAME EDNA EVERAGE AND THE RISE OF WESTERN CIVILISATION
Backstage With Barry Humphries.
By John Lahr.
Illustrated. 242 pp.
New York:  Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $22.


Robert S. Jenkins, 71, Recruiting Executive
Robert Spurgeon Jenkins, a retired managing partner and director of Eastman &amp; Beaudine, a New York management recruiting company, died on Thursday in a hospital in Greenville, S.C.
He was 71 years old and lived in Salem, S.C.
He died of pneumonia at Greenville Memorial Hospital, said his daughter, Roberta Jenkins Dias.


Molding Textbooks to Mold Consensus
JAPAN often seems devoid of ideological debate in public, but deep in its bureaucracy a major ideological battleground remains: School textbooks.
The country's powerful Education Ministry, which sets a uniform tone for schools across the land, never fails to stir arguments when it goes through its exhaustive screening of the content of the texts used in every Japanese schoolhouse.
For decades, the ministry and academics have argued about how to depict Japan's actions in World War II -- whether, for example, to refer to the "advance" into China as an "invasion," and whether it was the "Nanjing incident" or the "Nanjing massacre." Those disagreements, more than any other, are cited by Japan's one-time enemies, especially in Asia, as evidence that the country is still unable to come to terms with its history of aggression.


Consumer Design in London
The new Twentieth Century Gallery at the Victoria and Albert Museum in London spans the history of consumer design from 1900 to 1992.
Nearly 600 objects, presented in chronological order, are drawn from the museum's permanent collection and range from lighting to tableware, accessories, furniture, clothing, radios, books, magazines, electrical goods and hi-fi.
Some exhibits are of one-of-a-kind pieces, others show mass-produced design classics, like Charles Rennie Mackintosh fireplaces, for example, Eileen Gray lacquer furniture, Alessi kettles and paper dresses.
American designers' work in the gallery, which opened last month, includes furniture by Charles and Ray Eames; textile design by Ruth Reeves, a guitar by Herbert Clarence Lea Sender and photography by Alfred Stieglitz.
Within the chronological layout, specific themes are highlighted, such as nationalism and internationalism, industrial mass production versus skilled craftmanship and the way that popular choice, mass consumption and communication have driven design developments.


Dangerous Liaisons Are All the Rage
A MAN'S DEEP, ROMANTIC VOICE says, "I have crossed oceans of time to find you." What woman could resist such a line?
And who would have thought he meant it literally?
Gary Oldman, as the lovelorn vampire in "Bram Stoker's Dracula," has traveled four centuries to discover Mina (Winona Ryder), the reincarnation of his beloved wife.
His romantic obsession gives new meaning to the idea of mating for life.
It also captures the essence of Francis Ford Coppola's enjoyable, excessive version of the vampire myth.
This "Dracula" is so rococo -- overwrought with miles of jewel-colored costumes, gallons of movie blood and go-for-broke performances -- that it takes a powerful essence to emerge at all.
And it has one, perfectly expressed in the film's advertising tag line, "Love Never Dies."


Photos From 'Seasons of Life'
THE picture accompanying this review did not win a prize in the photography competition at the Hunterdon Art Center here.
Nevertheless, it is itself a prize, with the Mondrian esque simplicity of its design and details like the heads of the sculptures in the windows and that of the passer-by all facing in the same direction.
Still, the photographer, whose name is Rama, does not deserve all the credit.
The subject, an 1888 brownstone erected by John Duncan at the corner of Madison Avenue and 84th Street in Manhattan, is a beauty, eminently suited to the out-of-the-way 19th- and early 20th-century European art shown by the gallery within.


Jennifer A. Segal, David M. Madden
Dr. and Mrs.
Sheldon J. Segal of Hartsdale, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter Jennifer A. Segal to David M. Madden, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Jean D. Madden Jr. of Warwick, R.I.
A June wedding is planned.
Ms.
Segal, 27 years old, is an associate product manager at Clairol Inc. in New York.
She graduated cum laude from Wellesley College and received a master's degree in management from Northwestern University.
Her father is the creator of the Norplant birth-control device and a staff member at the Population Council, a nonprofit research organization in New York.
Her mother, Harriet Segal, is a novelist.


A Few More Harsh Words for the Payroll Tax
In "The Payroll Tax Is Getting Out of Hand" (Viewpoints, Nov. 8), Norman Ornstein, a scholar at the American Enterprise Institute in Washington, discussed shortcomings in the Social Security system.
Basically, he wrote, F.I.C.A. taxes earmarked primarily for Social Security and Medicare have become a large burden on working people.
The payments are not only a hidden tax, he argued, but a very regressive one.
Mr.
Ornstein's criticism drew a heavy response from readers.
Some of their thoughts and suggestions follow.
Pity Poor F.D.R.
To the Editor:


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball American League  BALTIMORE ORIOLES -- Signed Rick Sutcliffe, pitcher, to a one-year contract.
Football  National Football League  NEW YORK GIANTS -- Signed Ken Willis, kicker.
Placed Matt Bahr, kicker, on the inactive list.
Waived Bobby Abrams, linebacker.
SAN FRANCISCO 49ERS -- Activated Dexter Carter, running back, from injured reserve.
TAMPA BAY BUCCANEERS -- Signed Mark Duckens, defensive lineman.
Waived Mike Barber, wide receiver.
Hockey  Colonial Hockey League  FLINT BULLDOGS -- Signed Don Stone, forward.
Adds Mark Roof, goalie, as one-game emergency replacement.
East Coast Hockey League  LOUISVILLE ICEHAWKS -- Placed Ken House, left wing, on injured reserve, retroactive to Nov. 14.
Added Scott Humeniuk, defenseman, from Springfield of the American Hockey League.
Soccer  National Professional Soccer League  CLEVELAND CRUNCH -- Placed Zoran Karic, forward, on the 15-day disabled list.
Activated Tim Bartro, midfielder.
Signed Gary Heale, forward, and Herb Haller and Tom Isirov, defensemen, to 10-day contracts.


What About All Those Cars?
To the Editor:
In his article describing architectural proposals for Times Square  [ "Time to Reset the Clock in Times Square," Nov. 1 ] , Herbert Muschamp neglected one of the area's essential elements: How do people relate to the space?
Times Square today is dominated not by people but by automobiles.
The public life of the square has been sliced apart by automotive traffic and relegated to the narrow margins along the sidewalks and the isolated islands in the center of the "square." Of the four designs discussed in the article, the subway station was the only one to address the concern of how people relate to the space.


Laurie Martin, Nicholas Ward
Carol B. Martin of Suffield, Conn., has announced the engagement of her daughter, Laurie Ann Martin, to Nicholas Shaeffer Ward, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
James S. Ward of Short Hills, N.J.
A May wedding is planned.


Data Update
*4*INDEXES OF HOUSING COSTS N.Y.-Northeast N.J. area*
% change from
% change from
Oct. 92
Sept. 92
Oct. 91
Rents
178.8
-0.8
+4.1
Homeowner's costs
181.3
+1.3
+5.5
Fuel and utilities
106.7
-2.4
+3.0
Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics
*4**Five counties of New York City plus Nassau, Suffolk, Westchester
*4*Rockland, Putnam, Bergen, Essex, Morris, Union, Hudson, Middlesex
Somerset and Passaic.
Indexes: 1982-84=100
*4*MORTGAGE INTEREST RATES (Averages)
Last Week
Previous Week
Year Ago
New York
Conventional (30-yr)
8.62
8.61
8.85
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.49
5.42
6.53
New Jersey
Conventional (30-yr)
8.41
8.43
8.77
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.18
5.24
6.42
Connecticut
Conventional (30-yr)
8.49
8.49
8.72
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.10
5.06
6.42
Co-ops (N.Y.)
Conventional (30-yr)
8.62
8.63
9.00
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.97
5.81
7.06
*4*Indexes for Adjustable-Rate Mortgages*
1-yr. Treasury security
3.64
3.58
4.96
National Mortgage Contract Rate
7.44
7.44
8.93
*Rates on most adjustable mortgages are set 1 to 3 percentage points above these indexes.  (Source: HSH Associates)


New Hampshire Won't Scrap Education Rules
Facing objections from parents, educators and state legislators, the New Hampshire State Board of Education has retreated from a proposal to eliminate several minimum education standards for public schools.
The plan, the first of its kind to be proposed by any state, would have freed cities and towns to set their own standards for maximum class size, the ratio of guidance counselors to students, the size of a school library and whether art, music, physical education and other nonacademic classes were offered.


For Vietnam, Settling the Past Could Be Good Business
A generation ago, the Vietnamese learned how American public opinion could help end a war that bullets and bombs and the sacrifice of hundreds of thousands of lives seemed incapable of drawing to a close.
Now they are trying to apply that lesson in reviving a peacetime economy that remains among the most backward in Asia -- backward in no small part because of a 17-year-old trade embargo that is one of the last vestiges of the Vietnam war.


Flaps, Tubes, Peekaboos
It's the snap and crackle of the wearer's own panache that gives vitality to the longer hemlines.
These young women plunged theirs right to the ankle.
No timid, couple-of-inches-below-the-knee business for them.
The adoption of long day skirts takes these women's wardrobes into a dimension beyond leggings, trousers and dress-for-success skirt lengths.
Of course they're not just any old skirts.
They're tapered, slim, flared or slashed like the flapping rubber strips at a car wash.
The slashed skirts are usually worn over dark leg coverings, but two women went so far as to wear their black flying panels over white hosiery.
The whirling of the panels around the legs was quite a head turner.


The Transition: Political Memo; Tiff Over Governor's 'Christian' Remark Underscores Fault Line in G.O.P.
Despite the sudden skirmish over whether the Republican Party thinks the nation is "Christian" or "Judeo-Christian," this has been a peaceful post-defeat post-mortem, as such things go.
The argument identified unstable political fault lines, potentials for deep, angry divisions.
But now most Republicans blame their defeat not on ideological excesses or inadequacies but on a poor economy and a poor campaign by President Bush.


People For Pets
In the catbird's seat at the 'Top Dog' gala. Nov. 17.


Valerie Schwager, Andrew Karlin
Valerie Sue Schwager, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Arthur J. Schwager of Lloyd Harbor, L.I., was married last evening to Andrew Charles Karlin, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Gene Karlin of Union, N.J.
Rabbi Howard Stecker performed the ceremony at Shelter Rock Jewish Center in Roslyn, L.I.
Mrs.
Karlin, 30 years old, is a social worker in the oncology service at Mount Sinai Hospital in New York.
She graduated from Tulane University and received a master's degree in social work from Columbia University.
Her father is a pediatrician in Huntington, L.I.
Her mother, Judith Schwager, is an account manager at Epoch 5 Marketing Inc., a marketing and public relations company there.


PROVIDER
Alice Hoffman's Hers column "Provider" (Nov. 1) brought back memories of the family values of the 1950's.
My father died in 1952 when I was 7 years old.
In those days, children were very unforgiving if your family didn't fit the norm.
I was considered an outsider because I had only one parent.
If I was at a friend's house when her father came home, I was told that it was time for me to go home, as though I might steal some of her father's attention.


Olympic Skier Confronts An Uphill Challenge
There had never been any fear before.
There had been only this logical downhill progression for Donna Weinbrecht, that began at the top of a bumpy moguls slope and ended with a gold medal at the 1992 Albertville Winter Olympics and a victory parade in her hometown of West Milford, N.J.
Weinbrecht had never been injured in her dangerous sport.
She had never thought twice about trying out the latest trick in the freestyle skiing event.
But Weinbrecht suffered a serious knee injury last Tuesday while practicing new moves at Breckenridge, Colo., and now faces reconstructive surgery on Monday that poses an intimidating barrier to her participation in the 1994 Olympics in Lillehammer, Norway.


Hi. Goodbye. This Takes 11 Weeks and $3.5 Million?
AFTER four years in the splendid isolation of the Presidency, George Bush is finding the 11-week hiatus between his defeat and Bill Clinton's inauguration stripped of splendor, but still plenty isolated.
Moody, fidgety, maybe a little bitter, he has fallen out of the hyperactive, quirky character that even critics found endearing.
Instead, he steals unannounced from the White House for midnight visits to the Vietnam Veterans Memorial; spends long stretches out of public view; proclaims that he is putting the Government on ice, in effect, until Bill Clinton takes over.
The President's moodiness is certainly understandable: just after losing a race he expected to win, he also saw his mother die of a stroke.
But well before her illness, at a meeting on Tuesday that he had thought was private, he hinted at one source of his discontent.
"I've concluded that the interregnum is too long, too ungenerous and too long," he said.
"The gears are already beginning to shift, as they should," he added, and he is determined to transfer his power with grace.
But he had a word for long goodbyes: "laborious."


Fuzzy Daydreams Replace The Grimness of Grunge
After the explosive success of Nirvana last year, and the ensuing breakthrough by Pearl Jam and the Red Hot Chili Peppers, alternative rock is now in a paradoxical state.
Commercially, it has never been more powerful, but musically, it has become increasingly less adventurous.
The rise of the punk-metal hybrid known as grunge has led to a new orthodoxy of sound and attitude, based on a mix of Black Sabbath-heaviness and punk aggression, bludgeoning riffs and bleary disaffection.
With older groups like Sonic Youth trimming off their experimental edges in an attempt to sound more raunchy and younger bands like Helmet and L7 offering a belligerent hard rock, the alternative scene has gotten predictable and oppressive.


Steamy TV: Coffee Opera
HOW often does anyone actually extend a romantic late-night invitation to share several cups of coffee?
Think about it: it's a terrible idea.
Even if the scene is staged prettily, in a cozy room beside a roaring fire, the conversation is liable to be something short of soothing once the caffeine kicks in.
One party may fidget; the other may sweat; both will chatter on unstoppably.
And if they do wind up in the bedroom, this much is certain: they'll be far too jittery for whatever they have in mind.
But the coffee date suddenly has some credence as a sexual gambit.
Or at least it's been working as an advertising strategy, thanks to the zealous efforts of the McCann-Erickson advertising agency for Taster's Choice.
In that company's all-but-unavoidable serial commercials, which have raised sales by 10 percent since the first one was shown here two years ago, a flirtatious woman (played by Sharon Maughan) and her flirtatious neighbor (Tony Head) develop a mating dance based entirely on coffee's aphrodisiac possibilities.


No Headline
President Kaysone Phomvihan of Laos, the longtime guerrilla who led the Communist takeover of his nation in 1975 and ruled as its dictator ever since, died yesterday, the Laotian state radio announced.
He was 71 years old.
He died of an unspecified illness, said the broadcasts from Vientiane, the Laotian capital.
The announcement was monitored in London and Bangkok.


An Evening For Promises
The Promise Ball benefits the Juvenile Diabetes Foundation. Nov. 14.


Centuries Are Kind to the Japanese Maple
THIS has been the autumn of the Japanese maple, whose brilliant foliage has been spectacular.
Lucky, indeed, are those who have a tree or have one growing in their neighborhood.
Japanese maples are known for their interesting foliage in any season.
In fact, unusual leaf forms are one of the prime reasons for their selection.


'McTeague' Just Wants To Be Loved
The dominant impression made by William Bolcom's opera "McTeague," in its world premiere at the Chicago Lyric Opera recently, was just how much it wanted to be liked.
The work resembled a tourist on a cross-country trip determined to say something nice to everyone met along the way.
The music smiled and winked and cozied up to characters and listeners alike.
The approach was eclectically post-modern in its assortment of styles (though less so than in Mr. Bolcom's 1982 oratorio, "Songs of Innocence and of Experience," which was scheduled to have been performed at Carnegie Hall last night).
"McTeague" offered ragtime and waltzes and barbershop quartet.
It had a bit of Expressionism and a whiff of Italian opera.
But most of all it pined for affection.
In this yearning, "McTeague" was actually part of an American operatic tradition.
Styles of native works veer between a radical individualism and a determined populism.
On one side of the spectrum is Roger Sessions's uncompromising "Montezuma," on the other the seductive theatrical pieces of Gian Carlo Menotti.
For every idiosyncratic composition like Virgil Thomson's "Four Saints in Three Acts" there is a show like Marc Blitzstein's "Regina" that reaches for listeners across musical styles.
The individualism includes the high-art traditionalism of Samuel Barber as well as specialized Minimalist spectacles like Philip Glass's "Einstein on the Beach." The populism includes attempts to make Broadway operatic (Stephen Sondheim's "Sweeney Todd") and the opera house extravagantly entertaining (John Corigliano's "Ghosts of Versailles").


Corrections
A brief report in Styles of The Times last Sunday about a fashion designer of Sri Lankan and English descent rendered her name incorrectly.
As noted in the picture caption, she is Selina Blow.


BEST SELLERS: November 22, 1992
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
MIXED BLESSINGS, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $23.50.) Three couples' lives are strained by the problems of having children.
2
1
5
THE TALE OF THE BODY THIEF, by Anne Rice. (Knopf, $24.) Lestat embarks on a dangerous enterprise; "The Vampire Chronicles," continued.
3
4
4
DRIVING FORCE, by Dick Francis. (Putnam, $21.95.) An ex-jockey's horse-transport business is besieged by a series of mysterious deaths.
4
3
4
MOSTLY HARMLESS, by Douglas Adams. (Harmony, $20.) In the fifth volume of the "Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy" series, a survivor tries to cope with new predicaments.
5
2
6
THE STARS SHINE DOWN, by Sidney Sheldon. (Morrow, $23.) The fortunes of a businesswoman are imperiled by secrets from her past. (LP)
6
7
3
MEXICO, by James A. Michener. (Random House, $25.) While researching the lives of his ancestors, an American journalist learns about the history of the land south of the border. (LP)
7
1
THE GENERAL'S DAUGHTER, by Nelson DeMille. (Warner, $21.95.) The investigation of the murder of a woman officer, a general's daughter, unearths scandals in the military.
8
5
6
SABINE'S NOTEBOOK, by Nick Bantock. (Chronicle Books, $17.95.) Continuing the epistolary romance between two talented people begun in "Griffin &amp; Sabine."
9
8
37
THE PELICAN BRIEF, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $22.50.) A woman law student probes the murder of two Supreme Court justices.
10 *
6
12
GRIFFIN &amp; SABINE, by Nick Bantock. (Chronicle Books, $17.95.) The romance of an artist and a secret admirer, told through cards and letters.
11
1
RED SQUARE, by Martin Cruz Smith. (Random House, $23.) Investigator Arkady Renko, returning to Moscow and Berlin after the collapse of Communism, still faces a perdurable mafia.
12
11
15
THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $14.95.) A photographer and a lonely farmer's wife in Iowa.
13
9
13
WHERE IS JOE MERCHANT? by Jimmy Buffett. (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, $19.95.) A couple on a wild chase through the Caribbean on the trail of a deceased rock star who has been sighted there.
14
13
26
WAITING TO EXHALE, by Terry McMillan. (Viking, $22.) The friendships and romances of four black women in Phoenix.
15
14
19
GERALD'S GAME, by Stephen King. (Viking, $23.50.) Twenty-eight hours of horror suffered by a woman handcuffed to a bedpost.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
3
SEX, by Madonna. (Warner, $49.95.) Erotic photographs of the pop star by Steven Meisel, and her reflections on them.
2
2
10
THE WAY THINGS OUGHT TO BE, by Rush H. Limbaugh 3d. (Pocket, $22.) Anecdotes and opinions offered by the talk show host.
3
3
7
IT DOESN'T TAKE A HERO, by H. Norman Schwarzkopf with Peter Petre. (Linda Grey/ Bantam, $25.) The autobiography of the general.
4
4
5
I CAN'T BELIEVE I SAID THAT! by Kathie Lee Gifford with Jim Jerome. (Pocket, $22.) The autobiography of the television-show co-host.
5
6
12
EVERY LIVING THING, by James Herriot. (St. Martin's, $22.95.) Continuing the memoirs of the Yorkshire veterinarian.
6
7
4
BANKRUPTCY 1995, by Harry E. Figgie Jr. with Gerald J. Swanson. (Little, Brown, $19.95.) The authors predict the collapse of America under Government debt and suggest ways to cope with it.
7
8
24
EARTH IN THE BALANCE, by Al Gore. (Houghton Mifflin, $22.95.) The Vice President-elect discusses factors affecting the environment.
8
5
26
THE SILENT PASSAGE, by Gail Sheehy. (Random House, $16.) The psychological and social significance of menopause for today's women.
9
10
15
WOMEN WHO RUN WITH THE WOLVES, by Clarissa Pinkola Estes. (Ballantine, $20.) A Jungian analyst reinterprets myths and folk tales to enable women to understand their psyches.
10
9
9
THE TE OF PIGLET, by Benjamin Hoff. (Dutton, $16.) Aspects of Taoist philosophy explained through the actions of an A. A. Milne character.
11
11
23
TRUMAN, by David McCullough. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $30.) A biography of the 33d President.
12
12
3
GENIUS, by James Gleick. (Pantheon, $27.50.) The life and achievements of Richard Feynman, the Nobel Prize-winning physicist.
13
13
12
YOUNG MEN &amp; FIRE, by Norman Maclean. (University of Chicago, $19.95.) An account of a disastrous fire in a Montana forest in 1949.
14
1
MY LIFE, by Earvin (Magic) Johnson with William Novak. (Random House, $22.) The autobiography of the retired Los Angeles Lakers basketball player.
15
14
4
THE CHANGE, by Germaine Greer. (Knopf, $24.) An extensive survey of the physical, psychological and social effects of menopause.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
1
19
HARVEY PENICK'S LITTLE RED BOOK, by Harvey Penick with Bud Shrake. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $19.) Anecdotes and tips about golf.
2
2
8
ARE YOU THE ONE FOR ME? by Barbara De Angelis. (Delacorte, $21.) How to choose and keep the right partner in love and marriage.
3
5
8
THE AMERICAN HERITAGE DICTIONARY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE. (Houghton Mifflin, $39.95.) The third edition.
4
9
LIFE'S LITTLE INSTRUCTION BOOK, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $12.95.) Some 500 tips for achieving a self-fulfilling life.
5
4
38
A RETURN TO LOVE, by Marianne Williamson. (HarperCollins, $25.) Inspirational advice.
6 *
9
THE MEASURE OF OUR SUCCESS, by Marian Wright Edelman. (Beacon, $15.) Rules to live by for children.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,050 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 28,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.
And Bear in Mind
(Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)
YOU SEE, I HAVEN'T FORGOTTEN, by Yves Montand with Herve Hamon and Patrick Rotman. (Knopf, $25.) Montand, who died last year, collaborated at great length with the writers of this informative and balanced account of a fine singer and actor.
SHOWMAN: The Life of David O. Selznick, by David Thomson. (Knopf, $35.) A massive and masterly biography of the great independent Hollywood producer who feared, correctly, that he would be remembered primarily for "Gone With the Wind."
PILGRIM IN THE RUINS: A Life of Walker Percy, by Jay Tolson. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $27.50.) Mr.
Tolson presents Percy as the hero of his own life, which contained few outward events but produced a series of revelatory novels and philosophical essays.
PERSONAL WITNESS: Israel Through My Eyes, by Abba Eban. (Putnam, $29.95.) Life as it's not lived any more, full of the learning, literature, high sociability and cosmopolitan patriotism that characterizes Israel's former Foreign Minister.
WE WERE SOLDIERS ONCE . . .
AND YOUNG.
Ia Drang: The Battle That Changed the War in Vietnam, by Harold G. Moore and Joseph L. Galloway. (Random House, $25.) A general and a journalist, both of whom were there, narrate and analyze this agonizing 1965 encounter as a prototype for the developing war.
BLACK DOGS, by Ian McEwan. (Nan A. Talese/Doubleday, $19.50.) A short, shocking novel that explores what happens between a husband who thinks a rational society can solve its problems and a wife who believes, through revelation, that evil is alive and busy.
CITY OF LIGHT, by Michael Doane. (Knopf, $22.) Mr.
Doane's ambitious, topical novel takes the international political thriller into a whole new landscape -- the innards of a computer network.


Smoking in France
To the Editor: I'm afraid that your announcement of nonsmoking measures in the bistro capital of the world (Travel Advisory, Oct. 25) will raise false expectations among traveling American nonsmokers.
My experience is that while the Ministry of Health may be getting tough, the French people are as cavalier as ever.


She's the First Lady, Not the Little Lady; Hold That Resume
To the Editor:
The resumes will be flowing into Little Rock, Ark., and Washington.
Those who have served in Washington before, who once again find themselves asking what they can do for our country, should consider that most difficult of options: Stay home.


Most Likely to Succeed
It was obvious in 1969 that Bill Clinton would someday run for President.
It was just as clear that his roommate at Oxford, Frank Aller, would become a big-time journalist, another Edward R. Murrow.
The two Rhodes scholars were good-looking, gifted, well liked -- close friends who had everything in common, particularly a hatred of the Vietnam War.
After Aller decided to resist the draft, Clinton called him "one of the bravest, best men I know," in his now famous letter to an R.O.T.C. director in Arkansas explaining why he had given up his own thoughts of resistance to safeguard his "political viability."
Bill Clinton will become the next President of the United States on Jan. 20.
Frank Aller committed suicide in 1971 -- in despair, his friends say, over a decision that had ruined his life.


Coslet Wants Jets to Be Worried About Patriots
There's at least one thing that the Jets won't have to worry about when they play New England at Foxboro Stadium this afternoon.
They won't have to deal with the possibility of being the Patriots' first victims in 1992.
The Colts fulfilled that role last week, falling by 37-34 in overtime and giving New England its first victory in 10 games this season.
The Jets (3-7) do have to concern themselves with playing up to their level of the last four weeks.
Just as they played up to the level of Buffalo, Miami, Denver and Cincinnati, they have to make sure that they don't play down to the level of the 1-9 Patriots in today's game (Channel 4, 4 P.M.).


12 O'Clock Rock
The New York City Ballet opened its season with Dance and dance. Nov. 17.


Considering Opus Dei
To the Editor:
Paul Hofmann's intriguing review of Michael Walsh's book on Opus Dei (Oct. 4) points more than ever to the need for a serious treatment of this worldwide phenomenon in the Roman Catholic Church.
Openly hostile accounts, based on conspiracy theories, may slake the thirst of critics nursing misgivings, but they hardly lay bare the significance of an institution with a revolutionary approach to evangelization -- what one highly placed Roman cleric termed the "core teaching" of the Second Vatican Council.


Update; Neighbors Appeal to Board On Woman's Ostrich Farm
The debate over whether a Washington, Conn., homeowner should be permitted to raise ostriches on her property has taken a turn toward the courts.
Madeleine Calder, whose house and four acres lie in a neighborhood zoned for farming, was granted permission to build pens for her ostrich foursome earlier this year by the Washington Zoning Commission.
She immediately did so, and installed the birds, which have become something of a tourist attraction in the otherwise typical-looking town.
But a group of neighbors, objecting to that use of property in what they contend is a de facto residential area, filed an appeal with the local Zoning Board of Appeals, which last month overturned the approval granted by the zoning commission.


Virginia Flynn, Gary Koops Jr.
Virginia Kenny Flynn, a senatorial press aide in Washington, was married yesterday to Gary Ross Koops Jr., the press secretary of the Republican National Committee.
The Rev.
Roger Greene performed the Episcopal ceremony at Trinity Church in Boston.
Mrs.
Koops, 28 years old, is the assistant press secretary to Senator William V. Roth Jr., Republican of Delaware.
She graduated from Brown University and received a master's degree in communications from Boston University.
She is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
J.
William Flynn of Boston.
Her father owns Tech Pak, a packaging company in Peabody, Mass.
Her mother, Katherine D. Flynn, is the president of Preservation Plus, a Boston company that surveys and evaluates historic urban areas.


Coast Guard Reconsiders and Will Resume Search for Plant
Pressure from the family and friends of Mike Plant, as well as national concern over his disappearance at sea, has prompted the United States Coast Guard to resume its search for the solo sailor as soon as the weather clears in the Atlantic Ocean.
Plant, whose 42d birthday was yesterday, has been missing at sea for three weeks.
The Coast Guard ended a six-day aerial search on Wednesday.
Since then, officials have concluded that it was possible that Plant was not in the areas searched.
The new survey area is located about 500 miles northeast of the Azores, an island chain in the mid-Atlantic.


Sutcliffe Will Stay an Oriole    Pitcher RICK SUTCLIFFE signed for another year with the Baltimore Orioles, getting a 1993 contract that will guarantee him $2 million plus incentives. Sutcliffe was 16-15 with a 4.47 earned run average last season. His 36 starts was a career high and tied him for the major league lead. (AP)


Bookshelf
Additional titles of interest:
THE SIMPLE PEOPLE.
By Tedd Arnold.
Illustrated by Andrew Shachat.
Dial. $14. (Ages 4 to 8) In the season for giving thanks, the parable of the simple people who live under the trees offers an instructive text and charming illustrations.
Fascinated by the process of construction, the people wall themselves in.
The imaginative Node figures a way out.


Neva Jones, James Hoffmaier
Neva Marie Jones, an associate at the New York law firm of Callan, Regenstreich, Koster &amp; Brady, was married yesterday to James Charles Hoffmaier, an associate at the New York law firm of Mudge Rose Guthrie Alexander &amp; Ferdon.
Msgr.
James Cooney performed the ceremony at St.
Patrick's Cathedral in New York.
Mrs.
Hoffmaier, 31 years old, graduated from Carnegie Mellon University and received her law degree from Syracuse University.
She is the daughter of Neva C. Wells of Bangor, Pa., and the late Thomas H. Jones.


From Villain to Victim in Just 500 Years?
It doesn't usually take defense lawyers five centuries to ask for a retrial for their clients.
Still, this month in Paris, an unofficial "arbitration court" looked afresh at the evidence against Gilles de Rais -- and concluded that his execution in 1440 was unjust.
The original case probably seemed strong.
Having fought alongside Joan of Arc against English invaders, he then withdrew to his castles near Nantes and was said to have surrendered himself to sorcery, orgies and the serial killing of children.
His tale inspired the legend of Bluebeard and he is known in France as Barbe-Bleue.


NOV. 15-21: The Balkans; The U.N. and the West Get a Little Tougher With Serbia
A month ago motorists in Belgrade had to wait two days in line for gasoline.
Now it's a matter of minutes.
That, in short, is why the United Nations Security Council decided last week to crack down on violations of trade sanctions against Yugoslavia, and why the United States and Western Europe decided to enforce a naval blockade.
Whether such methods would have the desired political effect on the Serbs who lead Yugoslavia, and the forces they back in Bosnia, remained a question, however.
Once last week, Serbs fired on French troops convoying supplies to a besieged town outside Sarajevo.
The French fired back and got through unhurt.


Prosecutors Are Reined In On Seizing Crimes' Assets
Seeking to insure that local prosecutors and the police do not abuse a potent weapon in law enforcement, Attorney General Robert J. Del Tufo has issued new guidelines covering the seizure and forfeiture of assets in criminal and civil cases.
Mr.
Del Tufo, however, said today that he strongly opposed a bill pending in the State Legislature that would limit forfeitures only to cases in which there is a criminal conviction.
Under current law, local and state authorities can seek the forfeiture of assets in civil cases, where the burden of proof is not as stringent as in criminal cases.


Jacqueline Kelly, T. J. Collamore
Jacqueline Ann Kelly, a doctoral candidate in business administration at George Washington University, was married yesterday to Thomas Jones Collamore, a vice president of corporate affairs at Philip Morris Companies in New York.
The Rev.
Walter J. Burghardt, a Roman Catholic priest, performed the ceremony at the Dahlgren Chapel of the Sacred Heart at Georgetown University in Washington.
Mrs.
Collamore, 32 years old, graduated from the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill and received an M.B.A. from Georgetown.
She is a daughter of Ann Kelly of Washington and the late Dr.
Jacques M. Kelly.
Her father was the president and founder of National Health Laboratories, a clinical laboratory in Arlington, Va.
Her mother, now retired, was the chairwoman of the science department at Georgetown Preparatory School in Washington.


Windsor Castle Ablaze


Once-Soviet Jews Again Find Their Way to Israel
After hitting a low point last spring, immigration from former Soviet territory to Israel has gained new life, bolstered by a spurt of arrivals from troubled regions and the predominantly Muslim states of Central Asia.
The numbers are far from what they were two years ago, when the present wave of immigration reached a peak and 15,000 to 20,000 arrivals a month were routine.


Woman Is Held in Slaying of Roommate
A 36-year-old Brooklyn woman with a history of arguments with her roommate was arrested early yesterday on charges that she had stabbed her roommate to death with a kitchen knife, the police said.
The victim, Gail Gardner, 35 years old, had been found by neighbors on a stairwell near her apartment in the Pink Houses, a New York City Housing Authority project at 1305 Loring Avenue in East New York, a Housing Authority Police spokesman, Officer Michael Silvestri, said.


Around Seattle, an Oversize Clam Shines in Sushi
A Seattle restaurateur admits that when he first moved to the northwest, he ordered geoduck from a cafe menu assuming he would be served a special type of duck.
As he soon discovered, geoduck (pronounced GOO-ee-duck) is in fact a somewhat obscene-looking Northwest clam featured in succulent cuisine and ribald regional jokes, portrayed in silly tourist trinkets, and revered as star of a multimillion-dollar fishery.
Its indelicate appearance comes from a giant, fleshy siphon that dangles from its overstuffed four-to-six-inch-long shell.
Although geoducks have been found up to 15 pounds, average specimens weigh 1 1/2 to 2 pounds with siphons 5 to 15 inches long.
Both the siphon and meat inside the shell are eaten.


IN SHORT: FICTION
I MARRIED VIETNAM By Sandie Frazier. Braziller, $19.95.


New School Board Fight
Thrusting himself into the public debate over the future of the Board of Education, the Bronx Borough President, Fernando Ferrer, called on his rebellious appointee to the board, Ninfa Segarra, to conform more closely to his views or else resign.
Article, page 43.


Remembering Joyce Kilmer
May I add some footnotes to the "Jerseyana" article about Joyce Kilmer and Hobey Baker:
Kilmer remains a remarkable man.
The poet-soldier joined the New York Seventh Regiment two weeks after the declaration of war in 1917.
Although exempt (married with four children), he happily transferred to Douglas MacArthur's crack National Guard regiment, which became the famous "Rainbow" (A.E.F. 42d) Division.


The Melancholy Days Before Thanksgiving


Q and A
Cruising Asia Minor


Moving the Vegetables Out of the Shadow of the Turkey
BECAUSE so much attention is paid to the turkey on the Thanksgiving table, vegetables sometimes get short shrift.
Steamed brussels sprouts and sweet potato puree topped with marshmallows are all very well, but they aren't dishes I think many people will lose sleep over if they fail to appear.
I like to serve a variety of different vegetables with turkey, and I choose them both for their color and their texture.


Officials Say Deliverers Of Papers Face Charges
In a series of unusual indictments under New York State racketeering laws, the newspaper deliverers' union and a dozen of its members have been charged with extortion, bribery, theft of newspapers and other crimes in an enterprise under the wing of organized crime, law-enforcement officials said yesterday.
The indictments -- including the first against a labor organization under the state's Organized Crime Control Act of 1986 -- were handed up last week by a grand jury in Manhattan and are expected to be unsealed in State Supreme Court tomorrow, according to the officials, who spoke on the condition that they not be identified.


Two Vehicles Carry an Irish Actor to America
Tell Stephen Rea that he's about to be a star, with a major film and play opening in New York the same week, and the actor tosses a napkin over his face.
"It's a terrible word," he remarks wryly, slumping into his seat at London's Waldorf Hotel one rainy afternoon while his Belfast accent curdles in mock alarm.
"I don't know, these things have a way of blowing up in your face."
Deciding on a more measured response, he continues: "It's exciting, but I think I'm mature enough not to take it the wrong way. It's a way of opening up other areas of work."


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
70 Years of Scouting
IT has been a while since he donned the knee socks.
The legs aren't quite as shapely as they once were, Leonard G. Littmann of Melville says.
But his three-finger salute is as crisp as ever.


Passaic Flood Tunnel: Some Questions
It's still going on!
The Army Corps of Engineers is pushing another of its pork projects to destroy another part of our environment.
This time it's a gigantic tunnel that puts floodwaters underground and shoots them out into Newark Bay ("Passaic Flood Tunnel: A Turning Point," Nov. 8).
Are we to ignore the fact that the floodwater is an integral part of three river ecosystems?
And do we forget that the corps solutions to other of our problems, like the erosion at the beaches, haven't solved any problems but continue to blemish the environment?
And what about all that money?


Baha'i Faithful Prepare for World Congress
Several years ago a friend showed Akin Odulate a locket with picture of the Prophet Muhammad inside.
As the young man stared at the gentle bearded face, he thought he could also see the faces of Jesus, Zoroaster, Moses, Abraham and other holy men throughout history.
This realization led Mr.
Odulate to embrace Baha'i, a 150-year-old religion that teaches that all the great prophets represent the same divine spirit reaching out to humanity.
Baha'i teaches that all religions are one, that there is only one God and that the time has come for all humanity to unite and live in peace.
Gathering of the Faithful
Mr.
Odulate's new faith led him to this rural area of Connecticut, where he is rehearsing with 60 other young Baha'is who will perform at the Baha'i World Congress beginning Monday at the Javits Center in Manhattan.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-19  PARIS CALLS PACT UNACCEPTABLE


In the Region: Long Island; Recent Sales
Bayville 162,000
6 Pine Park Avenue  5-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 69-year-old colonial; dining room, eat-in kitchen, fireplace, basement; taxes $2,100.
East Hills 320,000
18 Magnolia Lane  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 43-year-old colonial; dining room, fireplace, finished basement, 1-car attached garage; taxes $6,700.
Hicksville 140,000
22 Spruce Street  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 66-year-old colonial; dining room, eat-in kitchen, basement, 2- car attached garage; taxes $3,500.
Jericho 255,000
295 Birchwood Park Drive  4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 31-year-old split level; dining room, basement, 1-car garage; taxes $5,400.
Locust Valley 307,000
4 Kathy Court  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 100-year-old colonial; dining room, basement, 2- car attached garage, 63- by 146-foot lot; taxes $4,100.
Old Bethpage 535,000
158 Haypath Road  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 33-year-old ranch; dining room, eat-in kitchen, finished basement, 1-car attached garage; taxes $4,300.
OTHER AREAS Yorktown Heights, N.Y. 239,000
2847 Avis Court  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 36-year-old contemporary; family room, dining room, fieldstone fireplace, sun room; taxes $6,200.
Hamden, Conn. 176,400
475 Tom Swamp Road  4-bedroom, 3-bath, 5-year-old raised ranch; kitchen with vaulted ceiling, newly finished lower level, 1.5 acres; taxes $3,768.
Jackson, N.J. 90,000
27 Oakland Drive  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 20-year-old ranch; woodstove, 1-car garage, all appliances; taxes $2,800.


Guerrilla Medicine
ACCEPTABLE RISKS
By Jonathan Kwitny. 466 pp. New York: Poseidon Press. $24.


Drum Roll to Harvard As 2 Bands Played On
The first thing you have to know about the 109th Harvard-Yale football game on this windy, drizzly afternoon in Harvard Stadium is that the marching bands for both schools were in championship form and they had the opportunity to display their intellectual prowess.
At halftime, the Yale band performed skits and stunts intended to rag Harvard, as is the custom between these legendary rivals.


Executives the Economy Left Behind
JOE COOPER hasn't sold his beloved Corvette yet.
But nine months after he was laid off from his $46,000-a-year job as a computer network manager at a Citicorp mortgage-processing center in St.
Louis, he no longer sounds like the cocky middle manager he used to be.
He has blown through $17,000 in savings, and in the take-it-or-leave-it job market of the 1990's, he blew one good chance when he told a prospective employer that he wanted a company car.
Gloria Walsh was let go in 1990 after 23 years as an advertising promotions manager when British Airways trimmed its ranks in New York.
The really hard part begins next month: her severance pay and company-provided health coverage run out.
But after 60 job interviews, she is still the odd woman out in the game of executive musical chairs.
"It's more difficult the higher you go," she said.
It's also more tortuous.
One company has called her in time and time again for follow-up interviews.
It "is still trying to find the perfect, perfect, perfect person," she said.


2 Top Iraqis to Ask U.N. Again to End Economic Sanctions
Iraq's Foreign Minister, Mohammed Said al-Sahhaf, and the Deputy Prime Minister, Tariq Aziz, plan to appeal to the Security Council on Monday that it end the economic sanctions imposed on Iraq after the invasion of Kuwait in August 1990, Western diplomats said today.
But the diplomats said the officials would probably be rebuffed.


Corrections
An article on Oct. 4 about the Blennerhassett mansion in West Virginia misstated the nature of the charge made against Aaron Burr after his duel in 1804 with Alexander Hamilton.
A reader's letter, dated Oct. 29, points out that he was charged with murder, not treason.
Burr was charged with treason in 1807 in connection with his reputed attempt to establish an empire in the West.


Decades of Inaction On Cancer and Water
"New Cancer Clusters Reported by Residents"  [ Sept. 27 ]  covered residents of Nassau and Suffolk who are researching the alarming rates of breast cancer in their communities.
Almost 20 years ago the State Health Department conducted a study and in 1990 released a report titled "Organic Chemicals in Drinking Water" written by Nancy K. Kim, Ph.D., and Daniel W. Stone, P.E.
To my knowledge, no community has implemented these recommendations.
This report was issued in 1980, and public hearings were held around our state to find out how much people were willing to pay to install treatment plants to remove toxic chemicals from their drinking-water supplies.
The rate of breast cancer on Long Island has been headline news for years.
Not so with the rate of testicular cancer.
Treatment for cancer involves diet, radiation, chemotherapy and surgery.
When surgery is performed, the mutilation of the body has a severe emotional impact on the patient.
Rather than research the statistics again, perhaps these groups should get legislative action committees rolling to impress on their local governments that they are willing to pay for treatment plants to remove toxic chemicals from their water supplies.
Compare the cost of cancer cures such as surgery, radiation, chemotherapy and death to the cost of implementing a cleaner water supply.
Don't forget children are very susceptible to this environmental disease, as well as adults.
Fortunately we live in a democracy and you can rally public support, have people at every Town Board meeting, enlighten your legislators, and get on with the implementation recommended in this 1980 report.
Don't let the argument of "real estate values" deter you.
Tell your legislators how many cancer victims live on your block.
The bottom line is money for water treatment or health insurance increases.
FRANCES HODSON Godeffroy The writer was formerly a resident of Long Beach, member of the League of Women Voters, chairwoman of the Water Resources Committee and councilwoman.


Family Travel Program Grows
A new educational-travel program called Familyhostel introduced this year is being expanded by its sponsor, the University of New Hampshire Continuing Education.
Modeled after the university's 13-year-old Interhostel program for people aged 50 and over, Familyhostel had one trip to the Netherlands this year and plans five more tours next year.
The new program allows children, parents and grandparents to travel overseas together.
Twenty-one parents and grandparents and 19 children took the 10-day August tour to the Netherlands, where they were housed in a conference center in a village near Utrecht and traveled each day to attractions in different parts of the country.
They attended lectures on Dutch history, art and the school system, went on walks and bicycle rides and a picnic.
The cost, without air fare, was $1,045 for adults and $975 for children.


On the Street of Dreams
THE sullen man transferred his backpack from one shoulder to the other.
He turned to his companion, a woman wearing a pair of Venetian blinds as a coat.
"Man, I could use some sunglasses," he said.
She spritzed her blinds with window cleaner and began to wipe them.
"Yeah, they're like $382 plus tax," she said.


ABOUT NEW JERSEY
CHANGE. Big change. Generational change. Epochal change.
Adjectives hardly seem adequate to describe what has been going on in this country for the last month.
From electing a post-World War II President to marketing a new Cadillac, change is everywhere.
But not in Harrison.


Agencies Hoping to Brighten Holidays
LAST Thanksgiving was a bleak one for many hungry and homeless people in the county.
This holiday season will be bleaker still, according to those serving the homeless and hungry in Westchester, unless those who can afford to celebrate help those who cannot.
"What a hard time this is for so many people!" said the Rev.
Ron Wiersma, a minister of the Reformed Church who directs the activities of Project Family, a food pantry and soup kitchen, at the Sacred Heart Roman Catholic Church of Mount Vernon.
"We have seen almost a 10 percent increase over last year in the number of people coming to us for help this year. Many of them are young, with families. We need everything, especially children's winter clothing in good repair and foodstuffs such as canned goods, fruits, vegetables and stews."


The Unbuttoned Henry James
HENRY JAMES
The Imagination of Genius: A Biography.
By Fred Kaplan.
Illustrated. 620 pp.
New York: William Morrow &amp; Company. $25.


In Westport, an Update of 'No Frills'
IN a psychiatrist's office an agitated patient is recounting last night's dream.
She is throwing a party for the singer Yma Sumac.
In come a flow of unexpected celebrity guests, all bearing nearly sound-alike first names.
Her forced repetition of tongue-tripping introductions -- Aba (Eban), Oona (O'Neill), Ava (Gardner), Ulu (Grosbard), Ali (McGraw), Uta (Hagen) -- escalates into a desperate hostess's nightmare.
It isn't just this sample of vintage giddiness dreamed up by Thomas Meehan for a New Yorker piece in 1967 and turned into a television sketch for Anne Bancroft two years later that is being delightfully recreated by Mana Allen at the Westport Playhouse.


ABOUT-FACE
The letter from Jean Orben regarding Vietnam and the various actions of those subject to the draft at that time rekindled a 20-year-dormant emotion of outrage (Letters, Nov. 1, in response to Michael Norman's About Men column "About-Face," Oct. 11).
I am outraged that she feels so morally righteous about the actions of men subject to being drafted into a questionable conflict while she, herself, faced no such peril or moral conflict.


The Executive Computer; How Much Can You Pack Into a Tiny Little Portable?
Miniaturization is upon us.
At the annual Comdex/Fall trade show last week, people everywhere were huddled around portable devices that ranged in size from laptop models to tiny handheld prototypes that fit in a coat pocket.
Some analysts predict that portable computers will make up more than half of all computers sold in this country by 1995.
The proliferation of small computers has spawned a search for even smaller peripherals, including memory cards, hard disk drives, network adapters, high-speed facsimile modems and wireless communications links, all miniaturized to the size of a fat credit card.


INSIDE
Laotian Leader Dies
Kaysone Phomvihan of Laos, who commanded the Communist takeover of his nation in 1975 and has ruled there since died at 71.
There were no reports about a successor.
Page 54.
The Dimming of a Star
Never before in his long and vibrant career has James Baker found himself so poorly placed as he does now.
News analysis, page 28.


Topics of The Times; A Warmer Winter for the Cold
Everyone talks about the weather.
New Yorkers now have a chance to do something about it.
By donating used but wearable coats they can make this winter a whole lot warmer for the homeless, the elderly poor and needy youngsters.
The fourth annual coat drive begins tomorrow.
Last year, the drive collected 30,000 secondhand overcoats, jackets and parkas.
This year, the nonprofit sponsor of this worthy 21-day effort, New York Cares, is hoping to collect at least 40,000 adult and children-size coats for distribution by local agencies serving the poor.


Surveying the Damage


Topics of The Times; Sniff!
Until Nov. 1, there was one city in this world that the traveler could recognize simply by taking a deep breath.
The air of Paris smelled like no other air because it smelled of Gauloises.
And the scent of Gauloises, a cigarette as unmistakably French as a Coke is unmistakably American, is like no other scent on God's earth.


A la Carte; California Cuisine Is Making an Impact on Long Island
AFTER a slow start, California cuisine is coming to Long Island in a big way.
The second California-style restaurant to open on the Island in two months will be off and running next week.
It is the 175-seat Monterey, at 379 Oyster Bay Road in Plainview (938-4343).
The California Grille in Glen Head (759-4100) opened on Oct. 6.


Miami, and 3 Yards, Silence Syracuse
The University of Miami's perfect football season, twice extended by last-second field-goal attempts that sailed wide right, was barely preserved today when a breathless Syracuse rally fell just short.
A comeback effort manufactured by Syracuse quarterback Marvin Graves, despite chest pain and vomiting that forced the Orangemen to use a precious timeout in the final minute, ended when tight end Chris Gedney's 29-yard reception was stopped on the Miami 3-yard line after time had expired.


Joanna A. Saltonstall, L. R. Farwell
Joanna Ayer Saltonstall, a daughter of Elizabeth Chace of Providence, R.I., and Robert Saltonstall Jr. of Concord, Mass., was married yesterday to Lawrence Robert Farwell, a son of Barbara R. Farwell of Morrisville, Pa.
The Rev.
Richard Gilchrist performed the Episcopal ceremony at the home of the bride's mother.
Ms.
Saltonstall, who is 34 years old, is keeping her name.
She is an interior designer at Russell Gibson VonDohlen, an interior design concern in Farmington, Conn.
She graduated from the University of New Hampshire and from the Rhode Island School of Design.


A Writer Tracks Down Rich Pre-Incan Mystery
GOLD earrings, gold necklaces, gold nose rings and gold breastplates.
That may sound like a Victoria's Secret store for pirates where King Midas ran amok.
In researching his new book, "Lords of Sipan: A True Story of Pre-Inca Tombs, Archeology and Crime" (William Morrow), Sidney Kirkpatrick hit a mother lode.
In one room -- actually a private museum -- at the home of a Peruvian collector of pre-Columbian antiquities, Mr.
Kirkpatrick saw such treasure that "it was like walking into Fort Knox."


Assemblages Offer Views of the Spiritual
THE University of Connecticut in Storrs has the Benton Museum, a mansion capable of accommodating two or three shows at a time.
In its Fine Arts Department the university also has the Atrium Gallery, a small space that under the direction of Sal Scalora performs a valuable service as a kind of back door for relatively unorthodox art.
One of its most memorable efforts was the 1991 show of voodoo banners from Haiti, interspersed with photographs of that unhappy land.
Now comes "The Warriors, Los Guerreros," an installation by Angel Suarez-Rosada, whose work has been seen in Manhattan and on campuses up and down the East Coast, as well as in the Southwest and California.
Prospective visitors are advised to bring, on the one hand, an open mind and, on the other, everything they know about the Colonial past, religious history and Modernism, together with a tolerance for -- if not belief in -- spiritism.
The term does not necessarily mean seances (though they may be relevant) but rather the espiritismo promulgated by the 19th-century French writer Allan Kardec, that took root in Puerto Rico.


In the Region: New Jersey; Recent Sales
Jackson 90,000
27 Oakland Drive  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 20-year-old ranch; woodstove, 1-car garage, all appliances; taxes $2,800.
Livingston 210,000
32 Crescent Road  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 33-year-old colonial; family room, eat-in-kitchen, 1-car garage, patio, fireplace; taxes $3,913.
Maplewood 195,000
710 Prospect Street  5-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 37-year-old colonial; 2-car garage, fireplace; taxes $6,622.
Millburn 265,000
52 Locust Avenue  4-bedroom, 2 1/2 -bath, 36-year-old colonial; family room, 2-car garage, fireplace, finished basement; taxes $4,190.
South Orange 210,680
556 Irving Terrace  6-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 45-year-old colonial; 2 fireplaces, 2-car garage, skylights, eat-in-kitchen; taxes $6,407.
West Orange 200,000
3 Linden Avenue  3-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 35-year-old split level; c/a, den, recreation room, 2-car garage; taxes $7,073.
OTHER AREAS Yorktown Heights, N.Y. 239,000
2847 Avis Court  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 36-year-old contemporary; family room, dining room, fieldstone fireplace, sun room; taxes $6,200.
Hamden, Conn. 176,400
475 Tom Swamp Road  4-bedroom, 3-bath, 5-year-old raised ranch; kitchen with vaulted ceiling, newly finished lower level, 1.5 acres; taxes $3,768.
Bayville, L.I. 162,000
6 Pine Park Avenue  5-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 69-year-old colonial; dining room, fireplace, basement; taxes $2,100.


Visions of Flight


Right Sandpaper Smooths the Way
VIRTUALLY all home-repair and improvement projects involving wood also involve smoothing it.
But smoothing wood can be as much a question of choosing the right materials or tools as using the right technique.
Sandpaper probably comes to mind first as the material of choice.
For use on broad flat areas, it often is the easiest way to achieve good results.
When choosing sandpaper, consider the grade or relative coarseness, the type of abrasive and the density of particle coverage.


Flushing Goes on Patrol To Chase Off Prostitutes
Kathryn Bryson, a 55-year-old grandmother, was on prostitute patrol the other night in her Flushing, Queens, neighborhood.
So were 30 of her neighbors, including some who were barely out of their teens and others living on Social Security.
All were part of a platoon of local residents determined to clear out the streetwalkers and their car-cruising customers who have infested their otherwise peaceful neighborhood of small homes and businesses.


Business Diary/November 15-20
THE ECONOMY Waiting for France


THE '92 FOLLIES
Russell Baker's article "The '92 Follies" (Nov. 1) was amusing and, I might add, invigoratingly clever and correct.


Wendy Shoolman, William Coke Jr.
Wendy Marlowe Shoolman, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Theodore J. Shoolman of Brookline, Mass., was married Friday to William Ralph Coke Jr., a son of Helen C. Coke of Harvard, Mass., and the late William R. Coke.
The Rev.
Dr.
Carl Scovel, a Unitarian minister, officiated at King's Chapel in Boston.
The Rev.
Jerome Massimino, a Roman Catholic priest, took part in the ceremony.
Mrs.
Coke, 33 years old, is the assistant director of acquisitions for Charles River Properties in Boston, a division of Charles River Park, a Boston real-estate development firm founded by her father and in which he is a general partner.
The bride is also an actress in Boston.
She graduated from Trinity College in Hartford.


Oo-wah, Moo-lah
In 1956, two 15-year-olds, Jimmy Merchant and Herman Santiago, doo-wopped their way to fame as members of the Teen-Agers, with the smash hit "Why Do Fools Fall in Love?"
What followed for them was 37 years of mostly singing the blues: Mr.
Merchant is a New York cabdriver, and Mr.
Santiago is unemployed.


Terry L. Phelps, John V. Miller
Mr. and Mrs.
Robert F. Phelps of Larchmont, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Terry Louise Phelps, to John Varner Miller, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John L. Miller of Columbus, Ohio.
An April wedding is planned.
Miss Phelps, 25 years old, is a public relations assistant at Wilson Sporting Goods Inc., the sports-equipment manufacturer, in Chicago.
She is a former professional tennis player.
Her father, who retired as a trust counsel to Fiduciary Trust Company International in New York, is now a lawyer in Larchmont.
Her mother, Joyce Phelps, is a real-estate broker at Burbank Whittemore Inc. in Larchmont.


At the Top Of the Heap, Looking Up
Forget about being discovered in Schwab's Drug Store.
Maili Bergman, a 22-year-old aspiring actress who lives in Los Angeles, is hoping her recent appearance in a trash can will get her noticed.
One day last May, Lisa Fields, the casting director for Propaganda Films, was going through the hundreds of photographs she receives every day from actors hungry for work.
In the pile was an 8-by-10-inch head shot of Ms.
Bergman (her first name is pronounced MY-lee).
Ms.
Fields threw it away along with most of the others.


Toughened Union Team Wins Its Playoff Opener
Despite going 9-0 and being ranked No. 1 in the state and fifth in the nation, the Union High School players have had a long and difficult year.
Their coach, Lou Rettino, underwent radiation treatment during the season after surgery on his stomach to remove cancerous tissues.
The father of John Quinn, an assistant coach, died just before the Farmers' big game against Elizabeth last month.
And on the playing field today, the team, already lacking depth, lost two of its starters to injuries.


Mideast Pawns


Q and A
Tax on Co-op Income Question: I serve on the board of a 40-family, self-managed co-op.
All co-op income comes from shareholder assessments, flip taxes and maintenance, and no profits are paid as dividends.
During 1991 and 1992 we earned a surplus to build up our reserve fund in anticipation of major capital expenditures expected in 1993.
Since we do not pay dividends, all income goes to paying the operating costs and building a reserve fund.
Is there a legitimate way of avoiding being taxed when our income exceeds expenses? . . .
Keith H. Gordon, Mohegan Lake, N.Y.
Answer: Yes.
According to Marc J. Luxemburg, an attorney who serves as the president of the Council of New York Cooperatives, there are two ways that co-ops can reduce or cut entirely their income-tax burdens with respect to reserves for capital improvements.
One is through the depreciation of their property.


Mongolia
To the Editor: With your article on Mongolia ("In the Land of Genghis Khan," Sept. 20), you listed eight travel companies that organize trips to Mongolia.
Cultural Tours, of which I am president, has been organizing travel to Mongolia for about four years now, and we are particularly known for our trips for individuals. .


Penguins and Barrasso Stay Inhospitable
The sweep of the home-and-home series with the Devils was clean as a whistle for the Penguins.
They had very little trouble both nights, with a 2-0 triumph tonight following a 4-1 trouncing in New Jersey a night earlier.
Jaromir Jagr had a short-handed goal and Ron Francis scored on the power play against Chris Terreri, who played very well in his first start in five games.


The Burdens of Being Overweight: Mistreatment and Misconceptions
Aleta Walker never had any friends during her childhood and adolescence in Hannibal, Mo.
Instead, she was ridiculed and bullied every day.
When she walked down the halls at school, boys would flatten themselves against the lockers and cry, "Wide load!" But the worst was lunchtime, she said.
"Every day there was this production of watching me eat lunch," Ms.
Walker said.
She tried to avoid going to the school cafeteria.
"I would hide out in the bathroom. I would hide out behind the gym by the baseball diamond. I would hide in the library."


Ms. Anderson, Thomas Morgan
Genevieve Morrill Anderson, the daughter of Alexandra Anderson-Spivy and O. Kelley Anderson Jr., both of New York, was married yesterday to Thomas A. Morgan, a son of James Morgan of Fresno, Calif., and Janet Wright of Santa Cruz, Calif.
The Rev.
Richard Fowler performed the ceremony at the Episcopal Church of St.
Mary the Virgin in San Francisco.
Mrs.
Morgan, 25 years old, is the assistant managing editor at Chronicle Books in San Francisco.
She graduated magna cum laude from Bowdoin College.
Her father is a director of the Coe Kerr Gallery in New York.
Her mother is a writer and art critic in New York.


Post-Czechoslovak Problem: Spent Atom Fuel


Setting Record Straight On Affordable Housing
Frank Denniston  [ Letters to the Westchester Editor, Nov. 8 ]  ought to do his homework before lashing out at my opposition to government-subsidized middle-income housing in Westchester County.
It's easy to take a few words out of context, to mischaracterize another's opinion in as poor a light as possible and then to attack it.
Let me set the record straight.


Joann Thompson, 59, Health-Care Advocate
Joann Thompson, a New York City health-care advocate and an advocate for social and religious causes, died on Thursday at St.
Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital Center in Manhattan.
She was 59 years old and lived in Manhattan.
She died after a short illness, friends said.


The Many Shades of Bigotry
THE COLOR COMPLEX
The Politics of Skin Color Among African Americans.
By Kathy Russell, Midge Wilson and Ronald Hall. 200 pp.
New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich. $21.95.


As the Steel and Iron Age Ends, Let's Turn to Lighter Materials
To the Editor:
Forty years ago I became concerned about the population explosion and environmental degradation because we in America subscribe to the notion that bigger is better and more is better.
We continue on that course.
The world population, then 2.2 billion, is now 5.8 billion and climbing.
As a result, we have more than 300 million automobiles and approximately 34 million trucks contaminating the air, and the water too, in their manufacture.
If we use our heads we should understand we are coming to the end of the Steel and Iron Age, and the sooner we come to the age of composites, the better off we will be.
The Voyager spacecraft, which circumnavigated the globe, should have taught us this lesson, but didn't.
It was built with composite materials.


Bookstores, the Public Spaces of the 90's
To the Editor:
Regarding "The Growing Battle of the Big Bookstores" (Nov. 8), we are a land bereft of public places.
Our public squares are parking lots.
Our streets are thoroughfares for cars.
The fast-food franchises are not for leisure.
The Christian Science reading rooms lack ambiance.
Group therapy in a psychiatrist's office is morbid.
On the other hand, the book superstores have benches, serve coffee, and they have readings.
It's no wonder that they are catching on.
RALPH SLOVENKO Detroit, Nov. 9  Ralph Slovenko is a professor of law and and psychiatry at Wayne State University.


Tyrol Museum
To the Editor: I enjoyed reading Carole Garibaldi Rogers's article on the Dolomites and the South Tyrol ("Hikers' Idyll Nested in the Dolomites," Oct. 4) having recently returned from there.
I am sorry that she missed the Museum of Local Ethnic Traditions in Bruneck (Brunico) in the Pustertal Alpine valley.


'Beyond a Reasonable Doubt' Often Puts a Jury on Trial
THERE are few egalitarian images more resonant than that of 12 jurors struggling toward a verdict.
And there are few groups more maligned than jurors who in a case of great public passion have come to an unexpected and unpopular decision.
It doesn't take long for these erstwhile emissaries of democracy to be depicted as bigoted, estranged from mainstream society or simply asleep at the switch.


Robyn M. Levy, James M. Weisz
Dr.
Lester M. Levy of Syosset, L.I., has announced the engagement of his daughter Robyn Madeleine Levy to Dr.
James Matthew Weisz, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
George Weisz of Lido Beach, L.I.
A May wedding is planned.
Ms.
Levy, 29 years old, is a freelance television-production assistant in Syosset.
She graduated from Duke University.
Her father is an attending physician in nuclear medicine at the Long Island Jewish Medical Center in New Hyde Park, L.I., and is a professor of nuclear medicine at the Albert Einstein College of Medicine in the Bronx.
The bride is also the daughter of the late Renee M. Levy, who was a first-grade teacher at Public School 19 in Manhattan.


Ripples of a Pathologist's Misconduct In Graves and Courts of West Texas
he prairie graveyards of West Texas are giving mute testimony to the misdeeds of a circuit-riding pathologist who left a trail of faked autopsies, botched blood samples and missing organs from the Panhandle to the Rio Grande.
According to defense lawyers' estimates, as many as 20 capital murder cases and dozens of other prosecutions will be appealed because of accusations that crucial evidence was ghoulishly or criminally mishandled in autopsies performed by the pathologist, Dr.
Ralph R. Erdmann, who worked as a contract medical examiner in more than 40 rural Texas counties since the early 1980's.


THE TOP 20
1 DUKE (34-2)
Three consecutive national championships?
Difficult but definitely doable.
Losing Christian Laettner was a blow, but Duke's 3-H club -- Hurley, Hill (Grant) and Hill (Thomas) -- will catapult Duke to another Final Four appearance.
Grant Hill may be the key; the 6 foot 8 inch junior is fluent in three positions and is the one un-guardable player Duke needs.If Cherokee Parks, the sophomore center-forward, contributes, Duke will be in excellent position for a third consecutive championship.
Guess what: the Blue Devils could make it four straight in 1993-94. 2 MICHIGAN (25-9)
The Wolverines should be uneasy about holding a script that seems too perfect to be true: Five starters returning from a team that played for the national championship; two players -- Jalen Rose and Chris Webber -- named to various pre season all America teams.
How can they fail?
That's the haunting question.
How?
Injury?
Overconfidence?
A flat performance at the most inopportune time.
After last season's energizing success, nothing less than a national championship is expected. 3 INDIANA (27-7)
This group of Hoosiers, with Calbert Cheaney and Alan Henderson, could give the Wolverines a ferocious rush for the Big Ten championship.
All eyes will be on the Indiana backcourt where critics are openly wondering whether Damon Bailey can consistently operate at point guard in a conference whose talent level has dramatically escalated since Bailey came out of high school three years ago. 4 SETON HALL (23-9)
Terry Dehere and point guard Bryan Caver could be the most explosive backcourt in the nation.
But the player who will push Seton Hall up and over the Hills is Luther Wright, the Pirates' 7-2 center.
Wright has done all of the physical work, shedding nearly 30 pounds during the summer.
From this point, coaches say, the improvement will largely be mental.
If Wright blossoms this season, the Pirates could be devastating. 5 KENTUCKY (29-7)
Jamal Mashburn, on the other hand, has an acutely refined sense of self confidence.
In two seasons, the junior forward has blossomed into one of the most feared frontcourt players in the nation.
He'll be teamed this season with Roderick Rhodes, a highly regarded 6-? freshman forward from New Jersey.
Rick Pitino has a knack for shaping a team with good talent around a superstar. 6 KANSAS (27-5)
At a time when too many college coaches lose sight of the fact that players -- not coaches -- win games, Jayhawk Coach Roy Williams has managed to be intense without being irrational.
His teams Jayhawks have been similarly well balanced.
Adonis Jordan has emerged as the marquee name at point guard, but shooting guard Rex Walters can be deadly.
The most important player for Kansas this year will be junior college transfer Darrin Hancock, an incredibly gifted forward who, by season's end, could help lift the Jayhawks to the Final Four. 7 FLORIDA STATE (22-10)
Basketball or football, the Seminoles a fun team to watch.
Last season, their first in the Atlantic Coast Confernece, they finished second to Duke.
This season all five starters return.Bobby Sura, Douglas Edwards, Sam Cassell are all key Seminole players, but the most important piece in the puzzle, point guard Charlie Ward, won't be available until Jan. 2.
Ward is the football team's starting quarterback. 8 NORTH CAROLINA (23-10)
You know going into a season that, at the very least, North Carolina will be in the thick of things come March.
With junior center Eric Montross and 6-7 forward George Lynch, ???
Carolina has the nucleus of another outstanding team.  9 MEMPHIS STATE (23-11)
Everyone talks about Michigan's Fab Five, but Anfernee Hardaway and David Vaughn, first-year players last season, return this year to make the Tigers a mighty force.
At 6-8, Hardaway is an extraordinary passer while Vaughn, at 6-9, is strong and mobile with a versatile shooting touch. 10 TULANE (21-9)
Under Coach Perry Clark, the Green Wave has made astounding progress in the last several years, finishing 22-9 last season with an upset of St.
John's in the national tournament.
The challenge this season is to build on last year's success. 11 SYRACUSE (22-10)
The Orangemen aren't eligible for the N.C.A.A. tournament, having been placed on probation by the N.C.A.A. after a year long investigation.
But guards Adrian Autry, Michael Edwards and center Conrad McRae make this team the second-best in the Big East.  12 CINCINNATI (29-5)
The Bearcats are a tough team.
And while toughness might eventually wilt in the presence of talent, as it did last March when Cincinnati was brutalized by Michigan, it can certainly carry a team great distances.
Guard Nick Van Exel epitomizes the rejuvenated Bearcats; as he goes so go the Bearcats. 13 OHIO STATE (25-6)
The loss of Jimmy Jackson to the N.B.A. takes a major plug out of Randy Ayers plans to advance farther in the post season tournament this season.
Suddenly, the mantle of leadership falls on Lawrence Funderburke, the junior center who came into his own last year after a two year layoff.  14 U.N.L.V. (26-2)
From the Shark Tank to the Think Tank?
Critics and fans have wondered what Rollie Massimino would do in situation where he had a higher level of talent to coach than he did at Villanova.
Beginning this season, they'll find out.
In J.R.
Rider, a 6-5 junior, Massimino has one of the most talented players he has ever coached.
Look for a U.N.L.V.team that is just as defense-oriented, albeit with more variations. 15 GEORGIA TECH (23-12)
After Kenny Anderson left two seasons ago, Yellow Jacket fans assumed that they had seen the last of prodigal talent.
Enter Travis Best, a 5-11 sophomore who, while not as dynamic as Anderson, is clearly a state of the art player.
He'll team with James Forrest, a 6-8 sophomore, and Malcolm Mickey, a 6-11 center.  16 ALABAMA (26-9)
The Crimson Tide has a new, unplaided look this season with first year coach David Hobbs.
The Alabama attack will be built around James (Hollywood) Robinson, a 6-1 junior guard.  17 ARIZONA (24-7)
A number of critics -- and fans -- have just about lost faith in Arizona's ability to be the West Coast team that overcomes East Coast muscle.
In last year's tournament, the third seeded Wildcats were upset by 14th-seeded East Tennessee State.
This season, the heart and soul of the team will be New York-born Khalid Reeves, a 6-1 junior guard, and Chris Mills, a 6-6 senior forward. 18 MICH.
STATE (22-8)
Mike Peplowski, the 6-10 senior center, has overcome a series of knee injuries and put forth so much effort and enthusiasm for the Spartans.
What better way to go out than a good run through the tournament. 19 NEW MEXICO ST. (25-8)
In an era dominated by 6-8 swing players and 7 foot rejectors, don't you love a team whose most dynamic player is a 5 foot 8 inch point guard.
Enter Sam Crawford.
The Aggies senior guard, is a sparkplug who ignites New Mexico State's potent offense.  20 OKLAHOMA ()
Billy Tubbs is promising fans a return to the up-beat, up tempo style of play that characterized the Sooners during the mid and late 1980's.
To pull it off, Tubbs is relying on three redshirt guards: Dion Barnes, Chris Black and Shon Alexander.
Center Bryan Sallier was the Big Eight's leading rebounder last season.
FINAL 4 CHAMPION
William C. Rhoden: Kentucky, Seton Hall Seton Hall  Duke, Michigan
Malcolm Moran: Florida St., Memphis St. Duke  Duke, Michigan


NEW DISCLOSURES OVER BOMB PLANT
The Federal grand jury that investigated the Rocky Flats nuclear weapons factory near Denver said in a draft of its report that violations of environmental laws had continued at the plant even as the grand jury was at work, according to excerpts published in the December issue of Harper's magazine.
The jury said in the report, which remains sealed, that shutting the plant was "the only means to stop these continuing criminal acts."


A Few More Harsh Words for the Payroll Tax
In "The Payroll Tax Is Getting Out of Hand" (Viewpoints, Nov. 8), Norman Ornstein, a scholar at the American Enterprise Institute in Washington, discussed shortcomings in the Social Security system.
Basically, he wrote, F.I.C.A. taxes earmarked primarily for Social Security and Medicare have become a large burden on working people.
The payments are not only a hidden tax, he argued, but a very regressive one.
Mr.
Ornstein's criticism drew a heavy response from readers.
Some of their thoughts and suggestions follow.
Tell the Truth
To the Editor:


Right Sandpaper Smooths the Way
VIRTUALLY all home-repair and improvement projects involving wood also involve smoothing it.
But smoothing wood can be as much a question of choosing the right materials or tools as using the right technique.
Sandpaper probably comes to mind first as the material of choice.
For use on broad flat areas, it often is the easiest way to achieve good results.
When choosing sandpaper, consider the grade or relative coarseness, the type of abrasive and the density of particle coverage.


The Transition: The Senate; A 2D STRETCH RUN IN A GEORGIA RACE
"I'll tell you the truth," Barbara Bush said here Friday as she campaigned for Paul Coverdell, who is seeking to unseat Senator Wyche Fowler Jr. in Georgia's Thanksgiving week runoff election.
"After 350 visits to 38 states, the last thing I thought I would be doing Nov. 20 was making a campaign speech."
No one else expected to be making one either.
But Bill Clinton, Al Gore and Jimmy Carter for the Democrats and Mrs.
Bush, Jack Kemp and Bob Dole for the Republicans are among the cast of thousands showing up for the bitterly fought race being called The Election That Would Not End.


Other Kinds of Home Heating
To the Editor:
"All About/Heating Systems: The Cost and Cleanliness Equation" (Nov. 8) covered the topic of current home heating systems admirably.
However, while conventional air-to-air heat pumps are not cost effective here in the North because of low air temperatures in winter, ground source heat pumps, which draw heat from the earth, often are.
This is because the earth's constant temperature below the frost line is considerably higher than that of the air in winter.


Most Art Safe in Windsor Castle Fire
The fire that roared through Windsor Castle on Friday appears to have claimed only a relative handful of the priceless artworks housed there, but the parts of the vast complex where the blaze was concentrated suffered severe structural damage, officials said today.
Government officials said it would take years to repair the damage from the fire, which broke out at midday Friday and was still smoldering late this afternoon.
The most visible damage was to the 14th-century St.
George's Hall, an ornate 185-foot-long chamber that is the site of state dinners.
The hall's roof completely collapsed, leaving piles of steaming rubble and badly damaged walls inside.


Wrist Support
WHAT: The Pro Flex personal wrist support made by the Ergodyne Corporation of St.
Paul, Minn.
Millions of supports, also known as wrist managers, have been sold.
More than a million of the Pro Flex model alone have been sold since 1989, including half amillion this year.
The company expects to sell a half million more in 1993.
WHY: In 1990 the Bureau of Labor Statistics estimated that of the 46 million Americans using computer keyboards, more than 180,000 suffered from wrist or hand injuries linked to repetitive tasks like typing.
The most serious repetitive stress injury, or R.S.I., is carpal tunnel syndrome, a swelling of nerves where they pass through the wrists.
That can cause crippling pain, weakness, numbness or tingling in the hands or wrists.
Less troubling injuries include a variety of inflammation and swelling problems.


Noah's Ark Lands in the Coliseum
COME one.
Come all.
Step right up and view the amazing world of what Long Islanders will do for their pets.
Behold the Garden City firefighter who saved a cat with mouth-to-mouth resuscitation.
Talk about fur balls.
"I did your basic c.p.r.," said the volunteer firefighter, James Calamari, standing next to a color blow-up of his feline-saving act.
"I'm a cat owner. I couldn't do less."


Female Goalie Waits for a Shot
It's not easy being a first woman, especially when your debut in a preseason National Hockey League game catapulted your name and face far and wide.
As a result, MANON RHEAUME, now a backup goalie with the minor league Atlanta Knights, has her hands full these days.
For one thing, Rheaume (pronounced ray-OME) has a daunting schedule of daily practice, extra drills and rigorous exercise, including aerobics, six different kinds of sit-ups and an extensive weight-lifting program.
"It's not to become big," said the 5-foot-6, 135-pound goalie, "but to make my muscles stronger."


Grentz's Goals Involve More Than Winning
She has seen so much and won so much that Theresa Grentz is probably less driven by the larger goals of her profession than by the simple pleasures of coaching and teaching.
In her 17th autumn at Rutgers University, Grentz is still winning women's basketball games and also still trying to lift her program -- and her players -- to new levels.
There is seldom a shortage of victories for the Lady Knights, who begin their competition today with an exhibition game at the Louis Brown Athletic Center.
But when Grentz looks back at her tenure as a coach, she is more inclined to recall players than national rankings and victories.


Mandatory Tests Are Misguided
To the Sports Editor:
Dave Anderson, in his column, "At Risk: One Boxer, Who Else?" (The Times, Nov. 15), states that National Basketball Association players who were fearful of guarding Magic Johnson should be equally concerned with detecting other H.I.V.-infected players in the league, and Anderson implies that league officials in contact sports are being irresponsible by not imposing H.I.V. testing and disclosure policies.


Sound Bytes; Riding Into the Multimedia Digital Age
AS corporate vice president and general manager of the multimedia division, Lucie J. Fjeldstad is one of the highest-ranking women in the International Business Machines Corporation.
Raised on a cattle ranch in California (which is still in the family), she now lives in Stamford, Conn., and rides herd over I.B.M.'s worldwide strategy for interactive multimedia and high-performance network computing.
Question: We're told we're entering the digital age. What does that mean?


New Free Guide For Car Renters
Advice about the loss damage waiver and other insurance matters, and the terms, policies and disclaimers commonly used in the car rental industry is given in a new free consumer guide issued by Budget Rent a Car.
The company says its "Rent Smart" brochure is designed to help drivers find their way through car rental information, weigh options and make "educated rental decisions." The brochure provides information on such topics as: methods of payment, policies on returning a car, refueling options, age restrictions, optional insurance and car rental pricing.
A copy of the guide is available by writing to Budget Rent a Car Rent Smart Brochure, Post Office Box 23903, Milwaukee, Wis. 53223.
The rental company also has a toll-free number, (800) 736-8762, that provides answers to commonly asked questions on renting cars from Budget.


Peru's Leader Facing a Test In Vote Today
Seven months after President Alberto K. Fujimori ordered troops to shut down Congress, suspended the Constitution, and closed the courts, Peruvians will vote on Sunday to elect a new interim legislature.
Mr.
Fujimori's candidates are expected to win a majority in the new 80-member, single-chamber Congress, and the President hopes that the election will be interpreted as a return to democracy and as a referendum approving his seizing of near-dictatorial power.
He also sees the ballot as a route to acceptance by nations that have shunned him.


Alone, Undercover and Black: Hazards of Mistaken Identity
It was early on a cool spring day, but in the dark subway corridors beneath Flatbush, there was no way to know this.
Officer Michael K., a black transit police officer, was in full plainclothes costume: sneakers, jeans, sweatshirt.
His knee was pressed to the chest of a suspect whom he had fought to the ground, and his gun was pushed against the man's temple.
Then, out of the corner of his eye he saw, strobelike, something move.
A white man, in combat stance, was facing him, pointing a gun directly at him.
Officer K. screamed, "Joe! Stop! It's me!" Somehow, in that half second, the man's knees gave out, and he lowered his gun.


Senator Is Accused By Several Women of Sexual Advances
Ten women have described unwelcome sexual advances by Senator Bob Packwood of Oregon, mostly in the late 1970's and early 1980's, The Washington Post reported in its Sunday issue.
The women, identified as former members of Mr.
Packwood's staff and lobbyists, recalled various instances in which the Senator grabbed them without warning, kissed them forcefully and persisted in such behavior until they made it clear they were not interested or pushed him away, the newspaper reported.


Legislators Seek to Put Justices On Ballot
A PROPOSAL in the Legislature aimed at forcing State Supreme Court justices to face the voters every four years has drawn an angry response from a diverse group of lawyers, legislators, academics and public-interest advocates.
The sponsors of the measure, two prominent Republican State Senators, say the court has increasingly sought to impose social change, usurping the role of the Legislature without being accountable to the public.
As examples, they point to the court's decisions on subjects like the death penalty and financing for poor school districts.
"I think it's fair to say that in New Jersey, the Supreme Court has become the supreme policy-making body in terms of major political decisions," said the Senate majority leader, John H. Dorsey, Republican of Boonton Township and one of the proposal's sponsors.


Trento's Piazza
To the Editor: Carol Lettieri refers to the Piazza del Duomo in Trento as a "delicate civilized enclosure" of the 16th-century Renaissance ("Bringing Back the Painted City," Oct. 4).
As Jews, our historical memory is quite different.
Just a few years before the turn of the century, in 1475, this small community was accused of the murder of a child named Simon and the use of his blood for the rituals of Passover.
This blood libel led to a "trial" and subsequent torture and killing of 14 in the piazza and expulsion of the remaining Jewish citizens.
Jews were excluded from Trento and in the 18th century were still not allowed to pass through the town.
Simon was beatified and the resultant propaganda led to further violence against Jews inside and outside Italy.


Irene Moore, William Miller Jr.
Irene Warren Mitchell Moore, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Beverly C. Moore of Greensboro, N.C., was married there yesterday to William John Miller Jr., the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Miller of Watch Hill, R.I.
The Rev.
John Broome performed the ceremony at the Holy Trinity Episcopal Church.
Mrs.
Miller is a reading and learning specialist in New York, where she is also an author and photographer.
She graduated from Sweet Briar College and received a master's degree in education from the University of Virginia.
Her father is a founding partner in the Greensboro law firm of Smith Helms Mulliss &amp; Moore.


Betsy Ringel, Kirk Kolodner
Betsy F. Ringel, the program director of the Washington AIDS Partnership, was married last evening to F. Kirk Kolodner, a partner in the Baltimore law firm of Kantor &amp; Winegrad.
Rabbi Gila Ruskin performed the ceremony at Evergreen House in Baltimore.
Ms.
Ringel, who is 35 years old, is keeping her name.
The AIDS Partnership is a nonprofit organization that distributes funds to AIDS-related services.
The bride graduated from Vassar College and received a master's degree in organization and management from Yale University.


Melissa A. Epstein, Scott A. Barshay
Melissa Ann Epstein, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Neville Epstein of Princeton, N.J., was married last evening to Scott Allen Barshay, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Stanley F. Barshay of Old Westbury, L.I.
Rabbi David Lincoln performed the ceremony at the Park Avenue Synagogue in New York.
Mrs.
Barshay, 26 years old, is an associate in the law firm of Zalkin, Rodin &amp; Goodman in New York.
She graduated from Colgate University and received a law degree from Yeshiva University.
Her father, an architect, is a partner in Geddes Brecher Qualls Cunningham in Philadelphia.


Elaine Medverd, David Nordby
Elaine Brenda Medverd and David Oliver Nordby were married in New York yesterday.
The Rev.
Hugh Hildesley, an Episcopal priest, performed the ceremony at the Americas Society.
Mrs.
Nordby, 47 years old, is the associate director of the Peace Corps in Washington, in charge of volunteer recruitment and selection.
Until recently, she was a vice president of human resource management at the Swiss Bank Corporation in New York.
She graduated from Boston University and received a master's degree in arts and teaching from Columbia University.


Corrections
A brief article last Sunday about the disposition of a lawsuit by Morton H. Halperin against Henry A. Kissinger omitted the date of a letter written by Mr.
Kissinger acknowledging moral responsibility in the wiretapping of Mr.
Halperin's home during the Nixon Administration.
The letter was written in December 1991.
It was made public this month after the suit was dismissed at Mr.
Halperin's request.


Indian Symbols and Roles of the Sexes
IN an exhibition of Plains Indian art at the Montclair Art Museum, nearly all the 100 objects are ornamented with intricate geometric patterns that give them a striking beauty and an aura of hidden power.
Some of the symbols, expressed in beads and porcupine quills, can be understood only by their makers, who said the signs appeared to them in dreams or visions.
Other designs on clothing or weapons may indicate that the owner is a member of a certain tribe or secret society within that tribe.
A few signs are sacred and reserved for the wardrobe and implements of ceremonial dances.


Skiing: Finding the Price That's Right
OPERATORS of ski areas have long encouraged the idea that skiers can cut costs by adopting various strategies -- seeking out discounted lift tickets, for example, or buying packages that combine tickets and lodging , or avoiding holiday periods, and even weekends.
The ski operators generally leave it to hotels and spas to suggest that skiing can be high style, too, and that one can enjoy luxurious quarters and elegant dining near the slopes.
Both ends of the sport have something to be pleased about.
A survey conducted by the United Ski Industries Association, which represents most major ski areas, reported that last winter skiing bucked the recession after a three-year decline.
During the 1991-92 season the number of skier visits (a skier visit is one person visiting a ski area to ski part of the day or night) rose 8.8 percent over the previous season.
Visits went up to 50.8 million from 46.7 million.
Attendance at beginner lessons, the report said, surged 21.2 percent.


'Esthetics Above Practicality'
To the Editor:
The sketch of a rejuvenated Times Square by Craig Hodgetts interestingly echoes the Russian avant-garde architectural projects of the 1920's, but it puts esthetics above practicality.
The main virtue of a subway lies in the fact that it is underground, leaving the streets to pedestrians, cars and buses.
Even subway entrances do better if they are inside building passages, rather than obstructing the sidewalks.
AEXANDER HAMMID New York


United Carries Skis Ahead
Skiers who fly to ski destinations often find themselves hauling bulky bags containing their skis and boots through airport terminals crowded with people with similar burdens.
To help solve the problem, United Airlines offers a plan under which passengers may go to the airport a day or two before departure, show their tickets and send luggage and ski equipment ahead.
The skiers' gear is stored at the destination airport until they arrive.


The Transition; Taking Steps for Crowd Control


Carjacking Finds Its Way To the County
IT is a crime that has law-enforcement officials groping for solutions, manufacturers of anti-theft devices scurrying to design a better mousetrap and the Federal Government enforcing a hard-hitting regulation that was signed into law just last month.
It is also a crime that has been moving relentlessly from cities to affluent suburbs like Westchester, as thieves search for new sources of expensive, late-model automobiles.


WHITE MEN CAN'T DRUM
Charley Murphy's letter (Oct. 25), in response to Sherman Alexie's article "White Men Can't Drum" (Oct. 4), misses the point.
White men have never been subject to systematic oppression by a dominant group.
Rather, they have been the oppressors.
Hence, the unwritten rule applies: that it is profoundly different when a victim ridicules an oppressor than when the reverse occurs.


Gay Soldiers Cut the Mustard Abroad
While military leaders resist President-elect Clinton's pledge to include homosexuals in the armed services, many foreign forces have successfully incorporated gay personnel.
The experience abroad suggests that gay soldiers can indeed function effectively in military units that are enlightened enough to accept their service.
The lamentable current American policy bans homosexuals, both male and female, from military service and requires discharging those discovered while serving.
The rationale is that the presence of known homosexuals would undermine morale and discipline and would unfairly invade the privacy of heterosexuals who do not want to share close quarters with individuals of the same sex who might find them sexually attractive.


Hurley, at the Helm, Sparks Seton Hall
If it is only a question of gaining confidence, Danny Hurley knows it will come.
But only with patience.
Hurley, whose freshman season at Seton Hall was full of stops and starts, took a big step forward today when he came off the bench and helped push the Pirates past Tennessee, 72-64, in the preseason National Invitation Tournament at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.


Talking: Fuel Costs; Coping With Cold Winters
THE mild winters of the last few years have made it all too easy to become complacent about heating costs.
But this winter is expected to be a cold one and the price of oil and gas could rise more than in recent years.
So it pays to re-evaluate conditions, especially as brokers continually insist that a steady history of relatively low heating bills is a compelling selling point when a home goes on the market.


RESULTS PLUS
GOLF Harwood Breaks Course Record Mike Harwood shot a 10-under 61, breaking the course record by three strokes, and tied Craig Parry and Peter McWhinney for the third-round lead in the Australian PGA Championship yesterday in Sydney.
The 10-birdie blitz over the 6,667-yard Concord Golf Club course marked a strong turnaround for the 33-year-old Australian.
A month ago, he took two weeks off from the tour because of poor play.
Harwood started six shots behind his fellow Australians Parry and McWhinney, the second-round leaders, and finished with a 54-hole total of 201, 12 under.
But Parry and McWhinney each had his third straight 67 to match Harwood's total.
Four shots back of that trio were an American, John Morse, the first-round leader who had a 69 yesterday, and two Australians, David Iwasaki-Smith and Bradley Hughes. (AP) Barrett Beats Ammaccapane: Tina Barrett shot a women's course record of 69 at Troon North in Scottsdale, Ariz., to win the $200,000 Mitsubishi Motors Invitational Pro-Am golf championship by two strokes.
Barrett, who played the last 10 holes at three under, finished with a 54-hole total of 214, two under par.
The victory was worth $25,000 in the non-tour event that drew a field of 44 L.P.G.A.
Tour pros.
Danielle Ammaccapane, who won the title last year and led until finishing with two bogeys, had a final-round 71 and earned $15,000 for second place at even-par 216. (AP) SOCCER Leeds Defeats Arsenal  The defending champion, Leeds United, overpowered Arsenal, 3-0, yesterday to end a seven-game streak without a victory and end the Gunners' winning streak at six in England's Premier League.
Leeds got second-half goals from Chris Fairclough, Lee Chapman and Gary McAllister.
Norwich edged Sheffield United, 2-1, to increase its lead over second-place Arsenal to 4 points. (AP) SPEED SKATING  Blair Coasts to Two Victories  Bonnie Blair, a double Olympic gold-medal winner, coasted to easy victories in the 500 and 1,000-meter speed-skating races at a meet in Oslo yesterday.
Blair, from Champaign, Ill., was timed in 42.34 seconds in the sprint race at the Valle Hovin oval, beating the runner-up, Edel Therese Hoiseth of Norway, by 37 hundredths of a second.
In the 1,000, Blair's winning time was 1 minute 27.61 seconds.
Marte Mari Nordby of Norway was a distant second in 1:34.32.
Blair won both events early this year at Albertville, France, becoming the first American woman since the Alpine skier Andrea Mead in 1952 to win two golds in one Winter Olympics.
Blair also won the 500 in the 1988 Calgary Olympics. (AP)


Withdrawing Retirement Funds -- It's Not Clear-Cut
To the Editor:
Regarding "Drawing Down Retirement Money" (Nov. 1): As a child, I was told "never say never." Perhaps this adage should be extended to "never say always."


Inefficient Soviet Economy Halted Cold War; What Khrushchev Did
To the Editor:
While I heartily agree with George F. Kennan (Op-Ed, Oct. 28) that "nobody -- no country, no party, no person -- 'won' the cold war," I nevertheless take exception to his revisionist assertion that Nikita S. Khrushchev "offered the greatest hope for international political liberalization and relaxation of international tensions" and that "downing of the U-2, more than anything else, put an end to this hope . . . humiliated Khrushchev and discredited his relatively moderate policies."


Hit-and-Run Death in Bronx Brings Traffic Complaints
Evelyn Ayala stood with her fist clenched yesterday in the drizzling rain a few feet from the Bronx intersection where a 5-year-old boy was killed on Thursday by a hit-and-run driver.
Mrs.
Ayala, a mother of two children, said she planned to write the city to demand that brighter lights be installed along the Grand Concourse, and that police officers crack down on speeders there.


Living on the Women's Pro Tour Recasts Family Roles
Parents seem more a part of the women's professional tennis circuit these days than when I competed.
I traveled by myself, but that wasn't unusual because most players toured without parents then.
At 17, I was as capable of living on my own as any college freshman.
Today, players are younger, in many cases barely teen-agers, when they first join the circuit.
Their parents, enticed by the money and believing their daughters still need parental support, often uproot the family to join the international road show.
The men's circuit has avoided the parental deluge; by nature, parents do not seem to worry as much about sons as they do about daughters.


Looking for Trouble


Ferrer Asks His Appointee To Step Down From Board
Thrusting himself into the middle of the public debate over the future of the Board of Education, the Bronx Borough President, Fernando Ferrer, yesterday called on his rebellious appointee to the board, Ninfa Segarra, to conform more closely to his views or else resign.
The move appeared aimed at slowing the juggernaut of officials and educators calling for a revamping of the Board of Education because of a fierce and unrelenting division over such issues as how to teach children about AIDS.
Mr.
Ferrer fears that such an overhaul could strip the borough presidents of their power to appoint members of the board.


Corrections
An article on Oct. 18 about a cemetery tour in Farmington misstated the years of service of the Farmington Canal.
It was 20 years, not 3.
The article also referred incorrectly to the son of Thomas Hooker, Hartford's founder.
He was Samuel, not William.
The Times was informed of the errors in a letter received on Nov. 12.


Life in One Chicago Neighborhood
FROM specificity comes universality.
It's every playwright's ideal and every regional theater's fantasy.
Reach out to nonwhite, nonsubscribers, even non-theatergoers, with a strong play about the circumstances of their lives, and that will spark the play-going habit.
The upshot?
Attendance at works about other cultures, other experiences, not to mention Moliere and Shakespeare, will follow.
Since the Hartford Stage Company believes that ideals and fantasies beget a better world, and boost ticket sales, the management is convinced that audiences drawn to today's play, "Pill Hill," which is described as a "glimpse of divisions within the African-American community," will become tomorrow's subscribers.


This Week's Numbers
Consensus
Last Period
Estimates
(I.D.E.A. Inc.)
Monday
Oct. Federal budget balance, billions
$5.4
-$36
Tuesday
Oct. durable goods, percent change
-0.1
0.4
Nov. consumer confidence index, percent
53
57.5
Mid-Nov. car sales, millions, annual rate
3.28
3.30
Wednesday
Third-quarter G.D.P., percent change
2.7
2.3
Oct. home sales, millions, annual rate
3.28
3.30
Friday
Oct. personal income, percent change
1.0
0.8
Oct. personal spending, percent change
0.7
0.4
Monday: Treasury auction, two-year notes  Tuesday: Treasury auction, five-year notes


A Cocktail Hat Worthy of the 40's, Just Slightly Used
As the 1940's waned, so did the popularity of hats for women.
For the next four decades or so, except for a slight revival at the time of Jackie Kennedy's pillboxes, hats as a fashion statement were dead.


A Benchmark Victory? Three Knicks Sit It Out
Nothing is coming easily or esthetically for the New York Knicks right now, but Saturday night's 92-77 victory over the Orlando Magic was the most attractive of the young season.
That's because the two players who were brought in to transform the Knicks into a well-rounded unit -- forward Charles Smith and guard Rolando Blackman -- had their best games for their new team just when Coach Pat Riley asked them to.
It meant an end to the Knick's three-game losing streak, and vision of better things to come.


Katherine Roach, Kevin M. Hogan
Katherine Brown Roach, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Daniel T. Roach of Buffalo, was married there yesterday to Kevin Michael Hogan, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas F. Hogan of Albany.
Msgr.
William J. Gallagher performed the ceremony at St.
Joseph's Cathedral.
Ms.
Roach, who is 27 years old and is keeping her name, is an associate at the Buffalo law firm of Saperston &amp; Day.
She graduated from Williams College and received her law degree from Albany Law School.


Wires, Meters, Phones and Fears
John F. Tangretta has seen handguns up close.
He has had a shotgun pointed at his middle.
He has been threatened and robbed at knifepoint while on a ladder.
It wasn't exactly what he had in mind when he became a cable-splicing technician for the telephone company 27 years ago.
Claudio Quintana has his own accounts from New York City's utility installation-and-maintenance wars.
Mr.
Quintana, a 43-year-old pay-phone repairman, was punched in the head last March as he drove his company truck slowly past a crowd of young men who had been blocking a street in Jackson Heights, Queens.
He made the mistake of getting out of his truck to chase his assailant and was knocked to the ground by the crowd, kicked, beaten and left with several fractured bones in his cheek and under his eye.


Lawyer and Still Champion
To the Editor:
In saying that "novels by lawyers are not new," John Grisham in his essay "The Rise of the Legal Thriller: Why Lawyers Are Throwing the Books at Us" (Oct. 18) might have mentioned that America's all-time best-selling author was a lawyer.


Agony, Ecstasy, Odyssey
YOU'RE a smart, young, single management consultant in a little black dress who has paid $75 to participate in the Big Apple Limousine Scavenger Hunt to benefit the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation.
It's going downhill right off the bat.
Nov. 14, 8:35 P.M.
You wonder why the 32 other limousines in the hunt are stretches with bars, disco lights and television sets, and yours isn't.
As you head downtown, legs pressed up against your chest, you discover that your limo has several other liabilities, too.
No. 1: Except for you and your friend, a single lawyer who has appointed herself group captain, none of your four other teammates are familiar with the territory (they are from New Jersey and Ohio, to be precise).
No. 2: They're in couples.
No. 3: Your driver is actually a moonlighting construction worker from Queens who proudly announces that he hasn't driven in Manhattan in 30 years.
No. 4: Nobody has brought along a cellular phone.


She's the First Lady, Not the Little Lady
To the Editor:
How symbolic of the old gender roles is "Support, Advice, Candor" (Op-Ed, Nov. 11), James S. Rosenbush's article on Hillary Clinton.
Mr.
Rosebush seems unaware of how his advice to the new First Lady is as condescending a male perspective as any that we might expect to hear from a truly out-of-touch politician, even from the outgoing President himself.


U.S. Mine Inspectors Charge Interference By Agency Director
Federal mining inspectors here and in five other states say the head of the agency that oversees the $20 billion coal industry has repeatedly interceded on behalf of coal companies to thwart enforcement of the law regulating strip mining.
The inspectors, who head regional offices of the Office of Surface Mining, Reclamation and Enforcement, said in interviews that the director, Harry M. Snyder, had ordered them to end investigations of violations, reduce fines, eliminate penalties, divert prosecutions and prevent inspections.
Such intervention, they said, has also made them reluctant to enforce the law aggressively.


A New Class of Chinese Is Emerging: Home Owners
Glowing with pride as he showed off his new two-room apartment, Xu Yougui pointed out the spacious master bedroom, with its color television and huge wardrobe, and the children's bedroom, with two beds and embossed green wallpaper.
Then came the best thing of all: the indoor toilet.
Mr.
Xu, a 47-year-old textile worker, noted that this was quite an improvement over his previous apartment, which was cramped and dilapidated and meant relying on a public bathroom around the corner.
But Mr.
Xu and his family are not only moving up in the world; they are also joining a category of people that has scarcely existed in the last few decades in China.
They are home buyers.


Making a Difference; From the Utility Business To U.S. Energy Secretary?
After an appendectomy in September, while groggily awakening from the anesthesia, Michael R. Peevey's first words in the recovery room were "Vote for Clinton-Gore."
While Mr.
Peevey said he has no memory of the incident, friends say it is typical of the 55-year-old who has just quit as president of the SCE Corporation, the parent of the Southern California Edison utility company.
They call Mr.
Peevey an anomaly in a conservative industry where most executives have engineering or financial backgrounds.


Traveling Companions to a Peruvian Hereafter
No one knows the kind of metal workshops the Moche people operated during the third century in what is now northern Peru.
But the glorious gold, silver and copper objects that villagers of the Piura Valley discovered there in 1969 are among the most sophisticated of all such pre-Columbian treasures.
These curious artifacts -- depicting spiders, scorpions, moon monsters and warriors with their victims -- are also profoundly enigmatic.
Although it is known that these were funerary adornments and emblems, scholars have yet to fathom the meanings of the images.


Arazi Is Retired to Stud
Arazi, an international champion at age 2 and an international puzzle at 3, will become a stallion at 4 and race no more.
The end of the colt's racing career was announced yesterday in England by Sheik Mohammed bin Rashid al-Maktoum of Dubai, who paid $9 million last year to buy a half-interest in the horse from Allan E. Paulson and who will now buy full control.
Arazi will stand at the sheik's Dalham Hall Stud in Newmarket, England, for a stud fee of $35,000.


NOV. 15-21: Roundabout to Freedom; Communists by a New Name Return to Power in Lithuania
Making even relatively enlightened former Communists look attractive is a difficult trick, but the inexperienced leaders of Lithuania have accomplished it.
The music stopped last week for Vytautis Landsbergis and his Sajudis movement, which brought Lithuania independence.
Mr.
Landsbergis, a professional musicologist, was repudiated by voters sick of cold apartments and economic travails, and they gave the former Communists, now called the Democratic Labor Party, 77 seats in the new parliament of 141 members, an absolute majority.
Sajudis won only 28 seats.


Public &amp; Private; Bells At Night
Dear Santa.
Christmas is coming up.
Just to remind you little boy's are looking forwerd to it.
Love: Chris-K
In the first known case of a human being getting ahead of the retailing industry on the seasonal curve of Christmas, Santa fever has laid waste to a 7-year-old boy whose previous manias have been bats, snakes and Marvel superheroes.


Detour Time
To the Editor:
If Times Square ever even remotely resembles the hideous, nightmarish caricatures that accompanied Herbert Muschamp's article, kindly book my next theater tour to London.
PAUL J. MORRISON  Pittsburgh, Pa.


7 Storied Slopes, the Stuff of Legend
ONE of the principal joys of skiing is boasting about the conquest of a trail that is famous or notorious or storied.
While every ski area has trails that give skiers bragging rights -- usually the steepest, meanest pitches on the mountain -- only a few are truly legendary.
These are the ones that skiers dream about, with anticipation or sweaty palms, that have been featured in movies, that are the sites of famous races.
Legendary trails are ancient in modern ski terms -- 30 to 50 years old -- and most are steep, moguled or simply terrifying.


PROVIDER
My question to Alice Hoffman is this: What has really changed in 40 years?
Yes, today more women have the courage and the financial ability to lead lives on their own, but many are caught in the same bind.
Divorced mothers still are viewed with a certain amount of caution in the community.
Mothers, whether they are married, single or divorced, still are the main providers for their children.
They wipe the runny noses, run to school functions and provide taxi service.
It seems that fathers more often are exempt from these duties, and society says that this is O.K.
TERRI IANNOZZI
Brooklyn


Patty U. Chang, Kent K. Anker
Patty Umay Chang, a daughter of Charles and Hsing Chang of the Bronx, was married in New York yesterday to Kent Kari Anker, a son of Tiia Kari of New York and Peter Anker of Darien, Conn.
The Rev.
Oliver Chapin performed the Episcopal ceremony at the Chapel of the Good Shepherd on Roosevelt Island.
Mrs.
Anker, 22 years old, is a publicity assistant at Basic Books in New York.
She graduated magna cum laude from the University of Pennsylvania.
Her father is a senior systems analyst in New York for the Swiss Bank Corporation.
Her mother is a library cataloguer at the New York Botanical Garden.


Italy Looks to End of the Old Politics
All across Italy's political terrain, insurgents are charting campaigns that march to different banners, yet share the same refrain: The old order that steered the land through the cold war must go as surely as its erstwhile adversaries in the old Soviet bloc have vanished.
If they succeed, they will produce nothing short of a revolution, for Italy's soft and sensuous contours will be sharpened, and improbably, this nation will shed its reputation as a place where bribery, tax evasion and political gridlock are assumptions rather than exceptions.


Corrections
The Practical Traveler column today, on page 3 of the Travel section, misstates the number of Kiwi Airlines flights to Orlando, Fla.
It is two round trips daily, between Newark and Orlando.


Miss Fuhrmann, Bogdan Kryca
Eugenie Livanos Fuhrmann of New York and Charles J. Fuhrmann of San Antonio have announced the engagement of their daughter Katharine Reynolds Fuhrmann to Bogdan A. Kryca, a son of Bogdan and Tatiana Kryca of Jozefow, Poland.
An April wedding is planned.
Miss Fuhrmann, 24 years old, graduated magna cum laude from Harvard University.
She is a candidate for a master's degree in art history at New York University.
Her father is an investor in San Antonio and the executive vice president, chief financial officer and director of America's Disability Channel Inc., a cable network there for people with disabilities.
Her mother is a painter of faux finishes and an instructor at the Isabel O'Neil Studios for the Art of the Painted Finish in New York.


At Work; And Now the 'Sticky Floor'
THEY are the workers who dispense driver's licenses, take care of the mentally ill and keep the paperwork moving.
Some of what they do is the most difficult or aggravating work around -- utterly essential jobs that twirl the wheels of state and local government, yet pay badly and provide little hope of a better future.
Many of these workers are women, and the glass ceiling that so frustrates their female professional counterparts is for most of them irrelevant, a realization that prompted researcher Catherine White Berheide to offer a more appropriate building part to serve as a metaphor for the occupational frustrations of women.
Ms.
Berheide, a sociologist of work at Skidmore College in upstate New York, proposes the "sticky floor" as an image to encapsulate the plight of hundreds of thousands of women trapped in low-wage, low-mobility jobs in state and local government.
"There are barriers to women at the top, but that's not the only problem," she said.
"We're overlooking the bulk of women."


Jody Rosen and Zachary Knower
Jody Nan Rosen and Zachary Stewart Knower have announced January wedding plans.
Ms.
Rosen, 25 years old, graduated cum laude from the University of Pennsylvania and is a third-year law student at New York University.
She is a daughter of Barbara and Herbert Rosen of New York.
Her father is a vice president of operations at Lewmar Paper Company, a distributor of paper products in New York.
Her mother is the vice president of Arnell Construction Corporation in Brooklyn.


Susan Schwartz And Joseph Maya
Mr. and Mrs.
Martin Schwartz of East Northport, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Susan Meryl Schwartz, to Joseph Chemaria Maya, the son of Jaime Maya of Brooklyn and Victoria Maya of Miami Beach.
A May wedding is planned.


A Young Briton Wins Interpolis Tourney
MICHAEL ADAMS, a 20-year-old English grandmaster, won the first prize of about $59,000 by defeating the Russian grandmaster Boris Gelfand in the final of the elite 16th Interpolis International Tournament in Tilburg, the Netherlands.
The tournament, which ended on Oct. 28, was a knockout format of more than 100 players, including most of the world's greatest players.
But many of the favorites, most prominently, Anatoly Karpov, were thinned out in the early rounds.
The former world champion lost to Aleksandr Chernin of Hungary in Round 2.


People of Distinction
LATINOS
A Biography of the People.
By Earl Shorris. 520 pp.
New York: W. W. Norton &amp; Company. $25.


Mutual Funds; Shedding a Statistical Albatross
MOST mutual fund managers began looking a lot smarter in October than they did in September because they were finally able to slough off the long-term impact of the 1987 stock market crash.
Eliminating the month of October 1987 from the trailing five-year returns of the five largest funds creates dramatic differences in returns.
For example, the average yearly return for Fidelity Magellan, the industry's largest fund, jumped seven full percentage points, from 11.2 percent to 18.2 percent, according to Lipper Analytical Services Inc., in Summit, N.J.


Making a Difference; The Look At American Lost Boys
MARLO McGRIFF doesn't care much for youngsters' current fashion fondness for baggy clothing.
In fact, he bluntly says he thinks the style makes black boys look like hoodlums.
And as one of the nation's few independent black designers, he's in a position to change how some of them dress.
His company, American Lost Boys, headquartered in the Empire State Building, produces coordinated separates, outerwear and sportswear with enough sophistication and style that they are sold in such stores as Bloomingdale's, Barneys and Rudnicks of Beverly Hills.
Starting in February, the collection will be exported to Japan, Europe and Canada.


Homelessness Defies Every City's 'Remedy'
WHEN he ruled last week that Miami must set aside a pair of "safe zones" where 6,000 homeless people can eat, sleep, bathe, cook and defecate without fear of arrest, Federal Judge C. Clyde Atkins sent a shiver of alarm through officials in dozens of other cities across the country.
With the ranks of the homeless growing, the public's tolerance of them diminishing, and winter approaching, courts are proving increasingly willing to write solutions to one of the nation's most intractable social problems.
"Everybody is impatient," said Maria Foscarinis of the National Law Center on Homelessness and Poverty.
"People are tired of walking on the street and being confronted by increasing numbers of desperate people. The average person is impatient, the homeless people certainly are, and now the courts are having to get into it because the rest of government is not sufficiently involved."


BENEFITS
Music and Art Benefit
TODAY -- Members of the New York Philharmonic and Metropolitan Opera Orchestra will join students of the Fiorello H. La Guardia High School of Music, Art and Performing Arts for a concert at the school at 65th Street and Amsterdam Avenue, behind Lincoln Center.
The benefit, for the school's endowment fund, starts at 6 P.M. with a reception and gift sale followed by the concert and a reception with the performers.
Tickets, $15 and $25 for the preconcert reception and concert, $50 for the two receptions and concert, at the door.
For St.
Clare's
MONDAY -- St.
Clare's Hospital and Health Center and its AIDS center will hold its 10th annual benefit at the Marriott Marquis.
Cocktails at 6:30 P.M. will be followed by dinner and entertainment by Broadway performers.
Tickets, $350, from (212) 459-8627.
Evening for Dance Institute
MONDAY -- Forty works by contemporary artists will be auctioned at a benefit for the National Dance Institute at the Hudson Theater in the Hotel Macklowe.
Cocktails at 5:30 P.M. and a 7 P.M. performance that will include Mandy Patinkin, Faith Prince and members of the Dance Institute will be followed by the auction and a buffet dinner.
Tickets, $150, or $500 for special seating with celebrities, from (212) 226-0083.
A History of Family Care
MONDAY -- The Leake &amp; Watts Children's Home in Yonkers has provided family services since 1831.
A black-tie benefit for the agency will be held at the Plaza, starting with cocktails at 6:30 P.M. and then dinner, dancing and entertainment.
Merv Griffin is to be master of ceremonies.
Tickets, $350, from (914) 963-5650.
Artistic Variations
NOV. 30 -- The American Craft Museum asked 47 artists to decorate identical ceramic or glass platters.
The results may be seen at a black-tie reception at the museum from 5 to 7 P.M.
Dinner and an auction of the works follow at Laura Belle, 120 West 43d Street.
Transportation will be provided between the museum and restaurant.
Tickets, $250, from (212) 956-3535.
Burden Center Dinner-Dance
NOV. 30 -- The Burden Center for the Aging, 445 West 85th Street, will hold its annual dinner-dance and awards ceremony at the Rainbow Room.
Cocktails at 7 P.M.
Tickets, $350, from (212) 921-9070.
International Doctors
DEC. 1 -- Doctors Without Borders, an independent medical relief organization that serves war-torn and famine-struck areas around the world, will hold a 6 P.M. champagne reception at the French Embassy Cultural Services, 972 Fifth Avenue at 78th Street, followed by dinner at 8 P.M. at the Mark Hotel, 25 East 77th Street.
The evening will include presentation of a report, "Populations in Danger." Tickets, $35 for the reception, $150 to include dinner, from (212) 649-5961.
AIDS Research Benefit
DEC. 1 -- Amfar, the American Foundation for AIDS Research, will hold a black-tie benefit at the Waldorf-Astoria, starting with cocktails at 6:30 P.M.
Dinner, dancing and entertainment, including by Melissa Manchester, will follow.
Alan King is to be master of ceremonies.
Tickets, $500 or $125 for champagne, dessert, entertainment and dancing starting at 9:30 P.M., from (212) 722-6226.


Dr. Showalter, Mr. Reynders
Dr.
Claudia Robyn Showalter, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
C.
Robert Showalter of Harrisonburg, Va., was married yesterday to Charlton Reynders 3d, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Reynders Jr. of Bedford Hills, N.Y.
The Rev.
Dr.
William E. Foley performed the Episcopal service at the Princeton University Chapel in Princeton, N.J.
Mrs.
Reynders, 25 years old, is an intern in internal medicine at Mount Auburn Hospital in Cambridge, Mass.
She graduated from Princeton, as did her husband, and received her M.D. degree from Yale University.
Her father is a forensic psychiatrist in Harrisonburg.
He is also a clinical associate professor of behavioral medicine and psychiatry at the University of Virginia medical school in Charlottesville, and a lecturer in mental health law at the law school.


Whole Truth and Nothing But?
In his new biography of the great Russian pianist Vladimir Horowitz, Harold C. Schonberg, the former senior music critic of The Times, recounts the circumstances of Horowitz's legendary return to the concert stage, at Carnegie Hall on May 9, 1965, after 12 years in seclusion.
Despite minor problems in the Bach-Busoni Toccata, Adagio and Fugue in C and a serious loss of control in Schumann's C-major Fantasy, Horowitz proved himself "still the master," as the book's chapter heading has it.
Here is Mr.
Schon
berg's description of the aftermath.
All the New York critics raved.
The Times critic did not, unlike most of the other reviewers, see a new maturity.
The old Horowitz was good enough for him, and here was the old Horowitz in all his glory.


No Rivals
To the Sports Editor:
I have always been leery of superlatives.
Who was the greatest President?
Surely Lincoln.
Or was it F.D.R.?
Washington, Truman?
About baseball: Ruth.
No, Mays.
Joe D., Williams, Jackie.
Picking Ali or Louis from a selection that includes Jack Johnson and Marciano is as fruitless as selecting Shelley from the company of Keats and Byron.
Still, there is one question from which I do not a trifle shrink, nor let a trace of trepidation taint my reply.
Who was the best football player you ever saw?
L.
T.
MARK T. HANLEY Kent, Conn.


Centuries Are Kind to the Japanese Maple
THIS has been the autumn of the Japanese maple, whose brilliant foliage has been spectacular.
Lucky, indeed, are those who have a tree or have one growing in their neighborhood.
Japanese maples are known for their interesting foliage in any season.
In fact, unusual leaf forms are one of the prime reasons for their selection.


Q and A
Cruising Asia Minor
Q.
We are interested in sailing aboard a Turkish gulet, or wooden yacht,
along the coast of Asia Minor departing from either Bodrum or Marmaris in Turkey.
How can we get information about chartering a gulet with a captain and crew? -- Donald L. Dinsel, Greenville, Del.


A Few More Harsh Words for the Payroll Tax
In "The Payroll Tax Is Getting Out of Hand" (Viewpoints, Nov. 8), Norman Ornstein, a scholar at the American Enterprise Institute in Washington, discussed shortcomings in the Social Security system.
Basically, he wrote, F.I.C.A. taxes earmarked primarily for Social Security and Medicare have become a large burden on working people.
The payments are not only a hidden tax, he argued, but a very regressive one.
Mr.
Ornstein's criticism drew a heavy response from readers.
Some of their thoughts and suggestions follow.
We Need a Little Light
To the Editor:


The Transition; A Career in Twilight
Never in a long and vibrant career has James Addison Baker 3d found himself as poorly placed as he does right now.
At 62 years of age, Mr.
Baker is the semi-dormant chief of staff in a semi-dormant White House.
His friend since their days on the tennis courts of Houston's Bayou Club three decades ago, George Bush, is a spent force, politically speaking.
Mr.
Baker himself is not much more after a campaign whose management he assumed too late and which he failed to turn around.


Focus: San Antonio, Tex.; Southwestern Bell's Move: Gloom and Glee
TWO months ago Southwestern Bell Corporation sent spirits flying in San Antonio, spread dejection in the St.
Louis area and demonstrated again Mexico's importance to the economy of the Southwest.
The mixed reaction came on the heels of an announcement by Edward E. Whitacre Jr., its chairman, that the $9.3 billion communications giant, which has had a long presence in St.
Louis, would move its corporate headquarters and 500 jobs to San Antonio.


Withdrawing Retirement Funds -- It's Not Clear-Cut
To the Editor:
The problem with term certain is that if the surviving spouse is blessed with a long life the retirement fund could ultimately be distributed in its entirety and the spouse would be left at an advanced age with no retirement fund.
It was for this reason the recalculation option was put into law.
Even at the age of 100, there is a life expectancy according to the I.R.S., and there would be a retirement fund.
VICTOR ROSE New York, N.Y., Nov. 1


CURRENCY
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen
124.38
124.08
129.37
per Dollar
German Mark
1.6055
1.5505
1.5845
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar
1.2839
1.2645
1.1391
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound
1.5130
1.5505
1.7935
U.S. Dollar per British Pound
Gold
$335.25
$335.30
$368.50
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


Elizabeth De Lott, Steven Reisman
Elizabeth Carole De Lott, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Stuart C. De Lott of Great Neck, L.I., was married there last evening to Steven J. Reisman, a son of Carole Reisman of Huntington, L.I., and Lawrence Reisman of Forest Hills, Queens.
Rabbi Mordecai Waxman performed the ceremony at Temple Emanuel.
Mrs.
Reisman, 26 years old, is a second-grade teacher at the Chapin School in New York.
She graduated cum laude from Brandeis University and received a master's degree in education from Hunter College.
Her father is the director of design and merchandising at Europecraft Inc., a manufacturer of men's outerwear in New York.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
THE PURLOINED CLINIC Selected Writings. By Janet Malcolm. Knopf, $23.


RUSSIA TALKS BIZNES
Was Serge Schmemann indulging in the Russian penchant for self-deprecation when he wrote of the minimal contributions of the Russian language to English (On Language: "Russia Talks Biznes," Oct. 18)?
While not of the rank of major contributors like French or Latin, Russian holds an honorable position in the middle ranks in its contributions to English, with words like
ruble
,
mammoth
,
vodka
,
troika
,
astrakhan
,
steppe
,
intelligentsia
,
borscht, tundra
and
balalaika,
to mention a few.
And readers of the novels of cold-warrior writers like Tom Clancy would recognize the exquisite insult implied in
nekulturny
, which is closer in meaning to "barbarian" than to its literal translation of "uncultured."
Nor should Schmemann be upset at the thrust of some of the Russian words we have adopted.
After all, the French have contributed such interesting items as
guillotine
and
sadism
. We have
auto-da-fe
because of the Spanish fondness for putting heretics to the test.


The Devil Wore High Tops
BESIDES being the strong, silent type, Jesus is a hunk in an Armani-like jacket and T-shirt.
Or at least that's how he appears in "Out of the Tombs," a video that translates Mark 5:1-20 into the liquid sights and sounds of MTV-style imagery.
For nine minutes, Jesus and a man tormented by evil and bad dental work drift in and out of a hip (and hypnotic) wash of rock tracks, gentle-as-a-breeze narration and quick scenes of graffiti-marred urban landscapes, sunburst skies and the bowels of a gritty tenement.


Shared Convictions
To the Editor:
If, as Jon Pareles says, Sinead O'Connor is driven by "the conviction that her private problems are the world's concern," then his assertion that the singer would have "thought twice about tearing up a photograph of Louis Farrakhan or the Lubavitcher Rebbe" is completely irrelevant.
These are not her personal problems.
Ms.
O'Connor's protest is a generalization about the continuing damage caused by the Catholic Church, based on her personal experiences.


County's Arts Award Goes to Three
THE award, designed by the late Greenburgh sculptor Robert Kendall Fink, stands 15 inches high, is made of brushed aluminum and depicts in abstract form an artist's yearning for transcendence.
Tina Sattin, the actress and drama coach, won't part with hers even for a day.
Judy Matson, director of the county's Office of Cultural Affairs, says hers makes her feel very proud.
It is the Westchester Arts Council's annual Arts Award, and although no money is attached, many of its past recipients call it a plum of a prize.


It's Playtime
Attention, all workaholic males who justify the limitations of your wardrobe by your hours of toil.
This spring, designers are sending you a sartorial storm warning: they will no longer be preoccupied with helping you dress to obsess.
Not that they've completely dismissed ties, cuff widths, and double-breasted jackets -- designers are becoming radical, not suicidal -- but the clothes the most visionary men's-wear designers are sending down the runway reflect an acknowledgment of a certain saturation point, and a desire for a brash new focus.
The apogee of the work uniform is at hand.
No matter what the old Lestoil commercial promised, you can't make water much wetter, and you can't make business suits much better.
Honestly, will further refinement yield significantly more quality than the luxury of a classic silk and cashmere Cerruti blazer, or more drape than what already enhances Donna Karan's double-breasted wool crepe?
Will it eclipse anything with lapels and an Armani label under the inside breast pocket?
Names like Lauren, Etro, Klein, Hermes, Boss, Dior, Abboud and Hilton are practically guaranteed foolproof in the work place.


Channel Tunnel Delayed Again, To Late 1993
The opening of the Channel Tunnel between Britain and France has been delayed again, to December 1993.
Eurotunnel, the company that will operate the tunnel, had hoped to open in spring next year, and then the fall, and attributes the delays to accumulated problems -- early tunneling ran behind schedule, and there have been cost overruns and late delivery of rolling stock.
Although trains will carry cars, buses and passengers through the tunnel from December of next year, full train services between London, Paris and Brussels are unlikely until the summer of 1994.
The reason: delays in delivery of the high-speed train, Eurostar.


Andy Garcia: An Enigma Wrapped Inside Charisma
You would expect Andy Garcia to look cheerful.
After years of searing performances in supporting roles, he is starring in two films, "Hero" and "Jennifer 8," that recently opened within weeks of each other.
But this morning, in his office at Paramount, Mr.
Garcia is unsmiling, his face pinched tight.
Even so, he projects that pass-through-lead intensity that makes him a riveting screen presence.
Today, dressed in a beautifully cut black suit and a black T-shirt, he looks like a GQ priest.
But for the most part, Hollywood has seen him as the type of guy who points a pistol.
Sometimes he's the cop; sometimes he's the criminal.
He was the dapper drugster in "Eight Million Ways to Die" (1986) and the responsible gangster in "The Godfather III," in 1990, for which he earned an Oscar nomination.
When he fought for the guys in white hats, Mr.
Garcia worked as a G-man opposite Kevin Costner in the 1987 movie "The Untouchables," as Michael Douglas's partner in "Black Rain" (1989) and as Richard Gere's nemesis in "Internal Affairs" (1990).


The Gallos Go for the Gold, and Away From the Jugs
Few business leaders are as secretive as Ernest and Julio Gallo, owners of the giant winery here that bears their names.
But for more than a decade, travelers through northern Sonoma County have been able to see the brothers' strategy writ large upon the land.
Like the Japanese entry in the luxury car business a few years ago, the E.&amp; J. Gallo Winery is moving up market.
The dozen huge bulldozers that have labored for years to create the largest vineyards in the prime Sonoma grape-growing region are evidence of Gallo's ambitions.
It is a monumental task -- moving mountains, sculpting hills and carving artificial lakes.


Times and Pressmen Have Tentative Pact
A tentative contract agreement was reached on Friday between The New York Times and the pressmen's union, an important step in hastening the full operation of the newspaper's $450 million printing plant in Edison, N.J.
A spokeswoman for The Times, Nancy Nielsen, said that the agreement, which is contingent upon approval by the membership, was achieved after three days of around-the-clock negotiations.
Terms of the contract were not revealed.


Foreign Affairs; Jobs, Jobs, Jobs
Most Americans think Bill Clinton was elected to create new jobs.
Most Democrats I know think his divine duty is to give them the old ones -- like Secretary of State.
Or if the President-elect begs, they might consider being national security adviser.
But nothing less.
Absolutely. (Maybe Ambassador to Paris, but too soon to compromise.)
Alas, there are too few good jobs for the deserving Democratic multitudes who have waited in the wings of power for 20 of the last 24 years.


Right Sandpaper Smooths the Way
VIRTUALLY all home-repair and improvement projects involving wood also involve smoothing it.
But smoothing wood can be as much a question of choosing the right materials or tools as using the right technique.
Sandpaper probably comes to mind first as the material of choice.
For use on broad flat areas, it often is the easiest way to achieve good results.
When choosing sandpaper, consider the grade or relative coarseness, the type of abrasive and the density of particle coverage.


New &amp; Noteworthy
ON THE ALTAR OF FREEDOM: A Black Soldier's Civil War Letters From the Front, by Corporal James Henry Gooding.
Edited by Virginia M. Adams. (Warner, $9.99.) This is the only sustained account of the Civil War from the perspective of a black soldier, Cpl.
James Henry Gooding of the 54th Massachusetts Regiment.
Gooding, who ultimately died in a Confederate prison camp, wrote these letters for publication in a weekly newspaper, The New Bedford Mercury.
"He is at his best arguing against the twin injustices of denying black soldiers the promotions and equal pay their bravery and sacrifice should have dictated," Geoffrey C. Ward said here last year.
RATES OF EXCHANGE, by Malcolm Bradbury. (Penguin, $10.) Angus Petworth, a British professor of linguistics, goes to a mythical Slavic country that is a kind of hell for an academic of his persuasion: He can't communicate.
He doesn't understand the language, and his only English acquaintance has a terrible stutter.
In 1983 our reviewer, Rachel Billington, described this novel as an "astonishing tour de force." Penguin has also restored to print the author's earlier novel, THE HISTORY MAN ($10), a story about another professor, one who is very much a product of the 1960's.
He "writes brilliantly about the way in which our concepts of ourselves determine every detail of our lives," Margaret Drabble said here in 1976.


POSTINGS: 5 Rentals on West 19th; From Loft to Luxury
Work will begin in December on the conversion of the landmark loft building at 35 West 19th Street in Manhattan to five luxury rental apartments.
The renovation of the six-story structure will create 1,900 square-foot, two-bedroom, full-floor apartments; the ground floor will be commercial space.
The property is owned and is being developed by MKF Realty Company of Manhattan.


Philadelphia Was Exhausted, But It's Nets Who Fall Asleep
All the elements pointed toward a Nets victory here tonight, but once again New Jersey seemed to take one step backward after taking two steps forward.
The result was a 104-95 loss to the Philadelphia 76ers in front of 11,515 fans at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.


Riding the Painted Ponies Round and Round


A Detour in the Search for Shelter
As dawn approached yesterday, the limp bodies of children, men and women were slumped in hard chairs, stretched across floors and sofas and piled atop one another.
It was like that throughout the dirty, cramped corridors and waiting rooms of a city office on Catherine Street in lower Manhattan, where homeless families went Friday afternoon and evening to seek placement in a shelter or hotel.


Rima Vetter and Paul Ukena Jr.
Rima Vargas Vetter was married yesterday to Paul Edgar Ukena Jr.
The Rev.
Tom Pellaton performed the Episcopal ceremony at the Manhattan home of Bert and Elena Glinn.
Ms.
Vetter, who is keeping her name, is a sculptor in New York.
She graduated in May from the Parsons School of Design She was formerly an actress and a dancer and choreographer.
She is the daughter of Sonia Alpert of Locust Valley, L.I.
Her adoptive father, Roy Alpert of Locust Valley, owns the Erico Management Corporation, a real-estate management and investment company in Great Neck, L.I.
The bride is also the daughter of the late Charles Vetter.


lice R. Gray, James W. Stites 3d
Alice Redway Gray, a daughter of Mrs.
Thomas O. Moore of Sparta, N.C., and the late Bowman Gray 3d, was married yesterday to James Walker Stites 3d, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Stites Jr. of Glenview, Ky.
The Rev.
Alfred Shands performed the Episcopal ceremony at St.
Bartholomew's Church in New York.
Mrs.
Stites, 27 years old, is an editor at Abbeville Press, the book-publishing company, in New York.
She graduated from the University of Virginia, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and received a master's degree in English literature from Columbia University.
Her father was the president of General Occidental, a holding company in New York.
Her stepfather, Thomas O. Moore of Sparta, is the president of Blue Ox Industries, a building-components maker and distributor in Kernersville, N.C.


UP AND COMING: Guillaume Depardieu; He Unlocked a Father's Life
Though a publicist warns that Guillaume Depardieu, Gerard Depardieu's 21-year-old son, doesn't like to be asked about his famous father, he seems to talk about little else.
In the new French film "Tous les Matins du Monde," both he and his father play Marin Marais, a renowned 17th-century court musician, as a young and older man.
Mr.
Depardieu says he accepted the part of Marais, who rose from humble beginnings, because it reminded him of his father's own personal history.
"I wanted to understand my father's life so that I could make peace with him," Mr.
Depardieu said.
"I was also living the same experience with him on the set and was getting closer to him in many different ways, and that gave me the means to forgive him for everything."


Beyond Assimilation
DAYS OF OBLIGATION
An Argument With My Mexican Father.
By Richard Rodriguez. 230 pp.
New York: Viking. $21.


A Hounting New Musical Illuminates A Gallant Soul
For a while, when television stations didn't operate round the clock, they would sign off with brief film clips meant to be inspirational.
The imagery was usually majestic -- golden sunsets, the ocean's mighty surf, or Old Glory, waving over waving amber fields.
One -- supplied, as I recall, by the United States Air Force -- showed a glistening jet soaring into the pale blue yonder, while a grave voice, the pilot's, described the sensation of slipping off earth's moorings and brushing up against "the face of God."


Julia S. Foote, Gregory LeStage
Mr. and Mrs.
Edward T. Foote 2d of Coral Gables, Fla., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Julia Stevenson Foote, to Gregory Codding LeStage, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Donald LeStage 3d of Attleboro, Mass.
A January wedding is planned.
Miss Foote, 26 years old, is an associate producer at the WGBH Educational Foundation, the Public Broadcasting Service affiliate in Boston.
She graduated cum laude from Middlebury College.
She received a master's degree in English literature from Oxford University in England, as did her fiance.
Her father is the president of the University of Miami.
The prospective bride is the maternal granddaughter of Senator J. W. Fulbright, Democrat of Arkansas.
Her paternal great-great-grandfather, Adlai E. Stevenson, was the Vice President in President Grover Cleveland's second administration.


The Religious Hunger
A FAR GLORY
The Quest for Faith in an Age of Credulity.
By Peter L. Berger. 218 pp.
New York: The Free Press. $22.95.


Rangers Recapture Winning Feeling
For the past two days, Neil Smith has spent hours on the racquetball court, all his frustration over the Rangers' recent misfortune translated into a fierce fight with a small rubber ball that has, at times, left him completely drained.
Tomorrow, he may rest.
He cannot stop worrying -- there are still far too many problems on this club for that to happen -- but he needn't spend so much time in small, windowless rooms, contemplating drastic changes while he works up a sweat.


Julie L. Garbus, Michael S. Jacobs
Dr. and Mrs.
Stanley B. Garbus of Fort Lee, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Julie Laura Garbus to Michael Scott Jacobs, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Alan L. Jacobs of Chestnut Hill, Mass.
An April wedding is planned.
Ms.
Garbus, 27 years old, is a strategic planning analyst in the pharmaceuticals division of Pfizer Inc. in New York.
She graduated magna cum laude from George Washington University.
She received an M.B.A. from New York University, as did her fiance.
Her father is the vice president of clinical research at EM Industries Inc., a pharmaceutical manufacturer in Hawthorne, N.Y.
Her mother, Sharon Garbus, is the president of Clinmark Associates Inc., a pharmaceutical consulting company in Fort Lee.


Topics of The Times; Unfair Warning
New York City has problems enough in making visitors feel safe and welcome.
It hardly needs the two-faced advertising slogan a local clothier has posted on the phone booths behind St.
Patrick's Cathedral, right in the heart of tourist territory: "In this neighborhood, be sure to keep an eye on your wallet."
The big black letters could easily be mistaken for an official police warning.
Certainly the sign confirms the out-of-towners' fear that there's a mugger behind every Manhattan lamppost.


How Lawyers Help Breast-Cancer Victims
As founding members and active participants in the Breast Cancer Legal Advocacy Project  [ "Legal Aid for Breast Cancer Queries," Nov. 8 ] , we wish to respond to the extremely negative statements with respect to attorneys.
It is very easy in this era of "attorney bashers" and "naysayers" to perpetuate negative stereotypes about members of the legal profession.
The negative comments are illustrative of this unfortunate practice.
On behalf of the hundreds of attorneys who are involved in this endeavor and who have given of their time, without charge, we wish to register our strong objection to the flavor of Ms.
Kaplan's statements.
Her reference to attorneys' only wanting to "see the pretty picture" is insulting and inaccurate, particularly since many of the attorneys participating in the project have been personally affected by breast cancer.
These attorneys practice law with a high degree of competence, ethics and responsibility.
Those of us who have already entered the arena of bone-marrow litigation know, full well, of the urgency of the attorney's mission.
It is part of the burden we all carry when we undertake such representation.
We do not seek "to get the flower in their lapel for doing a wonderful job."
We fully realize that the actualization of our efforts will, at best, afford our client the opportunity of undergoing a grueling medical procedure.
Hopefully this opportunity will save a life.
We are aware and fully cognizant of the fact that bone-marrow transplantation may be the final option available to our client.
The responsibility of our tasks is not a "pretty picture." Indeed, it is an extremely heavy burden.
And, most assuredly, it is not necessary for those of us who practice in this arena to be reminded of tombstones.
L.
SUSAN SLAVIN, HARRIETTE M. STEINBERG and CAROL L. SCAL  Uniondale


A Few More Harsh Words for the Payroll Tax
In "The Payroll Tax Is Getting Out of Hand" (Viewpoints, Nov. 8), Norman Ornstein, a scholar at the American Enterprise Institute in Washington, discussed shortcomings in the Social Security system.
Basically, he wrote, F.I.C.A. taxes earmarked primarily for Social Security and Medicare have become a large burden on working people.
The payments are not only a hidden tax, he argued, but a very regressive one.
Mr.
Ornstein's criticism drew a heavy response from readers.
Some of their thoughts and suggestions follow.
Clout vs. Apathy
To the Editor:


Withdrawing Retirement Funds -- It's Not Clear-Cut
To the Editor:
The term-certain method is "always the best option"?
I don't think so.
In the event that either husband or wife lives longer than the joint life expectancy, the alternative, recalculation, method will result in a longer payout period.
Using the example in your chart, a man turning 70 1/2 with a 67-year-old spouse, if either the husband or the wife lives more than 22 years from the date the payout begins, the recalculation method will result in a longer distribution period than the term-certain method.


SURFACING
TRAVEL --
Costa Rica:
A new hot spot for tourists.
"Caribbean weather without Caribbean prices," said a travel agent.
LANGUAGE --
Butter:
Not fat, but "phat." Hip-hop teen-agers who were writing and saying "that's phat" to express high appreciation now say "that's butter."  GREETING CARDS --
New Categories
: Cards for working mothers, gay men and lesbians and for Kwanzaa, the African-American holiday (Dec. 26 to Jan. 1).


Data Bank/November 22, 1992


How Hatred Grows on Petty Politics; The Germans' New Preoccupation: Disorder
TWO years after everybody hoped unification had solved the "German problem," it is back again.
With Chancellor Helmut Kohl's Government apparently overwhelmed by the challenges of simultaneously bringing the two parts of Germany together and coping with the chaotic social and economic consequences of the collapse of Communism elsewhere in Eastern Europe, neo-Nazi violence against foreigners has frightened Germans and their European neighbors who hoped such ugliness could never happen again.


Why Did God Make These Debates So Hard?
IT was a haphazard and slightly premature birth for what many people consider a landmark document in the history of the world's largest religious body.
Last week, bookstores in Paris began selling a French-language edition of the new "Catechism of the Catholic Church," a 700-page summation of Roman Catholic beliefs that had been scheduled for distribution in major languages after its solemn promulgation by Pope John Paul II early next month.
At the Omni Shoreham Hotel in Washington, where nearly 300 bishops were gathered for a meeting of the National Conference of Catholic Bishops, a church official announced the sudden appearance of the catechism with a certain chagrin.


No Commissioner, and Perhaps No Penalty for Schott
Marge Schott's apology to black and Jewish groups in Cincinnati could help her avoid discipline or even censure in baseball.
So could the absence of a commissioner.
Schott, the controversial owner of the Cincinnati Reds, aroused anger from blacks and Jews last week with the release of a deposition she gave a year ago in a lawsuit filed against her by a former Reds employee.
In the deposition, Schott acknowledged her use of the term "nigger" and her possession of an armband adorned with a swastika.


Montreal's Party
To the Editor: I can understand why so few people came to Montreal's 350th birthday, as noted in "What's Doing in Montreal" (Aug. 16).
As soon as we crossed the border into Quebec Province on Aug. 20, all road signs were in French with little or no attempt to translate them into English.
How about a nod to bilingualism, at least?
As I doped out the signs using my college French, I kept thinking, what if I were an American or a Canadian who knew no French at all?
On the next day, while pulling out of the parking lot at the Botanical Gardens I was faced with a sign reading "Arretez pour le vert." If I had not known that "vert" was green, I could have caused quite an accident.


Perspectives: Housing Finance; Freddie Mac Plants Its Flag in New York
A BROKER named Marlon Pilossoph on Sedgwick Avenue in the Bronx likens himself to a weeder.
"I weed out the people they should not sell to," he says.
The beneficiary of these gardening services is the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation, or Freddie Mac, which built a formidable portfolio of multifamily loans in the 80's.
This year it has sold 40 properties that it took back in foreclosure actions in New York City.
The company says it has been finicky in choosing new owners.
Mr.
Pilossoph was the broker in 17 sales.


A Familiar Tone in Race To Lead South Korea
The campaign officially began today for the dissident who went mainstream, the dissident who remains on the outside and the tycoon turned politician in what is shaping up as a heated presidential race and a test of democracy.
To the victor will go the task of reviving South Korea's push to become an industrial powerhouse and, perhaps, of presiding over a reunification with North Korea.


Pioneers Abroad
AN AMERICAN living in London learns these things: that over here you're the one with the accent; that hauling over such totems of home as jalapeno jelly and maple syrup only saddles you with a suitcase of clothes good enough to eat, and finally that the best way to deal with homesickness is heavy shopping -- and that means Harrods.
Americans in London have recently been astonished to hear a banjo playing "On Top of Old Smoky" as they slumped through the aisles of gloves and brollies.
Harrods' marble floor has become a pathway of rough gray planks -- a pathway through a forest of hanging baskets, Santa Fe shawls and patchwork quilts leading to an old-fashioned, no-kidding, general store.
The air is crisp with the scent of pine and cinnamon apples.
Popcorn crackles from an old-fashioned wagon in the corner.
There are baskets of blue-corn, sour-cream chili-chips, shelves of Shaker dolls and cowboy pottery sets.
Necklaces of bright corn kernels and star-spangled suspenders hang from "old" barn rafters.


Fixated on Famous People
Celebrity is the jewel in the tin crown of pop culture.
It may be paste, but who could tell in the dazzle of its glow?
Talent is less important than renown in a society as fixated on famous people as on what they do or make.
In the 1954 film "It Should Happen to You," Judy Holliday starred as a nobody who rents a billboard to advertise her name and instantly becomes rich and famous.
At length she learns that "it isn't just making a name. . . . The thing is making a name stand for something" -- but that was only a movie.
You're nobody till somebody knows you, which is where photography comes in.
A star needs a face, not to launch a thousand ships but to throng a million magazines.
One of the most visible facemakers of the day is Herb Ritts, whose portraits are on view at Staley-Wise in SoHo, in a show called "Herb Ritts: Notorious" (and in a book of the same name from Bulfinch Press; he is donating his royalties to the American Foundation for AIDS Research).


Making a Difference; From the Utility Business To U.S. Energy Secretary?
After an appendectomy in September, while groggily awakening from the anesthesia, Michael R. Peevey's first words in the recovery room were "Vote for Clinton-Gore."
While Mr.
Peevey said he has no memory of the incident, friends say it is typical of the 55-year-old who has just quit as president of the SCE Corporation, the parent of the Southern California Edison utility company.
They call Mr.
Peevey an anomaly in a conservative industry where most executives have engineering or financial backgrounds.


Inefficient Soviet Economy Halted Cold War
To the Editor:
In "The G.O.P. Won the Cold War? Ridiculous" (Op-Ed, Oct. 28), George Kennan argues that the Republicans cannot claim credit for ending the cold war.
In "Credit Where It's Due for Cold War's End" (letter, Nov. 6), Prof.
Richard Pipes asks why deny President Bush recognition for an "event that occurred on his watch."


NOTES
Organizers of the Fashion Follies held by the Fashion Group on Nov. 10 have sent apologies to the more than 100 designers who took part.
The variety show, which raised money for breast-cancer research and a design-school scholarship, was marred by an agonizingly long finale featuring more than 100 bridal dresses shown one at a time.
"We deeply regret the unpleasantness that surrounded the Fashion Follies bridal number," the letter said.
"The finale was clearly to be a very important part of the evening, and in no way was it meant to turn out the way it did."


Centuries Are Kind to the Japanese Maple
THIS has been the autumn of the Japanese maple, whose brilliant foliage has been spectacular.
Lucky, indeed, are those who have a tree or have one growing in their neighborhood.
Japanese maples are known for their interesting foliage in any season.
In fact, unusual leaf forms are one of the prime reasons for their selection.


The Cab Problem At Newark Airport
Concerning the article about cracking down on illegal cabs at Newark Airport (Nov. 1): Yes, there is a problem with such drivers preying on people.
But at Terminal A, one of Newark's three terminals, they actually perform a service of sorts, and life would be worse without them.
Terminals B and C are served by a fleet of about 600 Newark cabs.
But Terminal A is situated over the city line from Newark, in Elizabeth.
Thus, there is a monopolistic situation in which Newark cabs are not normally permitted to pick up fares at Terminal A. Only the 80 cabs licensed by Elizabeth are allowed to make pickups there.


Salt Lake City
Salt Lake City, framed so strikingly by the Wasatch Mountains, is one of the rare places in America that offers, at once, the sight of nature's grandeur and the feel of urban vigor.
This is a truly diverse city, with a flourishing artistic life, restaurants that range from exquisite to down-home, restored pioneer homes and a copper-domed state capitol, sidewalks safe enough to stroll after dark and, of course, the Mormon Tabernacle, the mainstay of majestic Temple Square.
Salt Lake City narrowly missed being chosen as the site for the 1998 Winter Olympics, which will be held in Nagano, Japan, and a campaign has begun to bring the games here in 2002.


White Plains Library Is a System Member
We were pleased to see the article "Libraries Join in Drive for Food for Homeless"  [ Nov. 15 ]  and glad to coordinate White Plains's established support of holiday food collections with a countywide effort.
However, because White Plains is a member of the Westchester Library System, we were disappointed that your article stated that we are not.
As a highly active provider of services to county residents, White Plains is justifiably proud of its longstanding, substantial contribution as a Westchester Library System member.
SANDRA C. MIRANDA Library Director White Plains Public Library


Sports of The Times; The Upset, the Party, the Fire
IT'S arguably the biggest upset in college football history.
Fifty years ago, Holy Cross stunned Boston College, 55-12.
But when two dozen members of that 1942 Holy Cross team gathered on the Worcester, Mass., campus this weekend, the revelry of their reunion remained haunted by the Cocoanut Grove nightclub fire, which killed nearly 500 people in Boston that Saturday night half a century ago.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: November 22, 1992
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
3
HIDEAWAY, by Dean Koontz. (Berkley, $5.99.) A resuscitated man has visions of evil.
2
5
MIDNIGHT WHISPERS, by V. C. Andrews. (Pocket, $5.99.) The travails of Christie Longchamp, haunted by her relatives' passions.
3
3
A RIVER RUNS THROUGH IT, by Norman Maclean. (University of Chicago, $9.95.) Three tales of the outdoors in western Montana.
4
43
THE FIRM, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $5.99.) A young lawyer learns that his firm is engaged in secret, possibly illegal activities.
5
4
REMEMBER, by Barbara Taylor Bradford. (Ballantine, $5.99.) A television correspondent seeks the truth about her fiance's suicide.
6
32
A TIME TO KILL, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $5.99.) Racial tensions surface during the trial of a man charged with murder in rural Mississippi.
7
1
RECKLESS, by Amanda Quick. (Bantam, $5.99.) A Sussex maiden in distress finds help and romance during a midnight encounter.
8 *
5
PRIVATE EYES, by Jonathan Kellerman. (Bantam, $6.50.) The psychologist-detective Alex Delaware goes to the rescue of an actress.
9
4
A RIVER RUNS THROUGH IT, by Norman Maclean. (Pocket, $4.99.) Three tales of the outdoors in western Montana.
10
7
SCARLETT, by Alexandra Ripley. (Warner, $6.99.) The sequel to "Gone With the Wind."
11
1
AND ONE RODE WEST, by Heather Graham. (Dell, $5.99.) A Southern belle and a Yankee officer, married in the aftermath of the Civil War, find love on the Western frontier.
12 *
9
A THOUSAND ACRES, by Jane Smiley. (Fawcett, $12.) The fortunes of a farming family.
13
6
THE HELLION BRIDE, by Catherine Coulter. (Jove, $5.99.) The romance of a British rake and a plantation belle in 19th-century Jamaica.
14
3
THE LAST OF THE MOHICANS, by James Fenimore Cooper. (Pocket, $4.99.) The 1826 novel about a frontier scout and his Indian friend.
15
1
THE DOOMSDAY CONSPIRACY, by Sidney Sheldon. (Warner, $5.99.) An American probes a mysterious balloon accident in the Alps.
16 *
9
NO GREATER LOVE, by Danielle Steel. (Dell, $6.50.) The sinking of the Titanic greatly alters the fortunes of Edwina Winfield and her large family.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
2
7
PUTTING PEOPLE FIRST, by Bill Clinton and Al Gore. (Times Books/Random House, $7.99.) The next Administration's program for "changing America."
3
4
THE AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF MALCOLM X, with the assistance of Alex Haley. (Ballantine, $5.99.) The life story of the black leader, originally published in 1965.
4
6
BACKLASH, by Susan Faludi. (Anchor/ Doubleday, $12.50.) A journalist contends that the media and political groups are staging a war against women's rights.
5
3
WHEN YOU LOOK LIKE YOUR PASSPORT PHOTO, IT'S TIME TO GO HOME, by Erma Bombeck. (Harper Paperbacks, $5.99.) The tribulations of travel suffered in all parts of the world.
6
4
SEX, ART, AND AMERICAN CULTURE, by Camille Paglia. (Vintage, $13.) Twenty-one essays on contemporary subjects, ranging from Madonna to Anita Hill to date rape.
7
31
AMERICA: WHAT WENT WRONG? by Donald L. Barlett and James B. Steele. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $6.95.) How the practices of Washington lawmakers and Wall Street deal makers have benefited a few Americans at the expense of most.
8 *
3
MOLLY IVINS CAN'T SAY THAT, CAN SHE? by Molly Ivins. (Vintage, $11.) Essays about the recent political and cultural scene.
9
79
YOU JUST DON'T UNDERSTAND, by Deborah Tannen. (Ballantine, $10.) The different languages men and women speak.
10
472
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Inspiration. (LP)
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
9
THE INDISPENSABLE CALVIN AND HOBBES, by Bill Watterson. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $12.95.) A collection of previously published cartoons.
2
96
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $9.95.) Principles for success.
3
67
LIFE'S LITTLE INSTRUCTION BOOK, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $5.95.) Some 500 tips for achieving a self-fulfilling life.
4
2
COWS OF OUR PLANET, by Gary Larson. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $8.95.) "Far Side" cartoons.
5
115
THE T-FACTOR FAT GRAM COUNTER, by Jamie Pope-Cordle and Martin Katahn. (Norton, $2.50.) How to reduce fat in one's diet.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,000 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 38,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.


Inefficient Soviet Economy Halted Cold War; The Costs at Home
To the Editor:


It's Modern. Is It Comfy?
Inspect a chair, help a museum. Nov. 18.


Unpardonable Sin
To the Editor:
In his essay "Why Sinead O'Connor Hit a Nerve"  [ Nov. 1 ] , Jon Pareles made some cogent points in trying to explain the ferocity of the American public's reaction to the singer.
Nonetheless, an important element was overlooked, probably because Mr.
Pareles is unfamiliar with the disparity between modern Irish society and the American-Irish perception of it.


Sports of The Times; Miami Raises The Volume In Big East
THIS was the reason they made the Carrier Dome a rectangle instead of a circle or a square.
This was the reason they left 100 yards' worth of playing territory on the ground floor -- so that one day a brave quarterback named Marvin Graves would fight off an upset stomach and run the ball directly at the best college football team of the generation.
The biggest game of the week took place not in the Big Ten or the Pac-10 or the Big Eight or the Southeastern Conference, but rather in the Big East, a conference long known for its football-like physicality, practiced by people in short pants named Patrick and Derrick and Alonzo.


Heather Taylor, David Bumsted
Heather Ann Taylor, a daughter of Esther Taylor of DeWitt, N.Y., and the late Russell A. Taylor, was married there yesterday to David Wentz Bumsted, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
William J. Bumsted of Vero Beach, Fla.
The Rev.
Edwin F. Taylor, a nondenominational minister, performed the ceremony at the DeWitt Community Church.
Mrs.
Bumsted, 26 years old, until recently was a marketing representative in New York for the Disney Channel, the cable-television network.
She graduated from Cornell University.
Her father was a partner in Hancock &amp; Estabrook, a law firm in Syracuse.
Her mother, who is retired, was a business teacher in the East Syracuse-Minoa (N.Y.) Central School District and a business instructor at the State University at Albany.


Profile/Michael Perlis; Family Man. No Mansion. This Guy Really Runs Playboy?
MEN, let's talk honestly.
Let's talk about dreams.
Want to be a millionaire?
The fact is they're $12 million a dozen.
Want to be Michael Jordan, Bruce Springsteen or Mikhail Baryshnikov?
Good luck.
So how would you like to be publisher of Playboy, surveying the world for the sexiest, most interesting women on the planet?
Playing in Hef's league!
Home, of course, would be a mansion, replete with pool, grotto and zillions of scantily clad bunnies.


NOV. 15-21: 'Sidesaddle' Gas Tanks; G.M Kept Making Pickups It Could Have Made Safer
General Motors Corporation, already struggling to right itself financially, was struck another blow last week when internal company documents regarding the safety of millions of its pickup trucks were disclosed in a Federal inquiry and in a Texas suit filed by a consumer group.
The G.M. papers show that company officials decided in 1983 that a pickup's fuel tank might be made "much less vulnerable" to leaking during accidents if it were positioned inside the vehicle's main frame.
But G.M. did not make that change until its 1988 models, and more than five million pickups with "sidesaddle" tanks are still on the road.


FRANCE CRITICIZES FARM TRADE PACT AS 'UNACCEPTABLE'
The French Prime Minister called a new farm trade agreement "unacceptable" today, warning that it posed a "grave threat" to French farmers but pointedly avoiding mention of a veto.
In a statement, Prime Minister Pierre Beregovoy noted that "difficult negotiations" lay ahead on the accord concluded on Friday by the European Community and the United States, but he left the door open to compromise.


Moving the Vegetables Out of the Shadow of the Turkey
BECAUSE so much attention is paid to the turkey on the Thanksgiving table, vegetables sometimes get short shrift.
Steamed brussels sprouts and sweet potato puree topped with marshmallows are all very well, but they aren't dishes I think many people will lose sleep over if they fail to appear.
I like to serve a variety of different vegetables with turkey, and I choose them both for their color and their texture.


Off-Price Stores: Retailing Impetus
IT looked as if the store might have been giving something away.
The parking lot was so jammed that cars waited outside for spots.
Inside, the lines of shoppers at each cash register seemed endless, and the store hummed with activity.
Recession?
Slow economy?
Not reflected in the activity at some recent store arrivals on Long Island.


Mutual Funds; Index Funds: The Big, Small and Odd
Investors have a seemingly insatiable appetite for index funds, whose returns duplicate those in a broader market because the funds buy all or a sampling of the securities in a given index.
To meet that demand, the industry has served up a wide array of funds, tracking large stocks, small stocks, bonds or variations on those themes.
Here's a look at what is available:
Funds that index big stocks come in three flavors.
The eight plain-vanilla S.&amp; P. 500 funds are distinguished only by what they cost to run.
Your best bet is the lowest-cost version, the Vanguard Index 500, because expenses cut into your return.
Peoples Index Fund passes along no expenses to investors for now, to build its assets.


Andrea Viklund, Francis Doherty 3d
Andrea Lynn Viklund, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William E. Viklund of Manhasset, L.I., was married there yesterday to Francis Vincent Doherty 3d, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Doherty Jr., also of Manhasset.
The Rev.
Thomas Hammond, a Lutheran minister, officiated at the Church of Our Saviour.
The Rev.
John Denniston, a Roman Catholic priest, took part in the ceremony.
Mrs.
Doherty, 24 years old, is a computer analyst for the Astoria Savings and Loan Association in Lake Success, L.I.
She graduated magna cum laude from the C. W. Post Campus of Long Island University.
Her father is the chief executive of the Long Island Savings Bank in Melville, L.I.


A Sure Winner
To the Editor:
I should like to submit my own proposal for Times Square.
Since the area is one of the world's great fantasy lands for grown-ups, I have never agreed with the concept of office buildings being the basis for its renewal and revitalization.
Quite the contrary.
It seems to me that office buildings, other than bringing in people on a daily basis, would inhibit the fun, which is what the theater district and Times Square are all about.


Casually Soul-Satisfying and Tasty
POMODORO is on a roll.
It is riding a wave of popularity at its new Great Neck restaurant, as well as at its Port Washington and Huntington locations.
All three have opened in the last two years.
They have the same ownership, menu and philosophy.
The appealing casual spots offer gargantuan bowls of soul-satisfying pastas and platters of tasty meat and fish at reasonable prices.
All of which means that Pomodoro has its fingers on the pulse of Long Island dining.


Nell Kelly, Dennis Conroy
Helen Alice Kelly, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas V. Kelly of Washington, was married there yesterday to Dennis Eugene Conroy, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Martin F. Conroy of Madison, Conn.
The Rev.
Paul E. Lavin performed the ceremony at St.
Joseph's Roman Catholic Church.
Mrs.
Conroy, 29 years old, is known as Nell.
She is an assistant first-grade teacher at the Milton School in Rye, N.Y.
A graduate of New York University, she was until recently a film and videotape editor in New York.
Her mother, Marguerite Kelly, writes "The Family Almanac," the syndicated newspaper column.
Her father is a reporter for The Washington Times.


Releasing Veterans: Not Just for Economy
In 1976, Charlie Finley tried to sell some of his best players to other teams, but Bowie Kuhn, then the commissioner, wouldn't let him, saying the Oakland Athletics' owner was liquidating the team.
Sixteen years later, teams are trading some of their best players, some admittedly because the players make too much money.
Is this practice questionable?
By shedding star players, are these teams saying they don't care if they win?
Should someone step in?


If You're Thinking of Living in: South Brunswick
ALTHOUGH officially incorporated in 1797, the Middlesex County municipality of South Brunswick has long been a phantom township.
It is fragmented into 10 ZIP codes, all listed under the names of South Brunswick's neighbors or the small unincorporated areas within the township.
"We had to write to map companies a few years ago just to get the name 'South Brunswick' listed," complained Mayor Theodore Cherry.
"The maps would list only the towns and villages that make up our township. Senators and congressmen coming to open factories would call and ask where we were."


NASA Security Problems Focus of F.B.I. Inquiry
At NASA's request, the F.B.I. is investigating potential security problems and criminal activity at its Ames Research Center in Mountain View, Calif., agency spokesmen say.
Officials of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration said Friday that an internal review of security procedures at the California center, which specializes in aeronautics and computer science research, had raised enough concerns to warrant further investigation.


Kimberly Farkas, Forrest Lee Smith
Kimberly Harcleroad Farkas was married yesterday to Forrest Lee Smith.
Justice Joette Katz of the Connecticut Supreme Court performed the ceremony at the Belle Haven Club in Greenwich, Conn.
Mrs.
Smith is the daughter of Carolyn Harcleroad of Montecito, Calif., and John J. Harcleroad of Grayson, Ga.
Her father, now retired, was a partner at Don the Beach Comber International, a former hotel and restaurant chain, in Honolulu.
Her mother is an interior designer in Montecito.


Jane Huddish, Robert Matluck
Jane Donna Huddish, an assistant district attorney in Brooklyn, was married yesterday evening to Robert Michael Matluck, a partner at Unterberg Harris, an investment banking and brokerage firm in Manhattan.
Rabbi Jerry Davidson performed the ceremony at the Metropolitan Club in New York.
Mrs.
Matluck, 26 years old, is a daughter of Mrs.
Ronald Schlossberg of Bedford, N.Y., and Grant Huddish of East Hampton, L.I..
She graduated cum laude from the University of Michigan and received a law degree from Brooklyn Law School.
She is a stepdaughter of Mr.
Schlossberg of Bedford and of Jane Huddish of East Hampton.


Southern Thanksgiving
Edna Lewis, the Virginia-born chef at Gage &amp; Tollner in Brooklyn, giggled soft and rich as an aged bourbon when asked about her Thanksgiving menu.
She bowed her head bashfully, laughing behind the long fingers of her right hand, and said: "Thanksgiving was a Yankee idea, you know, the Pilgrims and Plymouth Rock. In Freetown we just had a dinner."
Turkey dinner?


Jacqueline Eubanks, College Librarian, 54
Jacqueline K. Eubanks, a college librarian, an editor and a proponent of multicultural education, died on Thursday at St.
Vincent's Hospital in Manhattan.
She was 54 years old and lived in Brooklyn.
She died of complications from AIDS, said friends and colleagues at the library at Brooklyn College, where she was on the faculty since 1966.


Duly Noted
To the Editor:
In his discussion of Richard Danielpour's new song cycle, Will Crutchfield wonders whether he might have overlooked other settings of poetry by Rainer Maria Rilke  [ "A 'Musician' in Spite of Himself," Nov. 1 ] .
He has indeed, if he goes beyond the category of solo song.


BUT WHO WON ON LANGUAGE?
For the most part, the Presidential debates consisted of trite and almost predictable rhetoric ("But Who Won on Language?" by William Safire, Oct. 25).
Still, the television stations insisted on providing a needless half-hour analysis afterward.


Looking for Answers


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
THE BIGGEST GAME OF THEM ALL Notre Dame, Michigan State, and the Fall of '66.
By Mike Celizic.
Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.


CRIME
Bless Dorothy Simpson for declining to repudiate the traditional British mystery (to "transcend the genre," in euphemistic critical parlance) and for using her skills instead to enrich its classic puzzle formula.
The story elements in WAKE THE DEAD (Scribners, $19), the 11th of Ms.
Simpson's mysteries to feature her compassionate, pipe-smoking detective, Inspector Luke Thanet, are nothing if not familiar: the tranquil village setting; the charity fete on the grounds of a gracious estate; the sudden death of the family matriarch; the guilty secrets within the Georgian mansion; the dubious will and the cryptic journal notations; the hints of adultery and blackmail; the carefully laid clues, and the surprising denouement.
That the reliable conventions continue to carry this perdurable series says something about the author's mastery of form.
That these conventions also feel fresh says something about her facility for adapting them to modern characters of complex sensibilities, beginning with Thanet himself.
"Murder victims carried in themselves or in their lives the seeds of their own tragic destiny," Thanet says, as he goes about his inquiries into the murder of the manipulative, overbearing mother of a Member of Parliament.
A subtle interviewer with a genius for reading character through his sociable grillings, Thanet represents the best of the old school -- and he is one good reason why his shrewd breed and civilized genre are still flourishing.


Fine Words, but Will They Float?
THINGS are going so darned well at the Aqua Buoy Corporation that the ambitious little company tried to hold its annual meeting earlier than usual this year.
Last Friday was the date promised shareholders in the company's most recent annual report, advanced from January.
But we all know how things get when business is humming along.
"We've been too busy running the business" to organize the shareholders' meeting in time to make Friday's deadline, said Christopher O. Werner, chief financial officer at Aqua Buoy.
Shareholders, no doubt, are wondering exactly what is keeping management so busy.
From a 1992 high of $6.875 on Jan. 15, when new management took over, Aqua Buoy shares had fallen to $2.125 by Friday.
And that despite a flurry of cheery news releases.


Writing About Rape
VIRGIN OR VAMP
How the Press Covers Sex Crimes.
By Helen Benedict. 309 pp.
New York: Oxford University Press.


Cubs Await Life Without Maddux
Contract negotiations between the Chicago Cubs and pitcher GREG MADDUX, the Cy Young Award winner, have reached the "we-can-get-along-without-you-very-well" stage.
General Manager LARRY HIMES said yesterday that the club was beginning a search for other free-agent pitchers and would withdraw its five-year $27.5-million offer to Maddux as soon as one was signed.


Model Trains Roll in Seattle
Scale model and toy trains will clickety-clack around nearly 50 elaborate sets of track at the Pacific Science Center's 19th annual Model Railroad Show in Seattle from Nov. 27 to 29.
Trains will range from turn-of-the-century steam locomotives to modern diesel engines.
The circus train's cars are loaded with elephants, tigers, lions and tamers, and flatcars carry circus wagons.
Some exhibits are museum quality, such as the painted European models by the manufacturer Marklin.
Another display depicts a train yard, complete with a roundhouse where locomotives are repaired.


Clothes With Great Labels, Low Mileage
IT was just a month ago that Ina, a slender downtowner who wears black and goes by her first name only, spotted a "For Rent" sign in an empty SoHo storefront.
"I signed the lease that afternoon," said Ina, who used to represent fashion designers and sell vintage clothes in flea markets.
"I didn't even know what I was going to do with it."
Two weeks later, after a lightning renovation and a whitewash, the dingy former social club opened as Ina, a clothing shop for women and men who consider fashion an art, love labels and don't mind if the goods have been worn previously.


Riley's Pointed Lesson: Thy Team, Not Thy Ego
Sounding much like Bill Clinton, Pat Riley said it was "time for a change" last night, and off to the sideline went that noted Young Republican, Greg Anthony, and two of his cohorts who had been guilty in recent Knicks games of dirty tricks.
Anthony, John Starks and Anthony Mason -- three macho young Knicks -- were unceremoniously benched by Riley as the Knicks broke their three-game losing streak by defeating Shaquille O'Neal and the Orlando Magic, 92-77, at Madison Square Garden.
Deportment an Issue
Riley said this clear flexing of coaching muscle was no big deal.
He wouldn't even call it a benching, calling it a "growth change" and saying they "were just not part of the rotation." But he also admitted that he had been prepared to sacrifice the game, if necessary, rather than go back on his plan to deploy an eight-man rotation that was reduced to seven by Charles Oakley's second-quarter ejection and nearly to six because of Patrick Ewing's second-half foul trouble.


On Vital Bosnia Road, Winter Is a Fierce Foe
High in the Ozren Mountains, heavily laden trucks, tankers and buses were spinning their wheels today on the icy track that links this isolated Muslim town to what remains of Muslim-ruled Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The mountain road between Kakanj and Kladanj, which rises to nearly 5,000 feet among snow-covered pine trees and gorges, is a lifeline for more than 700,000 people in the northeastern region of this former Yugoslav republic.
Without the road, the region would be cut off from food and fuel, and from the weapons and ammunition needed to hold off Serbian nationalist forces seeking to drive Muslims from the region in order to join it to Serbia.


Dear Sears, About Those Interest Rates . . .
To the Editor:
Regarding "Listen Up, Sears" (Letters, Nov. 8): Sears accepts only its own card and the Discover card.
The fact that, in a period when credit card issuers generally are lowering interest rates, Sears continues to charge 21 percent interest on its card for unpaid balances and that its wholly owned Discover card charges 19.8 percent might also have alienated more than a few longtime customers.
It has this one.
RONALD DE PAOLO  Butler, N.J., Nov. 10


Reinstated Gay Sailor Revels in Navy Routine
After months of battling the Navy for the right to continue working, Petty Officer Keith Meinhold has spent the last week triumphantly re-immersing himself in the tedium of his military routine: inspecting the aircraft runway for pebbles, wearing his scratchy wool uniform and re-memorizing every switch and circuit of the P-3 airplane.
At each step of the way, Mr.
Meinhold has felt both protected by his notoriety and burdened by his status as the first member of the armed forces to be reinstated after being discharged for homosexuality.


The Transition: Political Memo; New Tune for Clinton: Sounds of Compromise
As if trading in the saxophone of the election season for a cello, Bill Clinton seems to be modulating the direct and even brassy oratory of his campaign into a Presidential tune.
As a candidate, Mr.
Clinton's task was to distinguish himself as sharply as possible from President Bush.
Listening to him this week on his first trip to Washington as President-elect, it was clear that as President, his aim will be to prevent conflict abroad and build consensus at home so he can concentrate on the economy.


From Ashes of a Feud, A Piece of Beauty
A RECENT discovery at Sotheby's, the auction house, may be about to set the numismatic world on its ear.
It concerns the Saint-Gaudens double eagle $20 gold piece, which was a result of President Theodore Roosevelt's desire to have an American coin that would be as beautiful as those of the ancient Greeks.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
THE LAST GREAT RIDE By Brandon Tartikoff  and Charles Leerhsen.
Turtle Bay/Random House, $21.


Remembering Joyce Kilmer
The Nov. 8 "Jerseyana" article on Joyce Kilmer did not mention the poet's special relationship to the "Fighting 69th." Kilmer chose to enlist in this unit although he himself was not Irish, because of the regiment's unique esprit de corps and its Catholic tradition.
Before his death he wrote several poems dealing with war, death and sacrifice.
"Rouge Bouquet" honors 30 men of the 69th killed when a shell collapsed their dugout.
In his "Prayer of a Soldier," Kilmer offers up his discomfort on a brutal march to the crucified Christ.
Like the Irishman Tom Kettle, he could see the ugly horror of the war and react with compassion instead of cynicism.
THOMAS J. MULLEN JR.
Flemington


Dukes Runs Eagles Into Hall of Fame
Having posted its best record since 1984 and been assured of a bowl berth, Boston College would have been expected to have come into its final regular-season game against an inexperienced and inconsistent Army team today brimming with confidence.
But that was not the case.


Ban This (Only Joking)
NAME: Jimmy Tingle.
IDENTITY: 37-year-old Boston-born stand-up comedian who appears in the British documentary "Damned in the U.S.A.," about the arts in America.
He steals the film, directed by Paul Yule, with his monologues on the controversies surrounding artists and performers like Robert Mapplethorpe, 2 Live Crew and Andres Serrano.


Boitano Is Thinking 1994
He turned professional after winning the gold medal in figure skating at the 1988 Winter Games and had to miss this year's Olympics in Albertville, France, but now that professionals have been declared eligible for the 1994 Games in Lillehammer, Norway, BRIAN BOITANO plans to go for the gold again.
"I'm 95 percent sure I'll be there," he said yesterday.


Sublime Sculptures in a Dubious Setting
It is no wonder that when the idea was first floated for "The Greek Miracle," the show opening here today at the National Gallery of Art, grumbling could be heard throughout the international archeological community.
The idea, endorsed by the Prime Minister of Greece, Constantin Mitsotakis, was to send some of the supreme sculptures in Greek collections from the fifth century B.C. to the United States for the first time.
This meant art from one of the most exalted periods in history, the Classical period, the period of Pericles and Thucydides, Sophocles and Aeschylus, the temple of Zeus at Olympia and the Parthenon in Athens.
The show's slender justification -- the supposed 2,500th anniversary of democracy, based on the election of Kleisthenes as archon of Athens in 508-07 B.C. -- did not disguise the fact that the event was a politically inspired promotion for Greece.
No one would question for an instant the sheer value of seeing sculptures as sublime and moving as these.
The issue from the beginning has been whether the occasion is worthy of the objects.
And discontented archeologists and art historians, who could see the exhibition for what it was, were understandably concerned about risking through travel some of the central monuments of Western civilization on the basis of such an intellectually meager excuse.


Judy Siegel, Roy Markell
Judy Siegel, a daughter of Norman and Ann Siegel of Utica, N.Y., was married there last evening to Roy Markell, the son of Richard and Maxine Markell of New Rochelle, N.Y.
Rabbi Stanley Gerstein performed the ceremony at Temple Beth El.
Ms.
Siegel, who is 27 years old, is keeping her name.
She is an associate at the law firm of Weil, Gotshal &amp; Manges in New York.
She and her husband graduated from the University of Pennsylvania, she cum laude.
They both received law degrees from Boston University.


Father Rabbit
There is something unsettling about the grounds of the Playboy mansion.
It's not the flamingos shedding by the lake.
Or the chicken with a red and navy face.
Or even the dejected-looking albino peacock.
And the enormous cage of -- what else? -- 40 bunnies blinking in the sunlight is no surprise.
It's the distinctly creepy feeling that someone is watching you.
Which he is.
High up in the Gothic stone mansion, right at the topmost turret, Hugh Hefner is perched near his office window, surveying his five and a half acres of home.
He is observing some of his staff of 70 put up a tent for the Los Angeles premiere party for "Hugh Hefner: Once Upon a Time," the David Lynch-Mark Frost documentary on the founder and editor of Playboy magazine.
Five hundred guests have been invited to the mansion to celebrate the life of this direct descendant of William Bradford, a Puritan governor of the Plymouth Colony.
They were coming to pay tribute the man who revolutionized sex in America with the maxim that if sex with emotional involvement is best, sex without emotional involvement is better than none at all.
Invitations to the mansion are mandatory now, a departure from the old days when the party never ended and the doors never closed.
Hugh Marston Hefner is 66 years old, and the new Mrs.
Hefner, Kimberley Conrad, 29, who was the 1989 Playmate of the Year, prefers to play in private.


Commercial Property: Spokane, Wash.; The Mid-80's Boom Arrives in Time for the Mid-90's
WATCHING the downtown core of this isolated city of the inland Northwest spring to life one recent misty morning was like being propelled back to the booming 80's.
Cranes and backhoes were cranking out new buildings.
Noticeably lacking were "For Sale" or "Space Available" signs.
The conversation of local business leaders as they sipped their morning coffee one recent day was about an article in The Spokesman-Review reporting that Class A office space, now about $18 a square foot, had become so scarce that anyone looking for more than 60,000 square feet might be totally out of luck.


In an Ugly Century, a Place For the 'Merely' Beautiful
Jean-Yves Thibaudet's two concert survey of Ravel's piano music, which begins today at the 92d Street Y, is an apt musical counterpart of the Matisse retrospective that is packing them in a few miles across town at the Museum of Modern Art.
The names Matisse and Ravel summon an intensity of color and sensuality unprecedented in the respective art forms.
The painter and the composer, who both sprang to prominence in the first decade of the century, are parallel figures.
The Matisse show has led art historians to re-evaluate the painter's place in 20th-century art.
Similarly, the Ravel recitals may suggest that we revise, if not our idea of the composer's place in 20th-century music, which is probably unshakable, then, more broadly, our concept of music history itself, which is overdue for a shake-up.


Zulu vs. Zulu: Old Stalinist Vs. Chieftain
Harry T. Gwala is a Zulu by ancestry and a Stalinist by reputation.
Of the two labels, he is more comfortable with the second.
"Worse things happened under capitalism than under Stalin," Mr.
Gwala said, wallowing happily in the notoriety that surrounds him as the most belligerent hard-liner in the top ranks of the African National Congress.


For Andrea, a Low Profile and a Stock That Tripled
No analysts follow Andrea Electronics, a defense contractor from Queens, N.Y., that trades on the American Stock Exchange.
And the company won't give details of its patents or its new product, which it says will suppress background noise in phone conversations.
But last week Andrea said a demonstration of the product got an enthusiastic reception from a trade show of pay phone operators, and that some unnamed companies were interested in buying it.
The stock more than tripled, rising $22.125, to close Friday at $31.125, on volume for the week that exceeded the 508,272 shares outstanding.


NOV. 15-21: Referendum Defeat; Panama's Leader Loses The Expectations Game
Panama's economy is growing rapidly and its people are better off than those in most of Latin America.
So how to explain the Government's embarrassing defeat in a constitutional referendum last Sunday?
In part it reflects a tradition in which Latin Americans expect presidents to be involved in solving everybody's problems, or at least to talk passionately about them.
With the United States perceived as the father of the laissez-faire presidency of Guillermo Endara, the new Administration in Washington can't ignore his weakened status without seeming to avoid the responsibility tacitly assumed with the 1989 American invasion.


Right Sandpaper Smooths the Way
VIRTUALLY all home-repair and improvement projects involving wood also involve smoothing it.
But smoothing wood can be as much a question of choosing the right materials or tools as using the right technique.
Sandpaper probably comes to mind first as the material of choice.
For use on broad flat areas, it often is the easiest way to achieve good results.
When choosing sandpaper, consider the grade or relative coarseness, the type of abrasive and the density of particle coverage.


When Uptown Looks Down
Some theater is beyond easy description and takes in more than Harold Pinter or one acts by Edward Albee.
For instance, there is "The Sheik of Avenue B," which opens tonight at Town Hall.
Can it be a Jewish show that is not quite a Jewish show?
Can "Rosie Rosenblatt, Stop the Turkey Trot," which drew no mass protests in 1911, or "Cohen Owes Me $97," a 1915 lament by the immigrant lad Irving Berlin, have Relevance in the 1990's, when Relevance has become the wardrobe in which theater enjoys cloaking itself?
Not easy questions.
Its producers describe "The Sheik" as a "new Jewish ragtime and jazz-era comedy musical revue." It has more than two dozen songs, mostly inspired by the Lower East Side immigrant masses during the century's early decades.
It has a cast of eight, who perform almost entirely in English.
And its composers include not only the immortal Berlin, but Bert Kalmar, Harry Ruby, Billy Rose, Harry Von Tilzer and even Milton Berle.


More Bureaucrats Won't Cut Health Costs; A Clinton Contradiction
President-elect Clinton promises to fix America's ruinously expensive health care system with managed competition.
That's absolutely the right idea.
Managed competition would encourage the use of large health maintenance organizations -- and force them to compete.
That's the way to preserve quality and control costs without having to hire an army of bureaucrats.
Mr. Clinton, meet Mr. Clinton.
Almost without pausing for breath, the President-elect also promises something else, ominously contradictory.
Government, he says, should control costs by setting a limit on total health expenditures, what he calls a global budget,
enforced with price controls.


Jaime I. Berman, David E. Matyas
Mr. and Mrs.
Roger Berman of New Rochelle, N.Y., have announced March wedding plans for their daughter Jaime Ilene Berman and David Evan Matyas, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Martin Matyas of Dallas.
Ms.
Berman, 24 years old, is an account executive at the International Management Group, a sports-marketing company in New York.
She and her fiance graduated from the University of Pennsylvania.
Her father is a partner in Bloom &amp; Streit, an accounting firm in New Rochelle.
Her mother, Helaine Berman, teaches second grade at the Ward School there.


Lean Budget Prevails, With Many Taking The Credit
DEMOCRATS applauded Andrew P. O'Rourke's proposed 1993 budget last week, which for the second straight year calls for no increase in the property-tax levy, a fiscally conservative plan they claim to have initiated.
The $1.2 billion spending plan, only 2 percent higher than the current budget, contains few new programs or cutbacks and no layoffs or salary increases.
Although he called his proposal "extremely tight," Mr.
O'Rourke said the plan preserves the recreational and cultural "quality of life" programs that have so often felt the budgetary ax.


'SO HOW DID I GET HERE?'
Rosemary L. Bray's account of her experiences on welfare was inspiring (" 'So How Did I Get Here?' " Nov. 8).
But while she accuses those who now question the success of entitlement programs as demonizing black women, she seems to be doing something similar to black men.
Bray talks about her father as "one of the shadow men," a "failed patriarch" who did more harm than good.
I agree with her that the Aid to Families with Dependent Children program was an important feministbreakthrough, allowing women and their children for the first time to survive without husbands.
But I fear that our policies -- and, worse, our attitudes -- have gone too far in the other direction.


Basic Training
When the dancer-choreographer Twyla Tharp was a child, she was expected to follow a rigorous regime.
In her autobiography, "Push Comes to Shove," which will be published by Bantam Books tomorrow, she recalls those early days.
Mother gauged the quality of my education by my grades, and if I received less than an A minus, the teacher was considered "possibly inept" and would be closely watched.
If I continued to slip, Mother pulled the plug, once actually marching into class, pronouncing the mathematics instruction inadequate, and yanking me out of the class then and there.


Cruises Both Warm and Cool
Cruise options next year for vacationers willing and able to splurge include an expedition through the Northwest Passage and a trip in the Mediterranean aboard a yacht described as the largest ever built.
The American Museum of Natural History's Northwest Passage voyage is scheduled to depart from Provideniya, Russia, on July 19 and end at Resolute Bay, Canada, on Aug. 5, following the 1906 route of Roald Amundsen, the Norwegian explorer.
The vessel will be the 112-passenger icebreaker Kapitan Khlebnikov, and travelers will be accompanied by a team of lecturers from the museum.
The passengers will have use of helicopters and Zodiac landing craft to see polar bears, beluga whales and musk ox.
Fares range from $9,950 to $19,950 a person in double occupancy.
Air fare is extra, and is figured at $1,500 from the East Coast.
Participants do not need to be members of the museum.
More information from Discovery Tours, a division of the museum, Central Park West at 79th Street, New York, N.Y. 10024; (212) 769-5700 or (800) 462-8687.


Inefficient Soviet Economy Halted Cold War; U-2 Saved the Peace
To the Editor:
George F. Kennan, in asserting that the U-2 represented the militarization of United States cold war policy (Op-Ed, Oct. 28), ignores that in the late 1950's hard intelligence developed from U-2 flights over the Soviet Union tended to discourage an acceleration of the arms race.
U-2 photographs contradicted fears of a bomber and missile gap and convinced American policy makers that the United States enjoyed strategic superiority over the Soviet Union.


Tech Notes; Bubble, Bubble, Less Soil and Trouble
What can a washing machine learn from a seltzer bottle?
More, perhaps, than you might think.
While technology has rapidly remade so many products, washing machines have basically just kept spinning along the same old way.
But the Sharp Corporation has a different idea.
The Japanese company is selling a novel washing machine that uses scrubbing bubbles and an advanced computer to get clothes cleaner while economizing on water.


Philharmonia Virtuosi Is Going to the Movies
THERE seems to be a rush to perform concerts before Thanksgiving, making today one of the busiest Sundays of the year.
At 2:30 P.M.
St.
Andrew's Episcopal Church in Hartsdale offers a recital by the New Piano Trio, consisting of the violinist Michael Roth, the cellist Marjorie Borgia and the pianist Janet Sussman Gartner.
The three Westchester artists (residents, respectively, of Scarsdale, White Plains and Mamaroneck) have chosen works by Haydn, Prokofiev and Dvorak.
In addition, the Elegy from Messiaen's "Quartet for the End of Time" will be played in tribute to President Kennedy, who was assassinated on Nov. 22 in 1963.
There are two numbers to call for further information: 698-2207 or 946-7931.


Down a Tantalizing Yellow Brick Road With Paul Taylor
Considering that dance, as the adage goes, can express what words cannot, it came as a surprise that singing took pride of place in the Paul Taylor Dance Company's recent season.
Mr.
Taylor's new and controversial "Oz" ends with the heroine vocalizing on stage.
"Company B," the choreographer's mega-hit from last year, proclaims its subject in a subtitle, "Songs Sung by the Andrews Sisters." Although they are heard on recordings, these songs are not a mere accompaniment.
Mr.
Taylor, moreover, does not illustrate them; he interprets them.
In these two highly divergent works, Mr.
Taylor is stretching conventional wisdom about the essence of dance as the art of the ineffable.
As Isadora Duncan supposedly said, "If I could write it, I wouldn't have to dance it."


Streetscapes: 655 Park Avenue; Letting the Sunlight In
CONTRACTORS doing facadework are temporarily disassembling one of the parapet walls at 655 Park Avenue, on the east side of Park between 67th and 68th Streets.
It's just a few feet off the top, but it gives west side residents a little bit more morning light.
And that's just the way they like it, since 655 was built in 1924 after West Side owners bought the site and restricted buildings to half the normally permitted height.


POSTINGS: Housing Court Biased?; Landlords' Suit Revived
Reviving its long-held assertion that the city's Housing Court favors tenants, a landlords' group last week filed suit in Federal District Court charging the court with a bias against them.
The court papers reopened a suit first brought in 1989 that asserted that Housing Court was systematically unfair to property owners.
Last year the Rent Stabilization Association, which is the main lobbying group for the owners of rent-regulated apartments and a plaintiff, agreed to a suspension of the suit when a series of court-approved administrative changes designed to improve operations in Housing Court were introduced.


THE TRANSITION: The New Team People in Line for Jobs: The 'Short List' Grows
Sam Nunn, Lloyd Bentsen and Bill Bradley are all prominent pieces in Washington's favorite puzzle these days, and it is not necessarily because they are all members of the United States Senate.
They are on The List, an ever-lengthening compilation of names of the people who are rumored to be under consideration to join President-elect Bill Clinton's Cabinet.


Gas on the Crown Heights Fire
My heart goes out to the Rosenbaum family -- I could give you a thousand reasons why.
They lost a member of the family, and that's a hurting experience.
I lost a brother.
These healing words from a young juror are a welcome contrast to the venom that has filled the air since Lemrick Nelson Jr. was acquitted in the killing of Yankel Rosenbaum during a mob riot in Crown Heights two summers ago.
The juror, Leslie King, offered wise and soothing counsel to a city whose citizens sometimes seem determined to keep throwing gas on the fires lit by the murder and subsequent acquittal.


Revolutionary! Patriots Win Again
The last time the Patriots played the Jets, New England's left tackle, Pat Harlow, argued with his offensive linemate Eugene Chung and rearranged some of the furniture in the visitors' locker room at Giants Stadium during halftime.
The Patriots lost that game, 30-21, back on Oct. 4.
Over the next few weeks they lost their head coach, Dick MacPherson, who has missed two games after colon surgery.
They also lost their best offensive lineman, tackle Bruce Armstrong, to a knee injury, and they lost their starting quarterback, Hugh Millen, and the backup, Tommy Hodson, to injuries.
But under second-year quarterback Scott Zolak, an enthusiastic spark, the Patriots (2-9) have won two straight games.


Still at Odds Over the Homeless
The courts and City Hall are like an old married couple locked in a destructive relationship: for a decade, they have squabbled about how to care for New York City's homeless, each pointing a finger at the other for the claptrap shelter system they have built together.
The latest act in this wearying, if vital, drama played out on Friday in the Manhattan courtroom of Justice Helen E. Freedman of State Supreme Court.
She had just taken the unprecedented step of holding four individual city officials in contempt of court for allowing hundreds of homeless families to sleep in filthy, overcrowded city offices.


When Hostetler Goes Down, Giants Give Rookie the Call
Ever since Jeff Hostetler suffered damaged ribs in Denver a week ago, Kent Graham, the Giants' rookie quarterback out of Ohio State, suspected that he might be playing against the Philadelphia Eagles today at Giants Stadium.
"I knew if Hoss took a lot of hits," Graham said, "I'd probably have to go in."


Corrections
An article on Nov. 6 about the influence that Gov.
Bill Clinton's election was having on life in Washington misidentified an owner of Chapters Bookstore there.
She is Terri Merz.


Telling Shocking Tales in Trenton
Just like a lot of newspaper publishers, H. L. (Sandy) Schwartz 3d keeps framed copies of memorable front pages on his office wall.
He pointed to one from his first week on the job in 1989: "Severed Head in Hopewell."
"That one was seminal," Mr.
Schwartz said.
"I wrote it myself. The reporter quit after it ran."


Review/Dance; The Birds and Elders Wild, the Youth Melancholy
The Washington Ballet resembles a fine chamber-music ensemble.
With 16 regular members and 3 apprentice dancers, it is not a large company.
But, like chamber-music players, these dancers have established a remarkable rapport with one another, as was evident when they appeared on Tuesday night at the Performing Arts Center of the State University College here.
The credit for maintaining this high level of performance surely goes to Mary Day, the Washington Ballet's artistic director, and the staff she has assembled.
The present professional company, which was founded in 1976, is the outgrowth of various school and nonprofessional groups Miss Day has headed since the 1950's.
Miss Day is nationally known as a teacher, and among her distinguished former students is Kevin McKenzie, the new director of American Ballet Theater.


Churchill Journal; Social Season for Bears: Not in the Kitchen, Please
November is polar bear season in Churchill, a town of 800 on the gray and rocky western shores of Hudson Bay.
One of the town's busiest men is Laury Brouzes, keeper of the bear jail.
"My job is to protect people from bears and bears from people," he said early one recent morning while inspecting traps around the dump where the now ravenous bears, the largest nonaquatic carnivores on earth, prowl.


Welfare Can't Be Reformed in a Social Vacuum; Senator Off-to-Work
To the Editor:
Daniel Patrick Moynihan, writing in "A Landmark for Families" (Op-Ed, Nov. 16), should know that his welfare reform goal, "Two years and off to work," has a long history.
Since the enactment of the Elizabethan Poor Law of 1601, governments in Europe and North America have struggled to subject the poor to the wholesome discipline of the labor market.
Welfare reform has never worked.
The poor are still with us, dependent in one way or another because of their poverty.


Europe's Currencies Wobble On
By devaluing the Spanish and Portuguese currencies early this morning, the European Community eased some immediate strains on its embattled monetary system, but the action did nothing to address the underlying financial problem afflicting Europe -- Germany's continuing insistence on keeping its interest rates high.
With most of the Continent in the economic doldrums, Germany's rates have cast a pall over hopes for economic recovery any time soon.


Israel's Roads Make Driving Hazardous
To the Editor:
Your Nov. 10 news article on relatively high traffic fatalities in Israel mostly blames Israeli drivers.
I believe that conclusion is wrong.


Abroad at Home;   When Truth Is Buried
The civil war in El Salvador is over now, a political settlement taking hold.
Americans hardly remember when the Reagan Administration called the leftist rebels a critical threat to our national security.
But the American role in El Salvador did damage to our institutions and our honor that remains unrepaired.
So we are reminded by a recent turn in an appalling piece of history.


With Nuts and Bolts, Trade Pact Is Struck
A daring gamble by the United States and a last-minute proposal by the European Community helped forge the compromise on farm subsidies reached on Friday.
The gamble: seek smaller cuts in Europe's subsidized grain exports but require a new method of calculating them.
The Europeans asked to plant more oilseed for industrial uses.
When both sides agreed, the deal was struck.


Sports of The Times; Hectic, And Even More, Humiliating
DURING the week, Pepper Johnson, the philosopher of the Meadowlands, had predicted that "if things start getting hectic, you'll see something."
Seldom has any philosopher, or any prognosticator, been more correct.


Classical Music in Review
Sergiu Luca, Violinist Kathryn Bache Miller Theater Morningside Heights
Sergiu Luca's performances and recordings often show as much concern for the way works are juxtaposed as for individual interpretations.
On Wednesday evening, he probed a few of the boundaries of the violin fantasy, first looking at works composed in this century by William Bolcom, Arnold Schoenberg and Curtis Curtis-Smith, and then leaping back to Schubert's 1827 Fantasia in C (D. 934) after the intermission.


THE TRANSITION: Energy Policy; CLINTON TO REVAMP ENERGY DEPT. ROLE
President-elect Bill Clinton is prepared to give the Department of Energy a dominant role in his efforts to marry the goals of creating jobs, making industry more efficient and reducing environmental damage, transition advisers say.
Those working on the plans say they reflect Mr.
Clinton's desire to transform a bureaucracy largely ignored for most of the Reagan-Bush years into an aggressive player in integrating environmental goals into economic policy.


Big, Bad Seles Prevails and Navratilova Cries 'Wolf'
After a merely mortal 36-year-old Martina Navratilova was pounded into submission by an 18-year-old phenomenon who wears a double-decker hairdo and keeps a double grip on her racquet, the loser referred to the winner as a "big, bad wolf."
This was a compliment.
Monica Seles, who used her special brand of radar to create a demoralizing new shot, the service-return ace, and who blithely splashed the sidelines with sonic winners, secured her third consecutive Virginia Slims Championships title yesterday, winning by 7-5, 6-3, 6-1.


Treasury to Sell Bills and Notes This Week
The Treasury financings this Thanksgiving-shortened week includes the regular auction of new three- and six-month bills normally held each Monday and on the same day an auction of new two-year notes.
Tomorrow the Government will auction a new five-year note.
Traders said that by late in the day Friday, the rate on the three-month bill outstanding was 3.19 percent and on the six-month bill, 3.38 percent.
In when-issued trading the new two-year note was being offered at a price to yield 4.69 percent and the five-year at a price to yield 6.09 percent.


Fujimori Winning Both Peruvian Votes, Counts Show
A survey of voters leaving polling places today showed strong backing for President Alberto K. Fujimori's candidates for a Congress that will rewrite the Peruvian Constitution.
Early and unofficial vote tallies also indicated that Mr.
Fujimori had won a legislative majority.


Luring Letterman Is a Matter of Time and Money
David Letterman's list of the top 10 reasons to consider quitting NBC for a different late-night home will probably contain just two.
Who pays him how much. And who lets him appear at 11:30 P.M.


Review/Music; 10,000 Maniacs' Folk-Rock as Something to Dance To
Stately, medium-tempo folk-rock is dance music now.
At least it was when 10,000 Maniacs performed on Friday night at the Paramount.
As Natalie Merchant, the Maniacs' singer and lyricist, twirled and skipped gawkily around the stage, an audience dominated by high school and college women flooded the aisles and swayed to songs about, among other things, unwanted pregnancy ("Eat for Two"), leaving a marriage ("Jezebel"), child abuse ("What's the Matter Here?"), depression ("Like the Weather") and, now and then, hope ("These Are Days").
"Everybody calm down just for a minute," Ms.
Merchant said before sitting at a keyboard to play "Noah's Dove." "I have to hear what I'm doing."
The band is an unlikely choice for rock's neo-hippie wing.
Although Jerome Augustyniak on drums and Steven Gustafson on bass can sock out a steady groove, Rob Buck's guitar and Dennis Drew's keyboards usually cushion Ms.
Merchant's self-possessed voice instead of supplying additional rhythm for dancing.
The touring band included an additional keyboardist, a violinist and a horn section of two saxophones and trombone.
The horn section punched up older tunes like "Hey Jack Kerouac" and the new "Few and Far Between."


Robert S. Jenkins, 71, Recruiting Executive
Robert Spurgeon Jenkins, a retired managing partner and director of Eastman &amp; Beaudine, a New York management recruiting company, died on Thursday in a hospital in Greenville, S.C.
He was 71 years old and lived in Salem, S.C.
He died of pneumonia at Greenville Memorial Hospital, said his daughter, Roberta Jenkins Dias.


Becker's Birthday Bash Is No Fun for Courier
They hung their adoring banners and sang "Happy Birthday" to Boris Becker with clear, strong voices.
The people of Frankfurt finally had their local hero.
Three years ago, the deep pockets of the German television companies convinced the newly created ATP Tour to move its year-end championships here from New York.
But for the first two years, German fans could only sit politely and watch young Americans -- first Andre Agassi, then Pete Sampras -- blast their way to victory in the elegant Festhalle.


THE TRANSITION: The President-Elect; Easing Friction, Clinton Meets With Jackson


Review/Dance; A Kirov Star Bows At City Ballet
Igor Zelensky, a principal dancer with the Kirov Ballet who has joined the New York City Ballet for the fall-winter season, made his debut with the company on Friday night and passed a difficult test with fluttering colors.
There was, in fact, no grandiose baptism by fire and had Mr.
Zelensky's reputation as a powerhouse prodigy not preceded him, he might have been mistaken as a member of the company in a routine assignment.


Spain's Tamed Civil Guard: Friend of Wildlife
A failed coup attempt in 1981, in which it played a leading role, gave the paramilitary Civil Guard of Spain a serious image problem, but today it is winning nothing but praise for its crackdown on the illegal trade in endangered species.
The picturesque caped uniforms and three-cornered patent leather black hats of the Civil Guard went out a decade ago and its forces, 60,000 strong, now wear more mundane olive green as they pursue missions ranging from fighting terrorists and drug traffickers to traffic patrol.


Accounts
*
Lotte U.S.A., Wilmette, Ill., to Bayer Bess Vanderwarker, Chicago, to handle Koala Yummies, a line of cookies previously handled in house.
Billings were estimated at $5 million. *
Church &amp; Dwight, Princeton, N.J., to NCI Advertising Inc., New York, as the first agency to handle its Arm &amp; Hammer Dental Care toothpaste's professional advertising account.
Billings were estimated at $2 million.


Brian Lasser Composer, 40
Brian Lasser, a composer and lyricist of Off Broadway shows and a director and musical arranger for cabaret acts, died on Friday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 40 years old.
Mr. Lasser died of AIDS, said Karen Mason, a singer and his longtime partner.


Joann Thompson, 59, Health-Care Advocate
Joann Thompson, a New York City health-care advocate and an advocate for social and religious causes, died on Thursday at St.
Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital Center in Manhattan.
She was 59 years old and lived in Manhattan.
She died after a short illness, friends said.


METRO DIGEST
WORKING WITH AIDS
As more people live longer and stay healthier because of advances in the treatment of the AIDS virus, many are trying to hold on to jobs.
Some work despite symptoms of illness because they have no choice -- they need the income or the health insurance benefits.
But many others work as long as they can for the vitality, camaraderie and sense of self-worth a job can provide.
What these workers are finding in the workplace varies greatly.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY  CUNY FAILS TO PUT JEFFRIES FIGHT BEHIND
When Dr.
Leonard Jeffries Jr. was removed last spring as head of City College's black studies department for his racially charged remarks about blacks and Jews, trustees of the City University of New York thought they had bought peace for the department by replacing him with Dr.
Edmund W. Gordon, a mild-mannered scholar.
But after four months on the job, Dr.
Gordon is struggling to steer a department that appears paralyzed by the controversy over Dr.
Jeffries.
A1.


Dance in Review
Danza Azteca de Anahuac
Triplex Theater TriBeCa
Ancient dance of other cultures tends to be so unrushed and unself-conscious that it provides an extra challenge to those who live with the hectic pace and instant gratification of life and the arts in New York City.
At first, Danza Azteca de Anahuac was rough going on Friday night, despite the gentle welcome of Guillarmo Chavez Rosette, the spokesman for this five-member troupe from Taos, N.M.
There was a great deal to absorb in the beautiful beading, embroidery and brilliant colors of the handmade costumes, as well as the huge feather headdresses and anklets of shells and little bells.
There were hand-painted hangings, a circle of ritual objects, particularly pungent incense and fascinating traditional instruments made of everything from butterfly cocoons to turtle shells and turkey bones.


Phyllis Goodman, Narendar Berry
Phyllis L. Goodman was married yesterday in Albuquerque, N.M., to Narendar G. Berry.
Rabbi Lynn Gottlieb performed the ceremony at Stephen's Restaurant.
Mrs.
Goodman Berry, who graduated from Cornell University, was until recently the associate vice president of communications and public affairs at St.
Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital Center in New York.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Bernard J. Goodman of Boynton Beach, Fla.


Gordon Hill; Accountant, 99
Gordon Hill, a former partner with the accounting firm of Haskins &amp; Sells and a golf official, died on Wednesday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 99 years old.
He died of cancer, said Malverne Hill, a nephew.


Shari Goldman, Robert S. Alter
Shari Goldman, the daughter of Harriet and Jerome Goldman of Aventura, Fla., was married there yesterday to Dr.
Robert S. Alter, a son of Judith Kallman of Rye, N.Y., and the late Howard Alter.
Rabbi Gilbert Klaperman performed the ceremony at the Aventura Turnberry Jewish Center.
Mrs.
Alter, 25 years old, is an interior designer at Empire Office Equipment, a furniture dealer in New York.
She graduated from Queens College.
Her father is a lawyer in New York and Aventura.


Back to Roots For Monopoly
For fans of Monopoly, Grey Advertising has a suggestion for a new Chance or Community Chest card: "Erect a billboard on Boardwalk."
The agency has put up an outdoor sign with an oversized portion of the game's familiar board at the Ocean One Mall at Boardwalk and Arkansas Avenue in Atlantic City.
A large red arrow on the sign, which is 20 feet by 60 feet, reads "You are here," pointing to the Boardwalk space on the board.
A giant mock pair of dice, rolled to an "8," rest on the adjacent "Luxury Tax Pay $75" space.


Memorial to Police Officers Slain in Union County, N.J.


As H.I.V. Patients Stay at Work, Problems, and Solutions, Emerge
Jason Worth, a Housing Court judge in Brooklyn who is infected with H.I.V., comes to work only one day a week because of fatigue and because he wants to avoid the risk of exposure to diseases like tuberculosis from the dozens of people who come through his courtroom every day.
But the 42-year-old judge recently asked state court officials to allow him to use a telephone equipped with a television screen so he could handle settlement conferences from home.
Working, he says, is as crucial to staying alive as any precaution he can take to protect his health.


Classical Music in Review
Robert White, Tenor  Alice Tully Hall
Robert White is New York's best Irish tenor and over the next few months he is offering three retrospective recitals ranging from plainchant to Broadway.
In the first of them on Wednesday night, Mr.
White sounded a little frailer than he has in recent years, but information like this misses the point of how he works.
For this is a musicality built not on stentorian brilliance but on intimate contact.
The communications are as much verbal as musical.
The words, clear and focused, issue first out of his mouth; the sounds that couch them cling like a lovely aftertaste.
The evening's demanding moment was Mozart's "Il mio tesoro" from "Don Giovanni." Mr.
White made it too slight for the opera stage; yet the long breath was managed very well and public declamation was turned to passion privately professed.


Dividend Meetings
Following is a partial list of dividend meetings for the week of Nov. 23: MONDAY  Beckman Intrs Detroit Edison Gap Hartford Steam Boiler San Diego G&amp;E United Illum TUESDAY  Angelica Bre Pptys Brush Wellman Burnham Pat Pptys Century Tel Enterprises Connecticut Nat Gas DQE Ipalco Enterprises Kellwood Morgan Keegan New England Elec Sys Unifirst Corp Mass Westvaco WEDNESDAY  Bairnco Pennsylvania P&amp;L Philip Morris


A Movie Producer Remembers The Human Side of Malcolm X
The film "Malcolm X" is, as everyone knows, the creation of Spike Lee.
But it has also been the 25-year obsession of Marvin Worth.
Mr.
Worth, the producer of the movie, said this morning that the box-office grosses for the film's first few days had left him stunned.
"Malcolm X," which stars Denzel Washington, opened on Wednesday to generally positive reviews.
It was expected to gross about $10 million over the weekend.
The film came in third at the box office, after "Home Alone 2," which grossed a huge $30 million, and "Bram Stoker's 'Dracula,' " with about $15 million.


Classical Music in Review
Sergiu Luca, Violinist Kathryn Bache Miller Theater Morningside Heights
Sergiu Luca's performances and recordings often show as much concern for the way works are juxtaposed as for individual interpretations.
On Wednesday evening, he probed a few of the boundaries of the violin fantasy, first looking at works composed in this century by William Bolcom, Arnold Schoenberg and Curtis Curtis-Smith, and then leaping back to Schubert's 1827 Fantasia in C (D. 934) after the intermission.


EUROPEANS DELAY PLAN TO ABOLISH PASSPORT CHECKS
While the European Community is on course to become the world's largest customs-free market on Jan. 1, the plan to allow people to travel between the 12 nations without ever showing a passport has been quietly postponed.
Britain and Denmark are strongly opposed to removing passport controls at their borders, Ireland is tied to Britain's regulations and several other governments are demanding tighter controls to keep out illegal immigrants, criminals and terrorists.


Syria Links a Troop Pullout to Political Changes in Lebanon
Syria said today that it would not withdraw its troops from Lebanon until this country completes promised political changes, including the scrapping of the 49-year-old system of distributing Government posts along religious lines.
"The redeployment of the Syrian Army in Lebanon is contingent on the implementation of reforms provided for under the Taif pact," the Syrian Vice President, Abdel Halim Khaddam, said in a statement published in Beirut today.
"The cancellation of the confessional formula is the most important part of the reforms." Anniversary of Independence
The Taif agreement, named for the Saudi city where it was reached in 1989, was an important element in ending Lebanon's civil war.
It called for Parliamentary parity between Muslims and Christians and reapportioned some of the powers of the top posts in the Lebanese Government, increasing the importance of the prime minister at the expense of the president.
But it preserved a system that reserved the presidency for a Maronite Catholic and the prime minister's post for a Sunni Muslim.


Welfare Can't Be Reformed in a Social Vacuum; Support, Don't Punish
To the Editor:
"Campuses Buck Clinton on Welfare" (The Week in Review, Oct. 25) reports on a national social work teach-in, in which more than 200 schools in more than 40 states organized activities to inform themselves and their communities about "welfare" and efforts to "reform" the program for single mothers and their children, and to let the next President know that social workers want more supportive, rather than more punitive, policies for women and children on welfare.
But your headline misses the point of our protest: the negative impact on women, children and families of 12 years of social program cuts by Presidents Reagan and Bush.


Essay; Foreign Service Scandal
All last week, the Foreign Service Officer establishment was huffing indignantly at the way political appointees of George Bush had abused State Department procedures.
Lusting to find dirt in Bill Clinton's passport files, these pols ran roughshod over Foreign Service professionals.
"Heinous," cried Acting Secretary Larry Eagleburger, long the department's ranking F.S.O.
Yes, James Baker and his aides had guilty knowledge of an improper search.
Frankly, to expect a campaign chief to call off a search for a document that would have changed the result of an election is to presume a degree of ethical purity rare in politics, but let us stipulate that State's political appointees grossly abused their governmental power.


Helping Remake Manhattan Through a Mastery of the Arcane
Samuel H. Lindenbaum, both renowned and derided for his talent at steering real-estate developments through New York City's Byzantine regulatory mazes, has been busy.
As Donald J. Trump's lawyer, he negotiated through most of last weekend with the City Council to get its approval for Mr.
Trump's giant Upper West Side development.
His hope is that the deal he is helping fashion will pass the relevant City Council committees today and tomorrow.
If all goes well, he expects final approval by Dec. 17.
"I'm wondering whether I'm going to get post-partum blues," he said of a project he has now shepherded for years.


Jets' No-Way Offense Gets in Team's Way In Loss to Patriots
After a stretch of four games in which they played like a team on the rise, the Jets crashed here this afternoon, losing by 24-3 to New England, a team that just last week won its first game of the season.
The Jets' offense was as waterlogged as the rainsoaked 27,642 fans at Foxboro Stadium and their defense was shellshocked in the first half.
It was inexplicable. It was frustrating. It was bad.


THE TRANSITION: The President-Elect; Easing Friction, Clinton Meets With Jackson
In what may be a first step to patch things up after a year of mutual distrust, the Rev.
Jesse Jackson offered more praise for President-elect Bill Clinton today than he ever did during the campaign.
Sitting side by side in a front pew at the church where Mr.
Jackson came to preach a guest sermon, the two men chatted like comfortable old friends, and in the sermon Mr.
Jackson welcomed Mr.
Clinton's victory as one of "inclusion over exclusion."


Welfare Can't Be Reformed in a Social Vacuum; Restoring Incentive
To the Editor:
It was heartening to read in "An Answer to the Welfare Trap" (editorial, Nov. 8) about New York State's welfare experiment to encourage work by exempting a significant portion of a parent's earnings until they reach self-sufficiency.


France Asks Other Nations To Rally Round Its Position
Recalling pointedly that France has often helped other European nations out of tight spots, Prime Minister Pierre Beregovoy today urged European Community governments to close ranks around France in its opposition to a new farm trade agreement between the community and the United States.
But he also for the first time acknowledged that, as a last resort, France might use its right of veto over the accord negotiated by members of the community's executive commission on behalf of the 12-nation bloc.


Corrections
A brief article on Nov. 12 about a lawsuit seeking to end the Government's ban on interviewing refugees at Guantanamo Bay Naval Base in Cuba misidentified a plaintiff, and a correction in this space on Nov. 13 also misstated its name.
The plaintiff is Fairness and Accuracy in Reporting, a group that monitors news coverage, not Accuracy in Media, another such group.


Kean Finally Lands in Winner's Circle
There was sadness at Seton Hall in South Orange, N.J., yesterday when the Pirates were eliminated by Dartmouth in the Division I soccer tournament but elation at Kean College down the road when the Cougars captured the title in Division III.
Kean's 3-1 triumph over Ohio Wesleyan yesterday at Union, N.J., gave the Cougars their first national title in any team sport in the history of the school, which was founded in 1855 and maintains 12 varsity sports.


Yankee Ingenuity Wins Out in PC's
Fujitsu Ltd. would seem in an ideal position to become a dominant player in the booming portable computing market.
The world's fifth-largest chip maker, Fujitsu is adept at precisely what the Japanese microelectronics companies are supposed to be best at: miniaturizing each new generation of computer parts and packaging it elegantly for the consumer market.
But at the vast Comdex/Fall trade show in Las Vegas, Nev., last week, Fujitsu had very little new to offer in the way of portable computers.
And the same was true for other Japanese computer makers.
Indeed, in a startling reversal of the technology trend in recent years, the action in mobile computing was all American.


Review/Music; Many Surprises, Mostly Unpleasant, At Multi-Act Rap Show
Hip-hop fans are used to mistreatment.
They've learned to expect extended waits at the door for weapons searches, short sets, long delays between performers and mysteriously vanishing headliners.
The rap show on Saturday night at the Ritz offered all those and more.
It was a promising bill, with the first local appearances by Public Enemy and by Ice-T since the elections.
Public Enemy's main concerns are political, and while Ice-T is largely a storyteller, his stories touch on racial and political tensions, as he found when his heavy-metal song "Cop Killer" was forced out of print by police protests.
But Ice-T didn't perform on Saturday night, and the set that Public Enemy started at 2 A.M., cursing "the promoter" and the Ritz, was not the group's best moment.


Useful Junkets A Timely Briefing on Vietnam
Frivolous "fact-finding" trips to jet-set spas have given Congressional junkets a bad name.
But more serious missions can make constructive contributions to policy.
Last week, two groups of Congressional fact-finders offered useful prods to a Presidency in transition -- one on Vietnam, the other on the Balkans.
Members of the Senate Select Committee on P.O.W.-M.I.A.
Affairs will report to President Bush this week on their trip to Vietnam.
Part of their mission was to deliver a letter from the President to Vietnamese leaders.
Reportedly, the letter indicated that continued Vietnamese cooperation on M.I.A. issues could bring an end to the long U.S. economic embargo as soon as next month.


People
*
Harriet Goodman was named to the new post of direct marketing supervisor at Mezzina/Brown Inc., New York, overseeing the agency's integrated direct-marketing functions.
She had been an account supervisor at Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Direct, New York. *
David S. Levine and William Yamada were named to the new positions of senior vice presidents and creative directors at Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Advertising, New York.
Mr.
Levine previously held a similar position at D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles, New York.
Mr.
Yamada was previously executive vice president and creative director at Wells Rich Greene BDDP , New York.


Susan Gable, Forrest Sussman
Susan Ann Gable, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Sidney Gable of Wyncote, Pa., was married yesterday to Forrest Michael Sussman, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Gary Sussman of Delray Beach, Fla.
Rabbi Elliot Holin performed the ceremony at the Rittenhouse Hotel in Philadelphia.


Turbulent Sky, Tranquil City


Helaine Ettinger and Henry Bloom
Rabbi Helaine Ettinger of the Jewish Congregation of Kinnelon, N.J., was married yesterday to Henry Bloom, a product manager at the Ciba-Geigy pharmaceuticals company in Summit, N.J.
Rabbi Lawrence Hoffman performed the ceremony at the bride's congregation.
Mrs.
Bloom, 30 years old, graduated from Princeton University and was ordained by the Hebrew Union College-Jewish Institute of Religion.
She is a daughter of Howard and Ella Ettinger of New York.
Her father, who is retired, was the president of Cleaners 57, which operates two dry-cleaning stores in New York.
Her mother, also retired, was the director of occupational therapy at the Kessler Institute of Rehabilitation in West Orange, N.J.


Review/Pop; A Brazilian Singer Sends An Environmental Message
In fantasy, Brazil appears as a tropical paradise, where sun and the land's rich beauty make for languorous passion.
Brazilian musicians must deal with the contradictions between these travel-poster dreams and post-colonial reality.
Their music caresses and lulls as much as it uplifts, but often uses its seductive sound to call for social change.
The influential Brazilian singer Milton Nascimento's latest album, "Txai" (Columbia), confronts a political crisis with typical Brazilian gentility.
The project resulted from his journeys into the Amazon, where he collaborated with native musicians and explored the area's environmental problems.
Mr.
Nascimento showed videotapes from his travels during his Wednesday night performance at the Ritz.
His six-person band produced a soothing wash of fusion music as the National Geographic-style images flowed by, making a delicate protest against the Amazon's obliteration.


Beating Victim Looks to Future After Verdict
For Alfred Jermaine Ewell, the four-week trial that ended Saturday helped fill in the blank of the night he was nearly beaten to death.
But today he turned his thoughts ahead to the task of rebuilding of his life, and returning to his grueling, six-hour routine of physical therapy.
What would he like to say to Shannon Siegel, the 22-year-old Long Island man who was convicted of first-degree assault, but acquitted of attempted murder and civil rights charges in the 1991 attack?
"He got what he deserved," Mr.
Ewell said, refusing to say anything more personal about his assailant.


Sir John Summerson, 87, Is Dead; Eminent Architectural Historian
Sir John Summerson, Britain's pre-eminent architectural historian, died on Nov. 10 in London.
He was 87 years old and lived in London.
The cause of death was pneumonia, complicated by Parkinson's disease and emphysema, said his niece, Anne Ellis.


Arnold K. Davis; Insurer, 76
Arnold K. Davis, a prominent insurance broker in Manhattan, died on Saturday at the Palm Beach Hospital in Florida.
He was 76 years old and lived in Palm Beach.
He died of complications of diabetes, his family said.


Bosnia's Second City Stays Viable Despite Attacks
In seven months of war, Sarajevo, like a score of smaller Muslim towns in Bosnia and Herzegovina, has been reduced to a shell, with almost nothing that still works as it did, and much that does not work at all.
But in Tuzla, the second-largest city in this former Yugoslav republic and its principal industrial center, the striking thing is not so much what does not function as what does.
The train still runs each day, carrying passengers and freight to a nearby town.
The filling stations pump gasoline, the power station belches grey smoke into the sky, and the shops sell food and clothing and videotapes.


Refugee Burden Is Impoverishing Croatian Hosts
Faced with enormous economic problems and an influx of Bosnian refugees, people from across this former Yugoslav republic are looking with resentment and bewilderment on a world they see as too slow to send help and too quick to slam its doors shut.
"The kindest thing you can say is that this is hypocritical," said Croatia's Vice President, Mate Granic.


SmithKline Jobs To Ogilvy New York
SmithKline Beecham in Philadelphia awarded assignments for three brands, with combined billings estimated at $5 million to $7 million, to Ogilvy &amp; Mather New York.
They are Citrucel, a bulk fiber laxative; Cepacol dry-throat lozenges, and Cepastat sore-throat lozenges.


Economic Watch; Although Trade Is Trickier, 'More Is Better' Is Still True
The end of the trade spat with Europe, if France can be persuaded to go along, is certainly good news for Americans who prefer to drink real Chablis with their oysters or who export soybeans.
But in an era in which everything from cars to cheese already seems to come from another country, does the apparent breakthrough in negotiations on a grand world trade deal really matter?
The answer, say most, if not quite all, economists, is a resounding yes.
International trade has been a great engine of prosperity for the last century and shows every promise of remaining one in the next.
And while the gains from trade have become far trickier to analyze than the old textbooks make them out to be, the basic logic -- more is better -- has not changed.


European Currencies Wobble
By devaluing two currencies on Sunday, the European Community eased some monetary strains but did not address the underlying problem -- Germany's insistence on keeping its interest rates high.
Page D1.


Antoni Hoffman, 42, Biologist at Columbia
Antoni Hoffman, a Polish biologist whose scholarly work at Columbia University disputed theories about the regular extinction of species, died Nov. 14 in Warsaw.
He was 42.
He died of pancreatic cancer, said Peter Osnos, his cousin.


Review/Music; Very Different Worlds Of 2 Composers' Works
It is interesting to compare Peter Maxwell Davies's "Worldes Blis" with the standard-issue 20th-century symphonic piece in current circulation.
The second is usually under 15 minutes long.
It flirts with harmonic adventure but couches itself in turn-of-the-century tonality.
It issues invitations for orchestras to spread their multicolored feathers peacock-style and allows listeners to acknowledge contemporary music with minimum expenditures of pain.
It is also learnable in three rehearsals.
As played by the St.
Louis Symphony at Carnegie Hall on Friday night, Mr.
Maxwell Davies's 23-year-old single movement turned out to be somewhat different.
It is 40 minutes long and follows its own path in its own time.
For its first quarter hour, quietness reigns: lapping and overlapping string lines underneath, transformations of 13th-century monody expressed through horn and high trumpet solos.
"Worldes Blis," depending on your point of view, is courageous in the face of short attention spans, or else it is indifferent to the casual listener's expectations.


Review/Music; Bolcom's Interpretation of Blake
What an astonishing, exhilarating, exhausting and exasperating composition it is!
That was this critic's contradictory reaction upon hearing William Bolcom's much-acclaimed oratorio, "Songs of Innocence and of Experience," in Carnegie Hall on Saturday night.
Completed in 1982, this work has been known only to those who have attended its initial performances or listened to a tape that has been circulating.
But it is difficult to imagine the work's receiving a more committed or comprehensive performance than the one offered on this occasion by Leonard Slatkin conducting the St.
Louis Symphony Orchestra.
It should be recorded.
A setting of William Blake's gnomic and mystical group of poems that lasts more than two and a quarter hours, Mr.
Bolcom's composition often seems an invocation of Walt Whitman more than Blake.
It deliberately displays contradictions, embraces multitudes, sings in nearly every style that has flourished on these shores in the last century.
It includes reggae, rock, folk, country-western, English dances, American ballads, Expressionism and 1950's avant-gardism.
It calls for an enormous cast: madrigal singers, a rock band, a children's choir, a full chorus and an exotic percussion section.
It is not at all mysterious and esoteric; instead, it is exuberant, tricky, a theater piece that is meant to construct its own all-inclusive universe like the great symphonies of the last century.
After Mr.
Slatkin conducted the final weighty C-major chords, the audience leaped to its feet in a standing ovation, welcoming the composer onstage.


Bridge
Two experts from the New York metropolitan area captured the first major title at the American Contract Bridge League's Fall Nationals here Saturday night.
Michael Rosenberg of Manhattan and Michael Kamil of Teaneck, N.J., who are both options traders on the American Stock Exchange, won the Life Master Open Pair Championship, finishing half a board ahead of a world-famous partnership, Eric Rodwell of West Lafayette, Ind., and Jeff Meckstroth of Tampa, Fla.
Shawn Womack and Jan Cohen of Los Angeles won the Life Master Women's Pair title, almost a board ahead of Sabine Zenkel of Chicago and Joan Jackson of Dallas.


Review/Television; An Actor Who Embodies Truman Capote's Foibles
Long a stage staple, from Emlyn Williams as Dickens to, more recently, Patrick Stewart reading Dickens's "Christmas Carol," the one-actor show was made for television.
Latest evidence can be found in tonight's -- Channel 13 at 9 -- "American Playhouse" presentation of "Tru," the Jay Presson Allen portrait of Truman Capote that won a 1990 Tony Award for Robert Morse.
Taped at Chicago's Shubert Theater and directed by Kirk Browning, this record of the Morse performance makes splendid television.
Cleverly constructed, "Tru" takes place during two consecutive evenings of Christmas week 1975.
Following the magazine publication of a chapter from his gossipy roman a clef "Answered Prayers," Capote has been spurned by those who he thought were his dearest friends among what he called the filthy rich.
He is genuinely puzzled and hurt, arguing that he is an artist and not just artsy and that they should have known better.
"No billionaire ever got bit by Mario Buatto," he said.


Islanders Struggle to a Tie
Islanders 5, Oilers 5
EDMONTON, Alberta, Nov. 22 (AP) -- Scott Mellanby's goal midway through the third period gave the Edmonton Oilers a 5-5 tie with the Islanders tonight despite three goals by New York's Pierre Turgeon.
Turgeon completed his hat trick at 1 minute 59 seconds of the third period, beating Bill Ranford with a sharp-angled shot from the left wing.
Defenseman Scott Lachance put New York ahead with his first goal of the season at 5:35, blasting Benoit Hogue's pass behind Ranford from the slot.


Better Than She Used to Be
Brilliant Brass is a 5-year-old gray mare who has endured knee surgery and three seasons of troubled success at the races.
But this year, she somehow got the act together with flair and started to win with regularity.
And yesterday at Aqueduct, she won the country's oldest stakes race for fillies and mares by five lengths and scored her eighth victory in 11 races in a remarkable streak.
She also wrote a footnote to history because the race was the 122d running of the Ladies Handicap, which has been held with a couple of lapses since 1868 and now offers a purse of $250,000 to horses still competing in New York late in November.
But Brilliant Brass, owned by Elaine L. Bassford and trained by Carlos A. Garcia, took it all in stride.


Stanley Friedman on the Lesson He Learned Late
"TOO long," Stanley M. Friedman said.
"The problem with a Friedman, a Manes, a Wilbur Mills, a Wachtler," he said, referring to himself, to the former Queens Borough President, to the former Congressman, and to Sol Wachtler, who resigned two weeks ago as New York State's Chief Judge, "is the longer you're in, you acquire a proprietary interest in the position.


3 Nations Seek to Buy Spy Satellites, Causing a Policy Rift in U.S.
At least three countries are seeking to buy spy satellites in the United States.
The requests, Government experts say, have set off a high-level rift and a policy review within the Government that will probably have to be resolved by the Clinton White House.
It is a watershed, analysts say, that the Government is even considering permits to sell such high-tech surveillance craft, which can cost a billion dollars and have been cloaked in the highest secrecy ever since their debut 32 years ago.
Several people are now in jail just because they leaked information about such satellites or data gathered by them.


So Look Who's Here, Not a Day Too Soon
There is no question that the Rangers' meeting tonight with the Pittsburgh Penguins is one most New York players scanned the schedule for when training camp opened in August.
After all, it was the Penguins who took away their Stanley Cup hopes last season.
There it was: Nov. 23, at Madison Square Garden.


Amy Conovitz, Robert Lindsay
Amy Merrill Conovitz, a senior account executive, and Dr.
Robert Lindsay, an endocrinologist, both in New York, were married yesterday.
Cantor Henry Weintraub performed the ceremony at the St.
Regis Hotel in New York.
Mrs.
Lindsay, 33 years old, is employed by Klemtner Advertising Inc.
She graduated from Simmons College.
She is a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Myron W. Conovitz of Great Neck, L.I.
Her father, an internist in Great Neck, is a clinical associate professor of medicine at Cornell University Medical College.
Her mother, Ellen E. Conovitz, is the director of administration for Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo in Albany.


CHRONICLE
A bank is pulling the purse strings a little too tightly to suit the offspring of DAMON RUNYON, the legendary newspaperman whose works included the stories and characters on which "Guys and Dolls" is based.
A trustee for Runyon's daughter, two of his grandchildren and a literary agent, who had all bought most of Runyon's copyrights, filed suit on Friday in United States District Court in Manhattan against the estate's trustee, the Chase Manhattan Bank.


24 Dead as Tornadoes Sweep the South
An unusual confluence of weather disturbances spun off scores of tornadoes from Texas to Ohio this weekend, leaving at least 24 people dead, scores injured and millions of dollars in damage.
Hardest hit was this town of 11,000 people, 15 miles east of Jackson, where officials said six children and four adults were killed.
Elsewhere in the state, five people died and more than 160 were injured, officials said.


Port Chief Denies Allegation on Travel
The chairman of the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey, which operates the metropolitan region's three main airports, said yesterday that he would not accept free upgrading to first class or business class on commercial airlines, after a report of an anonymous complaint that he used his position to have his ticket upgraded on a flight last April.
A spokesman for the Manhattan District Attorney's office, Gerald McKelvey, confirmed that the office had received the complaint, which was reported yesterday in New York Newsday.
He said the unsigned complaint accused the chairman, Richard C. Leone, of asking an authority staff member to ask Delta Air Lines to upgrade the tickets for him and his wife on a personal trip to Rome last April 13.
Mr. Leone angrily denied the allegations yesterday.


Review/Theater; The Jewish Immigrant Experience
In the Playbill being distributed at Town Hall these days is a tongue-in-cheek glossary of Yiddish words and phrases like oy, vey and hoo-hah.
What's missing is mishmash, meaning hodgepodge, which might be the best way to describe "The Sheik of Avenue B," which opened last night.
At work in this energetic musical is a 1990's sensibility applied to a recreation of a 1930's radio program yearning to milk nostalgia from songs about the Jewish immigrant experience that were written from 1899 to 1932 by composers better known for other tunes.


Haitians See a Renewal of Hope With Clinton
Although President-elect Bill Clinton has carefully qualified his campaign promises of more generous treatment of Haitian refugees, warning that he is not throwing the doors open to mass immigration, his victory has been greeted here with such enthusiasm that many Haitians are preparing renewed attempts to reach the United States.
In conversations with dozens of people along the Caribbean coastline, Haitians spoke with giddy conviction that Mr.
Clinton's Administration would either quickly restore democracy and set things right in their poor and broken country, or welcome them with open arms when they set out in small boats to reach American shores.


No Headline
"Nov. 3 and Jan. 20. As far as I am concerned, after the good Lord comes Bill Clinton, and as soon as Bill Clinton is sworn in, you'll see me go." -- LUC SALOMON, an unemployed Haitian planning to emigrate.  [ A1:4. ]


Children's Magazines Look to Future
"Oooh, too disgusting," Zane said. "Why do you have to take pictures like that?"
"So disgusting," Glendaly said. "But it's interesting."


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Press; Survey Finds Newsrooms Discontented
Newspaper publishers, A. J. Liebling wrote, had a simple way of making money: "buying the other fellow out and then sweating the serfs."
It's not so simple anymore.
To start with, in a shrinking business with vanishing advertisers, there are hardly any competitors to buy out anymore.


Bears Continue to Play Like Cubs
Packers 17, Bears 3
CHICAGO, Nov. 22 (AP) -- Chicago's slide continues, as does Green Bay's resurgence.
Brett Favre hit Sterling Sharpe with a 49-yard touchdown pass and scored on a 5-yard run to lead the Packers over the faltering Bears.
It was the third victory in the last four games for the Packers (5-6).
The Bears (4-7) sustained their fourth straight defeat, their longest losing streak since 1989, when they lost their last six games.


Jacqueline Eubanks, College Librarian, 54
Jacqueline K. Eubanks, a college librarian, an editor and a proponent of multicultural education, died on Thursday at St.
Vincent's Hospital in Manhattan.
She was 54 years old and lived in Brooklyn.
She died of complications from AIDS, said friends and colleagues at the library at Brooklyn College, where she was on the faculty since 1966.


Review/Theater; A Boy Who Lives Above a Bordello
"Cross-Dressing in the Depression," a new play by Erin Cressida Wilson, has little to do with either transvestism or the Depression, except the male lead is played by a female and the characters seem to be poor and hungry.
It mostly has to do with a pubescent boy living in the attic of a brothel.
Constructed as a memory play, the story is told through monologues from the point of view of an old man recalling his childhood.
This narration is interspersed with scenes of him as a boy with his parents, before and after they send him to live in the bordello, and with a young prostitute on whom he fixes his fledgling passions.


The Yacht Of Missing Solo Sailor Is Found
The widespread search for Mike Plant, the American solo sailor who has been missing at sea for three weeks, yesterday turned up his sailboat, the 60-foot racing sloop Coyote, upside down and awash in 8-foot seas in the Atlantic Ocean.
Plant was nowhere in sight.
A Liberian-registered tanker, the Protank Orinoco, spotted the capsized yacht yesterday at 7:40 A.M.
Eastern time and radioed the United States Coast Guard.
Coyote's hull was floating in an area about 500 miles north of the Azores, an island chain in the mid-Atlantic.


Market Place; Reasons to Avoid Chinese Stocks
IN Shenzhen, China, more than a million would-be investors waited in line -- some for days -- to buy applications for the purchase of stocks.
When the applications ran out, thousands rampaged through the streets.
American investors need no riot gear to play the Chinese markets.
A call to a broker is sufficient to buy individual stocks or one of the three Chinese mutual funds.
A pending Securities and Exchange Commission ruling is likely to multiply the number of funds investing in Chinese companies.


Review/Music; A Performer Who Mocks The Culture She Adores
No contemporary entertainer acts out the teen-age fantasy of being all things to all people with more nervy brio than Sandra Bernhard.
The comedian, actress and singer, who appeared at the Paramount Theater on Saturday evening, flaunts the knowledge of someone with photographic recall of every image, brand name and piece of gossip to have been printed in the fashion press over the last 25 years.
A smitten fan and insatiable wannabe who emulates everyone from Prince to Madonna, Ms.
Bernhard is also much too smart not to recognize the shallowness of the iconography that obsesses her.
As much as they worship at the altar of pop glamour, her performances are sharply self-mocking sendups of the very narcissism to which she is captive.
And the tension between envy and scorn, between self-worship and self-loathing gives her performances a resonance that reflects disquietingly on a celebrity-obsessed culture.


Equity Issues This Week
The following equity offerings are expected this week:
Box Energy Corp., $50 million of convertible subordinated notes due 2002, B-3/B-.
Paine Webber.
Cortech Inc., Denver, initial public offering of 3 million units.
Each unit consists of 1 share and 1 stock conversion right.
Montgomery Securities.


Rift Over Black Studies Head Leaves Program Riven, Too
When Dr.
Leonard Jeffries Jr. was removed last spring as head of City College's black studies department for his racially charged remarks about blacks and Jews, trustees of the City University of New York thought they had bought peace for the department by replacing him with Dr.
Edmund W. Gordon, a mild-mannered scholar at the twilight of a distinguished career.
But after four months on the job, Dr.
Gordon is struggling to steer a department that appears paralyzed by the controversy over Dr.
Jeffries's statements, in which he characterized whites as greedy, materialistic "ice people" and blacks as humanistic, communal "sun people."


Ann Dorman, Kenneth Adler
Ann Beth Dorman, an associate at the New York law firm of Lankenau Kovner &amp; Bickford, and Kenneth Adam Adler, an associate at the New York law firm of Brown Raysman &amp; Millstein, were married yesterday.
Rabbi Arthur Rulnick performed the ceremony at the Woodbury (L.I.) Jewish Center.
The bride, 30 years old, graduated summa cum laude from the C. W. Post Center of Long Island University and received a law degree from New York University.
She is a daughter of Doris and Arthur H. Dorman of Huntington, L.I.
Her father is the operations manager of Nutrition International Inc., a food nutrition analysis laboratory in Dayton, N.J.
Her mother is the head nurse and the nursing care coordinator of the labor and delivery room at Central General Hospital in Plainview, L.I.


Review/Theater; In Praise of Women With a Capital W
Almost a decade after "A . . . My Name Is Alice" was first presented, the sequel to this raised-consciousness revue takes its theme from the lyrics of the opening song, "Two steps forward, one step back." The new show, "A . . . My Name Is Still Alice" shrewdly keeps its optimism in check, especially when women are surrounded by supposedly "Sensitive New-Age Guys," as in the title of one of the revue's most pointed songs.
In that rallying cry by Christine Lavin and John Gorka, the show's all-male band acts as a chorus of approval for almost all the suggestions made by Nancy Ticotin.
But there are limits in the sensitivity department.
Ms.
Ticotin, who is the most vivacious member of an excellent and well-balanced five-woman cast, hits her stride in this number and in a sobering ballad by Michael John LaChiusa, in which a woman tries to excuse an evening of passion without protection.


Books of The Times; David Selznick: A Colossus Obsessed by Self
Showman The Life of David O. Selznick By David Thomson Illustrated. 792 pages.
Alfred A. Knopf. $35.
Although he wished it were not so and spent much of his prodigious energies attempting to make it otherwise, the fact remains that David O. Selznick (1902-1965) was always best known for producing the film version of Margaret Mitchell's monumental Civil War novel, "Gone With the Wind."


The Breakthrough Was the Result of a Gamble and a Last-Minute Idea
Friday's breakthrough in a six-year trans-Atlantic stalemate on farm subsidies was the result of a daring gamble by the United States last month and a last-minute idea by the European Community, participants in the talks said in extensive interviews over the last three days.
Shuttling by the supersonic Concorde, jumbo jets and limousines to a succession of posh hotels and luxurious guest houses in Brussels, Chicago and Washington, trade negotiators from the two sides hammered out in the space of less than six weeks a comprehensive deal solving all their major disputes over agriculture.


Wise Counsel on Macedonia
Diplomacy still has a chance to prevent the Balkan firestorm from spreading to the former Yugoslav republic of Macedonia.
President Bush ought to heed the advice of Senator Dennis DeConcini and Representative Frank McCloskey, just back from a trip to Macedonia sponsored by the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe.
Their recommendation: "International recognition of that country would be the right thing to do, and . . . it should be done immediately."


SCANDAL EMBROILS THE ISRAELI ARMY
The Israeli Army, normally one of the country's most respected institutions, has stumbled badly in the last few weeks, with top generals caught up in a whirl of blunder, scandal and death.
The trouble began Nov. 5 when five young soldiers from a special unit were killed by a missile that had been mistakenly fired during an exercise at the Tseelim training grounds in the Negev.
A week later, an army inquiry board found negligence and faulty planning, and recommended that charges be brought against several officers, including the major general who had directed the exercise, Amiram Levine.


Net for Illegal Students Must Avoid Abuses
To the Editor:
"In Suburbs, a Stealthy War Against Infiltrating Students" (front page, Nov. 6), which discusses efforts of Long Island school districts to remove illegally enrolled students from across the county line in New York City, refers to our agency, a nonprofit legal services center for students.


Classical Music in Review
Houston Symphony Orchestra  Avery Fisher Hall
Christoph Eschenbach and the Houston Symphony stopped off on their way to Europe on Wednesday evening with, admirably, some fine Americana in tow: a sensitive, appealing interpretation of Ives's "Three Places in New England."


No Accounting for Taste? An Agency Gives It a Shot
One of the most puzzling questions in advertising since Stan Freberg wondered who put those eight great tomatoes in that little bitty Contadina can is: Why do viewers avidly watch certain television commercials, even looking forward to seeing them again and again, while "zapping" most others into oblivion?
DDB Needham Chicago believes it has found some answers.


Nets Can't Keep Up With the Warriors
The Nets were 9 points down to the Golden State Warriors, 84-75, when just before the final quarter, a film clip of the comedian John Belushi flashed on the scoreboard.
"Over?" cried out Belushi. "Did you say over? Nothing's over till we decide it's over."


The Big Clock
New York is a city of grand gestures.
In the harbor, the Statue of Liberty lifts an enormous torch.
Behind her loom what seem to be the topless towers of Ilium.
Sometimes their peaks are banked in clouds; and, once, a giant ape batted at planes from a perch on the Empire State Building.
True, he was only a fiction -- but this is a place in which an ape
might
scale a skyscraper.
It is also a place in which a clock 120 feet high can make perfect sense, especially in the center of that same monumental harbor horizon.
A city with big aspirations can handle -- deserves -- a big timepiece.


Loss of Aid Closes Doors Of Program for Runaways
For 16 years, a program for runaway youths in Nassau County helped reunite hundreds of parents with their children.
Now, through what youth workers say is a flaw in the system for allocating Federal aid, the program has closed, leaving the area without much-needed services for runaways.
"This should not have happened," said Margot Hirsch, executive director of the Empire State Coalition of Youth and Family Services.
"Nassau County is one of the largest areas in terms of level of need for these youths, and this closing leaves a big hole in the system."


Corrections
Because of an editing error, a front-page article yesterday about Russian charges of human rights violations in the Baltic republics referred incorrectly to the rights granted people in Estonia who are not of Estonian stock.
If they receive citizenship, they can vote in local and national elections and can own land.
If they have not received citizenship, they can vote only in local elections and cannot own land.


TRANSACTIONS
WEEKEND Baseball  American League
BALTIMORE ORIOLES -- Signed Rick Sutcliffe, pitcher, to a one-year contract.
Basketball  National Basketball Association
GOLDEN STATE WARRIORS -- Signed Ed Nealy, forward.


Facing His Term's End, Barr Defends His Record
The melancholy that pervades the Bush Administration these days runs particularly deep at the Justice Department, where Attorney General William P. Barr has taken a pounding from Congressional critics in recent months and is preparing to relinquish to Democrats an agency that drove the Republicans' conservative legal agenda for a dozen years.
"I'm still breathing," said Mr.
Barr, smiling guardedly from his office at the Justice Department's headquarters, an Art Deco fortress on Pennsylvania Avenue where he talked at length about the department and his 12-month tenure.
"I recognized from the beginning that this job consisted of walking through mine fields and I'd be happy just to survive. I think most people would say I've done more than that."


2 Restaurant Chains Pick New Agencies
Two large restaurant chains said Friday that they had selected new agencies.
Ponderosa Steakhouses in Dayton, Ohio, named W.B.
Doner &amp; Company in Cleveland to handle the family restaurant chain's account, with billings estimated at $10 million to $15 million.
Ponderosa had been at Ayer Inc. in New York from September 1991 until two weeks ago, when Ayer said it would resign the account.


Rolling Thunder: Bills Score Early and Often
Bills 41, Falcons 14
ORCHARD PARK, N.Y., Nov. 22 (AP) -- The game was settled, then they played the final three quarters.
Buffalo scored touchdowns on all four first-quarter possessions today, while limiting Atlanta to three plays and out on three of its four drives as the Bills sprinted away from the Falcons, 41-14.


Rising Dollar Brings a Challenge
The dollar's sharp jump against European currencies in the last two months is making times difficult for managers of international bond portfolios.
Nicholas Sargen, the chief investment officer for Prudential's Global Fixed Income Investment Advisers, has to review regularly the moves he has made to protect his funds from the eroding force of a rising dollar, which can quickly wipe out the capital gains from even a shrewdly invested foreign bond portfolio.


Eagles Win by Risking a Hard Loss
Down by 20-6 with nearly 10 minutes left before halftime, the Philadelphia Eagles had a tricky decision to make.
Sit back on defense, play out the string and hope to regroup at halftime?
Or go for it.
Right away.


INSIDE
Senate and Sex Harassment
Senator Bob Packwood of Oregon is accused of sexual advances toward 10 women in a case that could test how the new Congress will handle such complaints.
Page A10.
Tornadoes Ravage South
An unusual late-season series of tornadoes from Texas to Ohio has killed at least 16 people and injured hundreds more.
Page A10.
Yacht Found in Atlantic
A racing sloop missing for three weeks was seen north of the Azores, but the sailor Mike Plant wasn't spotted.
SportsMonday, page C1.
Voters Back Peru's Leader
Voter surveys and unofficial tallies showed strong backing for President Fujimori in electing a congress to write a new constitution.
Page A3.
Buyers Seek Spy Satellites
In a sharp departure in U.S. policy, experts say, the Government is considering permits to sell spy satellites to other countries.
Page A7.
Yankee Ingenuity Wins One
In a startling reversal, American companies are trouncing Japanese rivals in the design and marketing of portable computers.
Page D1.
U.S.
Export: Patients
Americans living near the Mexican border routinely go south for cheaper medical care and prescription drugs, a survey finds.
Page A11.


Multicultural Ad Agency Aims to Join Mainstream
It sounds like a high-concept situation comedy -- an advertising agency run by a black entrepreneur, an Asian journalist and a Colombian would-be opera singer.
Lots of jokes based on idiomatic misunderstandings, like the partner who declares "right off" when he agrees with someone.
Endless opportunities for trouble with clients, like the time the printer dropped a line of type from a transit billboard for Pacific Bell and then pasted the Chinese characters back on upside down.
But J. Melvin Muse, chairman of Muse Cordero Chen Inc. here, is dead serious.
Mr.
Muse, known as Jo, David Chen and Mavis Cordero founded what he calls a "multicultural, ethnically diverse" agency six years ago, and in that time have lifted their billings to $25 million from less than $2 million.
Their half-dozen clients include Nike Inc. and the American Honda Motor Company.
Going Mainstream
Now, Muse Cordero Chen is ready to go mainstream, and one look at the arithmetic of ethnic diversity explains why: Nike and Honda account for almost 75 percent of the agency's billings.
In contrast, Rubin Postaer and Associates of Santa Monica bills $127.6 million for its work for Honda, while Nike spends an estimated $223.3 million on advertising.
Its general account is handled by Weiden &amp; Kennedy of Portland.


Introducing the New, Polite Knicks
eating the young and still inconsistent Orlando Magic, even with their supertalented rookie Shaquille O'Neal, at Madison Square Garden on Saturday night was not really a big deal for the Knicks.
But the way they did it, and whom they did it with, was.
In the 92-77 victory, the Knicks, for the first time this season, looked like the team Coach Pat Riley and Dave Checketts, the club president, had in mind when they made big off-season trades for forward Charles Smith and guard Rolando Blackman.


For Most Trying to Lose Weight, Dieting Only Makes Things Worse
Throughout history and in much of the world today, human survival has been a battle to get enough to eat.
But not, for the most part, in the United States, where more than a third of the population struggles daily
not
to eat from the cornucopia of high-calorie foods that has become the hallmark of American affluence.
Their goal is to lose and keep off the fatty flesh that once served as insurance against famine and replace it with sinewy slimness that has become the national symbol of physical beauty for men as well as women.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Tug-of-War in Europe
The European Community's plan to allow people to travel among the 12 nations without showing a passport has been quietly postponed, in a new blow to the community's dream of unity.
Britain and Denmark strongly oppose removing passport checks, and several other governments are demanding tighter controls to bar illegal immigrants, criminals and terrorists.  [ Page A1. ]
Does an apparent breakthrough in world trade negotiations really matter?
Most economists, if not quite all, answer with a resounding yes.
International trade has been a great engine of prosperity for the last century and shows every promise of remaining one in the next.
Economic Watch.  [ A1. ]


Accusations Against Senator May Pose Test for Congress
Ten women have come forward asserting that Senator Bob Packwood of Oregon made unwelcome sexual advances toward them, and some political leaders here said today that the case could pose the first major test of how the new Congress treats such accusations against one of its own.
The Washington Post reported today that at least 10 women gave specific accounts of alleged sexual misconduct over a 20-year period by the Senator, a Republican who was narrowly re-elected to a fifth term.
The women, most of whom had worked for or with Mr.
Packwood, told similar stories about Mr.
Packwood: that he would get them alone and try to kiss or fondle them and make unwelcome sexual suggestions.


Miss Greenberg and Mr. Rosenberg
Barbara Greenberg, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard Greenberg of Rockville, Md., was married yesterday to Michael Rosenberg, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Jerome I. Rosenberg of New York.
Rabbi Richard Chapin performed the ceremony at the Lotos Club in New York.
Mrs.
Rosenberg, 29 years old, is an executive assistant at Booz, Allen &amp; Hamilton, the management consulting concern, in Washington.
She graduated from the University of Maryland at College Park.
Her father is the chief of social services, research and evaluation at the Department of Health and Human Services in Washington.


World Economies


Test Scores Spell Doom For Chief Of Police
THE pressure was on as Frank T. Perilli sat down last March to take the state Civil Service exam for police chiefs -- a test he had already failed twice.
This time, after scanning the first question, Mr.
Perilli said to himself, "Somebody upstairs likes me."


Dolphins Outkick Oilers
Dolphins 19, Oilers 16
MIAMI, Nov. 22 (AP) -- In a battle of field goals, Pete Stoyanovich outkicked Al Del Greco, and Miami outlasted Houston.
Stoyanovich's fourth field goal, a 52-yarder with two seconds left, gave Miami a 19-16 victory today.
Del Greco hit three field goals for the Oilers but was wide-right on a 41-yard attempt with 1 minute 54 seconds to go.


Andrea Greif and Jorge Fitz-Gibbon
Andrea Hillary Greif and Jorge Fitz-Gibbon, newspaper reporters, were married yesterday in New York.
Robert Berson, a leader of the Ethical Culture Society, performed the ceremony at the Explorers Club.
Ms.
Greif, who is 29 years old, is keeping her name.
She is a reporter for The Reporter Dispatch in Yorktown Heights, N.Y.
She graduated from Union College in Schenectady, N.Y., and received a master's degree in journalism from New York University.
She is a daughter of Norman and Annette Greif of New York.
Her father is a marketing consultant to the cosmetics industry in New York.
Her mother is an agent at Travelworks, a travel agency in New York.


Woody Allen Talks About Custody Fight
A month before Mia Farrow accused Woody Allen of molesting their adopted 7-year-old daughter, Mr.
Allen said, she told him "I have something very nasty planned for you."
Mr.
Allen said on the CBS News program "60 Minutes" last night that Ms.
Farrow had told him on many occasions, over the telephone and in person, "You took my daughter, and I'm going to take yours." He said Ms.
Farrow was referring to his relationship with her 21-year-old adopted daughter, Soon-Yi Farrow Previn, whom he has said he started seeing after his decadelong affair with Ms.
Farrow ended.


Young Father Is Charged In Baby's Death
A 17-year-old Long Island father was charged today with the death of his 16-month-old daughter, who died on Friday at Mercy Hospital in Rockville Centre, the Nassau County police said.
The baby, who had been treated at the same hospital in September for injuries that hospital officials said were consistent with child abuse, had been suffering from hepatitis B and was having difficulty breathing when she arrived by ambulance on Friday evening, the police said.


Syphilis Cases Among Newborns Climb With the Rise in Crack Use
On Nov. 11, a baby girl was born at Kings County Hospital in Brooklyn with the matchstick arms and legs and undeveloped lungs typical of babies born 11 weeks early.
But this newborn also had an enlarged liver and spleen and peeling skin on the palms of her hands and soles of her feet, signs that she had contracted syphilis in her mother's womb.
Her mother, a drug addict, never saw a doctor during pregnancy, and so never got the required blood test for syphilis or the treatment that would have kept her baby healthy.


Quality and Low Cost of Medical Care Lure Americans to Mexican Doctors
Americans living near the Mexican border are now routinely crossing to Mexico for medical care rather than pay higher prices for similar care and identical drugs in the United States.
While doctors and public health officials in the area have been aware of the phenomenon for some time, a new large random sampling of Mexican doctors along the border from Texas to California found that Americans now account for a quarter of their patients.


Corrections
A brief article by The Associated Press in some editions on Saturday about the former Chief Judge of the New York State Court of Appeals, Sol Wachtler, misidentified Stanley R. Chesler, and an article yesterday repeated the error.
He is a United States Magistrate in Newark.


Dinkins Plans Major Appeal For Harmony
Confronting issues that threaten New York's social stability and his own re-election, Mayor David N. Dinkins said yesterday that he would address the city in a televised Thanksgiving Eve appeal for harmony in the face of growing racial and ethnic tensions.
The Mayor's speech at noon on Wednesday -- the fourth time in his tenure that he has taken to the airwaves to ask New Yorkers directly for understanding and to quell criticism of his stewardship -- underscores the seriousness of tensions since the Crown Heights verdict last month, as well as the urgency Mr.
Dinkins has assigned to dealing with the problem.


Trump's West Side Project Needs a Rail Link
To the Editor:
Your Oct. 28 appraisal of Donald J. Trump's Riverside South plan suggests that the 57-acre mixed-use development project on Manhattan's Upper West Side may have a beneficial effect on the future of urban planning in New York City.


2d Child in a Week Hit by Car on Bronx Roadway
In the second hit-and-run accident in four days on a stretch of the Grand Concourse in the Bronx where residents say motorists routinely break the speed limit, a 2-year-old boy broke away from his adult cousin and stepped in front of a car that the cousin said had run a red light.
The child, Alfuseny Dukurey, was taken to Bronx-Lebanon Hospital by police officers from the 46th Precinct.
He was listed in critical but stable condition last night, the authorities said.
His cousin, Daly Camara, 20 years old, was not injured.


Corrections
An article in The Living Section on Wednesday about chili pepper growers in Hatch, N.M., misstated the growth in the industry in that state over the last two decades.
In 1991, 66 million pounds of chili peppers were harvested in New Mexico, up from 7 million pounds in 1971, according to the American Spice Trade Association.


CHRONICLE
In the land of the macho, GEORGE PLIMPTON has often been considered a king: he has fought a bull, served as a circus lion tamer, boxed with Archie Moore and played football with the Detroit Lions and hockey with the Boston Bruins, among other exploits.
So why is he associated with a book titled "Bringing Out Their Best: A Parent's Guide to Healthy Good Looks for Every Child"?
Mr.
Plimpton and his wife, SARAH, are giving a party in their home this evening for the author of the book, WENDE DEVLIN GATES, and to celebrate its publication by Bantam.


Segarra Says She Will Stay On Board
Ninfa Segarra, the Board of Education member whose resignation is sought by the man who appointed her, Borough President Fernando Ferrer of the Bronx, indicated last night that she intended to remain on the board until her term expires in 18 months.
Ms.
Segarra, along with several other board members, has been at odds with Mr.
Ferrer, with Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez, and with some educational, political and religious leaders over the extent to which sex education and AIDS information should be taught in the schools.


Let Hong Kong Speak
To the Editor:
"Hong Kong Tastes Democracy, and China Chokes" (news article, Nov. 11) talks of a "distinct change of direction on the part of the British Government." While the British are calling for more democracy in the territory, that most crucial element, self-determination, is missing.


Transit Officer Kills Robbery Suspect in Manhattan Elevator
An off-duty transit police officer, returning to her Upper West Side apartment building yesterday morning after a night patrolling the subways, killed a would-be mugger after he threatened her with what appeared to be an "Uzi-type" machine gun, the police said.
The gun turned out to be a toy.
The officer, Anna Mendez, 25 years old, was riding an elevator to the fifth floor of her building just before 5 A.M. when the elevator suddenly stopped and opened at the second floor, bringing her face to face with the man.
The suspect, who has not been identified but who is believed to have been in his 30's, showed the toy gun and tried to rob her, the police said.


Welfare Can't Be Reformed in a Social Vacuum
To the Editor:
Re "How to Lift the Poor," your Nov. 10 news analysis of one aspect of Bill Clinton's domestic policy: If President-elect Clinton is truly committed to making work pay for low-income families, he must develop a combination of welfare reform, support services and nonwelfare strategies.
Job training and education alone will not solve the problem of intergenerational poverty and dependence on public assistance.


Special Defects Haunt Giants
For years, the Giants have prided themselves on the play of their special teams -- Dave Meggett's punt and kickoff returns, Reyna Thompson's punt coverage and the reckless punt and kickoff coverage of many young players.
Today, in the Giants' 47-34 loss to the Philadelphia Eagles, the special teams fell apart.
True, Meggett returned a kickoff 92 yards for a touchdown, becoming the first Giant to score on a kickoff since Rocky Thompson in 1972.
But then everything went wrong.
Ken Rose of the Eagles blocked Sean Landeta's punt, picked it up on the 3-yard line and scored.
Vai Sikahema returned Landeta's next punt 87 yards, the longest in Eagles' history, and scored.
Sikahema returned kickoffs 41 and 38 yards, each leading to a touchdown.


Books of The Times; David Selznick: A Colossus Obsessed by Self
Showman The Life of David O. Selznick By David Thomson Illustrated. 792 pages.
Alfred A. Knopf. $35.
Although he wished it were not so and spent much of his prodigious energies attempting to make it otherwise, the fact remains that David O. Selznick (1902-1965) was always best known for producing the film version of Margaret Mitchell's monumental Civil War novel, "Gone With the Wind."


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-9  DELAY IN OPEN EUROPEAN BORDERS
Plans by the European Community to allow people to travel in its 12 nations without passports has been delayed because of opposition from some of them.
A1  Youths attacked a hostel and battled the police in 4 German cities.
A8


Linda Smithwick, Alton B. Kinsey 2d
Linda M. Smithwick, a daughter of Gabriel B. Smithwick of Brooklyn and the late Megan A. Smithwick, was married yesterday to Dr.
Alton Bruce Kinsey 2d, a son of Mr.
Kinsey of Hempstead, L.I., and Jacqueline Nicholas of Raleigh, N.C.
The Rev.
Douglas Miller performed the ceremony at the Cranford (N.J.) United Methodist Church.
Mrs.
Kinsey is a computer manager at Mutual of America, the life insurance company, in New York.
She graduated from Fordham University, where she also received a master's degree in arts and teaching, and has an M.B.A. from Rutgers University.
Her father, now retired, was a general foreman with the New York City Department of Parks.


Squaring Away the Major Bowl Games
When Miami's Casey Greer stopped Syracuse tight end Chris Gedney on the 3-yard line, ending the last-gasp effort of quarterback Marvin Graves and the Orangemen, the possibilities for New Year's Day came into a much clearer focus.
One of three games in the new bowl coalition should be host for a No. 1 vs.
No. 2 matchup that would decide an accepted national champion for the first time since 1989.


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Monday  None  Tuesday  Durable Goods . . .
Oct.
Wednesday  GDP . . . 3d Qtr.
Weekly Jobless Claims  Thursday  None Friday  Personal Income . . .
Oct.


Forecast Didn't Include Eagles' Pouring It On
If you were hoping the Giants would do well today against the Philadelphia Eagles, here's some good news.
The Giants managed to score 34 points.
They sacked Randall Cunningham four times, they held the ball for almost 35 minutes of the 60-minute game and Dave Meggett returned a kickoff 92 yards for a touchdown.
Don't ask about the rest.
The Giants lost, 47-34, and were victimized in bizarre fashion along the way.
They allowed a 20-6 lead to dissipate.
They allowed the Eagles to block one punt for a touchdown, return another for a touchdown and return an intercepted pass for a touchdown.
They gave up 184 yards rushing.
They allowed their quarterbacks to be sacked eight times, including three and a half sacks by their longtime nemesis, Reggie White.


Patents; Using Lights To Reset Body's Clock
USING mathematical equations and bright lights, scientists at Harvard Medical School last week patented a method for resetting the internal body clock that governs a person's sleep rhythms.
Intended to help people fight jet lag and the fatigue that plagues many workers on night shifts, the invention draws on several decades of research into the "circadian" rhythms that are thought to govern most animals.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
7.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
4.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.00
2.90
4.89
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.27
3.19
4.44
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.45
3.38
4.51
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.47
6.45
7.03
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.54
7.52
7.98
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.50
8.50
8.95
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.40
6.40
6.90
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Nassau's New Sludge Plan Is to Dump It Elsewhere
Just one week before they were to award a $200 million contract to build two plants to process sewage sludge, Nassau County officials said today that they had a better idea: ship the sludge elsewhere.
The officials said they would request an extension on a court-mandated Dec. 1 deadline to award the contract.


Classical Music in Review
Vermeer Quartet  Weill Recital Hall
On Friday evening as on previous occasions, the Vermeer Quartet impressed more for its corporate strength than for the beauty of any individual contributions.
Such a unified voice is no small achievement; admirable in itself, certainly.
Yet however unfairly, the listener could not help but yearn at times for a melting phrase from this player or an enlivening spark of individuality from that one. (The quartet comprises Shmuel Ashkenasi and Mathias Tacke, violinists; Richard Young, violist, and Marc Johnson, cellist.)


Utility Bond Issue Is $324.5 Million
The Municipal Electric Authority of Georgia yesterday priced $324.5 million of tax-exempt general power revenue bonds with a maximum yield of 6.45 percent for an issue due in 2016 through underwriters led by the First Boston Corporation.
There are two longer-term issues, due in 2017 and 2018, both priced to yield 6.35 percent.
Another issue, due in 2014, is insured by the Financial Guaranty Insurance Company and rated triple-A; it is priced to yield 6.30 percent.


Bush and Aides Attend Funeral For His Mother
Returning to the town where he spent his childhood, President Bush led more than 100 mourners who gathered here today for the funeral of his mother, Dorothy Walker Bush, who died Thursday at the age of 91.
The President, who had arrived in a long motorcade from Westchester County Airport, briefly shed the trappings of office as the 45-minute Episcopal service ended.
He stepped outside Christ Church, where his mother had been a member for more than 40 years, and remained there for about 20 minutes, embracing friends and family members and, at one point, raising his hands to acknowledge a smattering of applause from onlookers across the street.


How a Cancer Center Conducts Drug Trials
To the Editor:
You cast unjustified doubts on the national trial of tamoxifen in the prevention of breast cancer in an Oct. 23 news article.
We believe these doubts could deter women from enrolling in a study that promises to yield insight into, and provide treatment for, an epidemic disease.
You cite Congressional testimony charging that trial participants are "being inadequately informed of the risks" and that cancer centers are "placing far more emphasis on unproven, possible benefits of the treatment than on side effects and potential risks." This broad brush tars more than 100 institutions in the study, including ours.
We fully disclose all details about the drug, including potential side effects, in our informed-consent process.
With the National Cancer Institute, the Food and Drug Administration and the American Cancer Society, we believe the risks of side effects for most women are small and acceptable.


Compromise and Time for Olympia in U.S.
Efforts by Olympia &amp; York's United States unit to stave off a bankruptcy filing made some progress yesterday, as the developer reached a compromise with one aggrieved creditor and won more time to negotiate with another.
The compromise came in a suit filed on Friday by Battery Park Holdings Inc., which accused Olympia &amp; York of improperly diverting or withholding more than $83 million from Olympia's World Financial Center in Manhattan.
Battery Park Holdings, controlled by members of the Bronfman family of Toronto and an allied investor, has varying interests in three of the center's buildings.


Carol Haussamen, Heiress, 71, Is Dead; Was Philanthropist
Carol Weil Haussamen, a New York City philanthropist, hostess and Democratic fund-raiser, died on Sunday at her home in Manhattan.
She was 71 years old.
Her family said she died of cancer of the esophagus.


Classical Music in Review
I Cantori di New York  Rutgers Presbyterian Church 236 West 73d Street Manhattan
At first glance, the program that I Cantori di New York sang on Saturday evening had an unsettled look.
The 25-voice chamber choir began with six lush Brahms songs, leaped into the 20th century for works by Luigi Dallapiccola and Samuel Adler, then back to the 17th century for Monteverdi's "Lamento d'Arianna," and forward for a Poulenc group and two melancholy jazz ballads.
Yet this stylistic roaming had a kind of logic in performance: the modern works, with their graceful pastel harmonies, differed from the earlier ones in accent rather than language


Federal Judge Orders CBS To Surrender a Videotape
A Federal judge ordered CBS News yesterday to surrender a "reality" news-show videotape showing Secret Service agents ransacking a Brooklyn apartment for evidence in a criminal case, strewing furniture and the contents of drawers and closets about while an absent suspect's wife and child cower on a couch.
The judge, Jack B. Weinstein of Federal Court in Brooklyn, said the search -- with a CBS camera crew along by invitation of the Secret Service agents against the explicit orders of a prosecutor -- violated the Constitutional protections against unreasonable searches, and he said this outweighed the newsgathering privileges embodied in the First Amendment.


Q&amp;A
Wave Damage
Q.
Does a violent storm at sea cause damage on the ocean floor?
A.
Big waves can damage a coastal reef when they break, said Dr.
Tim Barnett, an oceanographer in the climate research division of the Scripps Institution of Oceanography at La Jolla, but 100 miles at sea, waves do not affect the sea floor.


Treating the Sick Can Mean Clothing Them Too
Behind five unmarked doors at the Bellevue Hospital Center are storerooms crammed with clothing.
Huge bags of white cotton underwear sit on one shelf, near several rows of black, rubber-soled shoes.
A metal cabinet holds dozens of pairs of infant pajamas.
A waist-high pile of navy blue T-shirts is on the floor, almost blocking the entrance.
Racks of coats, suits, slacks and dresses create a traffic jam in the narrow aisles.
The clothes will be given to the growing number of patients who arrive at the hospital in rags and who might otherwise leave wearing only flimsy hospital gowns and paper slippers.
Last year, Bellevue clothed more than 6,000 people and expects to do the same this year.


CHRONICLE
Miss America, LEANZA CORNETT, , stepped into something of a controversy on Sunday when she appeared at the New York State Museum in Albany as part of her effort to increase public awareness of AIDS.
Some members of the audience at the museum's exhibit of 800 panels of the Names Project AIDS Memorial Quilt, were angry that she was taking a $1,200 speaking fee, the Associated Press reported.
"We are losing sight of this disease and who it is affecting," Ms.
Cornett said in her talk.
She pledged to dedicate her yearlong reign to public education about the disease.
"It is claiming the lives of our friends, our wives and husbands and lovers," she continued.
"These people need our compassion."
The museum and some community agencies had invited her to appear in hopes that she would draw attention to the quilt, said RANDY ROBERTS, head of the museum's public programs.
The speaking fee was contributed by private donors.
But some AIDS activists contended that the money should be spent on housing, food and other services for people with AIDS.
"Does she need $1,200 when people are struggling and lacking medical services and lacking decent affordable housing?" said STEVE BARATTA, a member of the audience.
Ms.
Cornett said she would donate a portion of the fee to help AIDS patients but she did not say how much.


Despite Iraqi's Appeal, U.N. Says It Will Not Ease or Lift Sanctions
Noting that Iraq has still not fulfilled many of the conditions in the cease-fire agreement that ended the Persian Gulf war, the Security Council said today that it would neither lift nor ease the sanctions imposed on Iraq for invading Kuwait in 1990.
The Iraqi Deputy Prime Minister, Tariq Aziz, told the Council that Iraq had met the main conditions in the agreement and said continuing the sanctions amounted to "genocide" against the Iraqi people.


A Recount Lets Senator Retain Seat
The Republicans who have controlled the state Senate for 27 years appeared to have suffered a small chink in their armor this month when election results indicated that one incumbent in southwest New York, Jess J. Present, had lost to a Democrat.
But today even that chink was eliminated when election officials announced that a count of absentee ballots had handed the victory to Mr.
Present after all.
Returns released today showed that Mr.
Present, a 13-term Senator from Bemus Point, had held his seat by 190 votes, 50,540 to 50,350.
His opponent, Nancy G. Bargar, had been leading by about 900 votes after a recount of machine ballots.


In Theory and Practice, Defining Youth Music
"This is not school. O.K.?"
Donna Gaines uttered these words as a challenge to the several hundred audience members slumping before her in wooden auditorium seats.
Her statement bore its share of paradox, since the gathering was an academic conference, typically the site of scholarly muscle flexing.
But the words of Ms.
Gaines, a sociologist and journalist who wrote the innovative study of alienation among suburban adolescents, "Teen-Age Wasteland," in many ways epitomized the challenge posed by an unusual two-day conference at Princeton University this weekend.


The Sometimes Bumpy Ride Of Being Joseph Mankiewicz
Joseph L. Mankiewicz has always been known for his wit and his cynicism, as the auteur of that biting backstage film, "All About Eve." It was he who said, through the character of Addison De Witt, that critics are "essential to the theater: as ants to a picnic, as the boll weevil to a cotton field." But when he talks about the old Hollywood, he verges on nostalgia.
"I miss that studio atmosphere," he said, looking back on Hollywood from the 1930's through the 50's.
Sitting for a recent interview in his home here, surrounded by leather-bound volumes of his scripts, by his awards and his memories, he mentally transported himself back to the days when studio heads were omnipotent and when directors like him somehow managed to make movies that have become classics.
In his case, those films include three of his own favorites: "All About Eve," "People Will Talk" and "Five Fingers." Those movies and 28 others directed, produced or written by him, are being shown in a comprehensive five-week retrospective of his work at Film Forum in the South Village.


Prosecutors Seek Takeover Of a Union
Charging that corrupt labor officials and the Mafia have controlled the newspaper and magazine delivery industry in New York City for decades, prosecutors yesterday began legal action for the appointment of an independent trustee to run the newspaper deliverers' union.
The move by Robert M. Morgenthau, the Manhattan District Attorney, marked the first time that state prosecutors have used an anti-organized-crime law to seek the takeover of a union.
Mr.
Morgenthau said the indictment also represented the first time that a labor union had been accused of state or Federal criminal charges.


Words for Spring: Soft, Gentle, Transparent, Light
The big fashion news for spring has little to do with the length or shape of clothes.
It concerns construction, or the lack of construction, and fabrics, which are always thin.
There is no stiffness anywhere, no hard lines.
It is a striking change in the direction of fashion, and it will have an effect on clothes beyond the warm-weather season.
"The secret is that even jackets are made as softly as blouses," Donna Karan said.
"Everything just flows."


Classical Music in Review
New York Philharmonic  Avery Fisher Hall
Kurt Sanderling, conducting Rachmaninoff's Symphony No. 2 with the New York Philharmonic on Thursday evening, won no points for consistency.
He made some, though not all, of the disfiguring cuts once standard in the work and added trims of his own, including a particularly jarring and tasteless one in a hash of the finale.


Market Place; Dell Raises The Ante For Kidder In Battle
The Dell Computer Corporation's saber-rattling against Kidder, Peabody &amp; Company and one of its securities analysts grew louder late today when Dell announced that the Securities and Exchange Commission was investigating the high-stakes feud.
The news came after Dell's share price had plunged by as much as $3.625, to $31, before rebounding to finish the day at $33.375, off $1.25, in very active trading in the over-the-counter market.
Volume reached almost 5.3 million shares.


Riley Teaches Knicks That More Means Less
After putting the Knicks through a two-and-a-half-hour workout he labeled their best since training camp, Pat Riley explained his benching of three players Saturday by saying they had contracted "the disease of more."
The Knicks' coach made it clear that he was far more concerned today in getting his team headed in the right direction than he was about the feelings of Greg Anthony, Anthony Mason and John Starks.


COMPANY NEWS
DREYER'S GRAND ICE CREAM INC., Oakland, Calif., said it had acquired the T.&amp; W. premium ice cream brand and the supermarket direct-store distribution system of Calip Dairies Inc. of Lindenhurst, L.I., for $21.8 million.
RJR NABISCO INC., New York, said its Nabisco Foods Group unit was negotiating to purchase Phoenix Confections Inc.


An Odd Alliance Subdues Turkey's Kurdish Rebels
Turkish Government forces have taken advantage of a split in the ranks of Kurds, winning a series of battles that have nearly crushed an eight-year rebellion by Kurdish rebels fighting for an independent state in southeastern Turkey.
About 5,000 members of the Kurdish Workers' Party, a Marxist guerrilla group, have been driven from their remote mountain redoubts here in northern Iraq, and more than half have been killed, wounded or captured.


Search Continues for Sailor
Rescue planes yesterday continued a search for Mike Plant, the American solo sailor whose 60-foot sailboat, Coyote, was found capsized in the Atlantic Ocean Sunday.
Plant, 42 years old, of Jamestown, R.I., was not in sight Sunday, according to the crew of Protank Orinoco, a Liberian tanker that discovered the Coyote floating upside down in an area about 500 miles north of the Azores.
There is speculation that Plant might be adrift in a life raft.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
Ernst &amp; Young paid $400 million to settle Government claims that it improperly audited federally insured banks and savings and loans.
It did not acknowledge wrongdoing.  [ Page A1. ]
The U.S.
Government should increase taxes to reduce the deficit of nearly $300 billion, an O.E.C.D. report says.  [ D1. ]


Discount Seller of Perfume Loses Ruling on Copyright
A Federal judge in Los Angeles has ruled that Drug Emporium, a discount drugstore chain, violated copyright laws when it sold the perfume Amarige without permission of the manufacturer, Parfums Givenchy.
The decision gives manufacturers of prestige cosmetics, fragrances and luxury goods a potent weapon against the diversion of products into unauthorized distribution channels.


Schott Sees Bill White, Then Defends Conduct
Marge Schott, the owner of the Cincinnati Reds, met with the National League president, Bill White, yesterday in the wake of accusations that she made racist and anti-Semitic comments.
"He didn't yell at me; Bill never yells at me," Schott said by telephone from her office in Cincinnati.
"This whole thing is berserk. I'm a minority, too. I've been in business since my husband died 26 years ago. I've had thousands of employees and no one has ever said anything like that."


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-9  FRANCE LACKS VETO ON FARM PACT  France acknowledged that it had no legal authority to veto a farm trade agreement between the European Community and the United States, but insisted it had the right to block community acceptance of a broader global trade agreement.
A1  Germany's strategy on global trade now: Silence.
A6  MORE FOREIGNERS' BLOOD IS SHED  A woman and two girls of Turkish nationality were killed by a firebomb in Germany's deadliest violence against foreigners in three years.
Neo-Nazis were blamed.
A1  ALLIANCE SUBDUES TURKISH KURDS  Turkey's Army, in an unlikely alliance with Kurds in northern Iraq, has won a series of important battles against a group of Turkish Kurds who are fighting to establish an independent nation.
A1  YELSTIN REASSURES MILITARY  In an apparent attempt to reassure troops, Russia's President vowed to raise spending on military arms and equipment while keeping defense spending at current levels.
A3  BOSNIAN TIDE TURNS  Attacks on Travnik and the surrounding area have U.N. officials worried that Serbian forces have new battle plans that go beyond the earlier territorial objectives.
A3  PERU'S AID STILL IN QUESTION  Peru's elections, which apparently gave President Fujimori's candidates an majority, were certified free of fraud by observers, but that was no assurance that aid cut off earlier this year would resume.
A5  NO PEACE IN ISRAEL DURING RECESS  Peace talks are not synonymous with peace in the case of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
Violence continues to hit Israel while the talks are in a holding pattern.
A9  Beijing Journal: "Yellow cows" grow fat on capitalist pastures.
A4  Veterans' and M.I.A. groups seek to delay relations with Vietnam.
A5  The Security Council said it would not ease sanctions on Iraq.
A8  King Hussein issues a warning to Islamic fundamentalists.
A9  National A10-13  AUDITOR SETTLES CHARGES  The accounting firm Ernst &amp; Young agreed to pay a record $400 million to settle Government claims that it improperly audited banks and savings and loans that failed.
The settlement avoided years of litigation and could serve as a model.
A1  G.E.
QUITS AEROSPACE SECTOR  General Electric said it would sell its aerospace division to Martin Marietta for $3 billion, in a deal underscoring the new era for the military-industrial complex.
A1  THE WORTH OF JOB PROGRAMS  Like every President in the last half-century, President-elect Bill Clinton is promising new programs to create jobs.
History shows that such efforts can create jobs -- but they can also lead to fraud and inefficiency.
A1  DROP US OFF IN TOWN  A freighter carrying 62 Haitian refugees sailed into downtown Miami, bringing a test of American immigration policy even as Washington is sending mixed signals about its intentions toward boat people.
A10  PACKWOOD INQUIRY URGED  National women's groups and legislators urged the Senate to investigate accusations that Senator Bob Packwood of Oregon made unwanted advances to 10 women.
A11  A FIZZLING CHALLENGE?
Many members of Congress won election this year with promises to challenge the system in Washington.
But if the turnout at a meeting for new lawmakers is any indication, few have the will to follow through on those pledges.
A11  ON THE TRAIL, AGAIN  Clinton was back on the campaign trail -- this time for a Georgia Senator struggling to win a runoff race.
After three weeks of transition business, Clinton appeared to enjoy reprising his familiar role as campaigner.
A13  A Republican challenger has a surprising chance in Georgia.
A13  Former Senator Paul Tsongas undergoes a biopsy.
A13  GUIDELINES ON ELDERLY  The American Medical Association suggested that doctors routinely ask older patients about abusive or neglectful behavior.
The group cited estimates that two million older Americans a year are mistreated.
A10  HOSTAGE INQUIRY ENDS  A Senate panel says it cannot substantiate an accusation that Ronald Reagan's campaign in 1980 tried to delay the release of American hostages in Iran until after the Presidential election, but it added that some aides operated "on the outer limits of propriety." A11  A second man is rescued from a volcano crater in Hawaii.
A10  Dr.
Jack Kevorkian is present at a sixth suicide in Michigan.
A10  Metro Digest B1  Business Digest D1  Science Times C1-12  DATA LACKING ON DIET PROGRAMS  The jury is still out on whether commercial diet programs can scientifically prove long term success in keeping weight off.
A1  Cheapest protection of nature may lie in taxes, not laws.
C1  After kinship and marriage, anthropology discovers love.
C1  Fashion Page B6  Words for spring: soft, gentle, transparent, light.
Obituaries D19-20  Roy Acuff, country musician.
D20  Arts/Entertainment C13-18  Joseph Mankiewicz looks back on his life and career.
C13  Theater: A Beirut basement on Broadway.
C13  Sports B7-13  Boxing: And now, Bowe's 12 rounds of fame.
B7  Hockey: Penguins are 5-2 winners over Rangers.
B7  Editorials/Op-Ed A14-15  Editorials  Homeless policy, in contempt.
No partial deal for Iraq.
Sexual harassment in the Senate.
Let the mayor choose the board.
Letters  A. M. Rosenthal: Our German crisis.
Russell Baker: It never sleeps, either.
Michael Horowitz: States of grace.


Clinton Returns to the Campaign Trail
In an apparently welcome distraction from the rigors of creating a new government, President-elect Bill Clinton returned to the campaign trail today to stump for Senator Wyche Fowler Jr. on the eve of a bitter runoff election.
After three weeks of security briefings and juggling names of Cabinet appointees, Mr.
Clinton appeared to enjoy reprising his familiar role as campaigner.
At his first stop, in Macon, he even picked up a saxophone and joined the Central High School Sugar Bear Band in the pop tune "Hey, Baby."


Trump Development Plan To Drop Giant TV Studio
City Council leaders and Donald J. Trump have reached an agreement on Mr.
Trump's proposed development on the Upper West Side that eliminates a giant television studio in the original blueprint and creates a public board to oversee the $3 billion project, Council aides said.
The Council's land-use committee will vote on the agreement today and the full Council will take it up on Dec. 17.
Council Speaker Peter F. Vallone said yesterday that he expected the project to be approved with the changes Mr.
Trump agreed to.


Tarkanian Is Checked for Chest Pains
Spurs Coach JERRY TARKANIAN suffered chest pains during the weekend and underwent hospital examinations in Houston and San Antonio.
The 62-year-old Tarkanian does not plan to miss the team's trip this week to Portland and Utah.


Classical Music in Review
Gary Lakes  Tenor Alice Tully Hall
Perhaps in every big voice there is a smaller one trying to get out.
Gary Lakes, at any rate, seemed happy on Sunday afternoon to narrow the dimensions of his better-known heldentenor sound and sing music of reduced dimensions and heightened subtlety.
His German diction, forwardly placed and with excellent vowels, sold Beethoven's "An die ferne Geliebte" and six excerpts from Schubert's "Schwanengesang" persuasively.
His English in two Handel arias, in Griffes's "Three Songs of Fiona Macleod" and in five Irish folk songs at the end was scarcely less precise.


INQUIRY IS SOUGHT IN SENATOR'S CASE
Leaders of several national women's groups joined two members of the newly elected Congressional delegation from Oregon today in urging the Senate to investigate accusations that Senator Bob Packwood of Oregon had made unwanted sexual overtures to 10 former female aides.
But it is far from clear whether or when an investigation might occur, partly because the turnover in Senate seats after the Nov. 3 election has so convulsed the political blocs that will face the matter early next year.


World Baha'i Congress Opens in New York


A New Network President at ABC
Capital Cities/ABC Inc. named Robert A. Iger as president of the ABC Television Network Group yesterday.
Mr.
Iger, currently the president of the network's entertainment division, succeeds John B. Sias, who is moving into an advisory role with the company.


Executive Changes
AMERICAN FILM TECHNOLOGIES INC., Los Angeles, named Arthur P. Hartel president and chief executive.
CADUS PHARMACEUTICAL CORP., New York, named Jeremy M. Levin, M.D., Ph.D. president and chief executive.


Colorado State Dismisses Bruce as Coach
EARLE BRUCE was fired yesterday as Colorado State's coach because he created a climate of "intimidation and fear" in the football program, school officials said.
Bruce, who finished this season with a 5-7 record and was 22-24-1 in four years at Colorado State, had two years remaining on his contract.
He refused to resign Sunday during a meeting with the school president, ALBERT YATES ; the athletic director, COREY JOHNSON, and the university legal counsel, BRIAN SNOW.


Dinkins Asks Segarra To Resign
The pressure on Ninfa Segarra to resign from the Board of Education increased yesterday when Mayor David N. Dinkins joined Fernando Ferrer, the Bronx Borough President who had appointed her, and said she should step down.
But Ms.
Segarra stood firm, notifying Mr.
Ferrer by letter that despite their current disagreement over the degree to which information on AIDS should be disseminated in school, she intended to serve out her four-year term, which expires in 1994.


For Nagle, Some Sun But Too Many Clouds
With the Jets staggering under the weight of a 3-8 season, Coach Bruce Coslet's confidence in quarterback Browning Nagle shows no signs of buckling.
Nagle's confidence isn't sagging either.
"I'm still the same confident guy," Nagle said today.
"Feeling sorry for yourself isn't going to help."


Review/Theater: Someone Who'll Watch Over Me; Coping With Incarceration, Or, the Lighter Side of Beirut
Although Ella Fitzgerald's lush rendition of "Someone to Watch Over Me" is piped in after every scene, the new West End import at the Booth is not an adjunct to "Crazy for You" at the Shubert next door.
"Someone Who'll Watch Over Me," as the Irish writer Frank McGuinness titles his play, is set in a filthy Beirut basement serving as a windowless cell for three hostages.
And it features one choreographic gimmick that not even its resourceful musical neighbor came up with: Mr.
McGuinness's characters each have a leg shackled to the wall.
I don't mean to sound flip about the evening's subject, but "Someone Who'll Watch Over Me" brings its own light touch to grim matters.
Mr.
McGuinness's view of the hostages' plight is more Beckett than Costa-Gavras.
His unpretentious play offers no bombastic speeches about man's inhumanity to man, no onstage violence and no debates about Middle Eastern politics.
Instead of exploiting a real-life tragedy to bring a spurious journalistic reality to the stage, Mr.
McGuinness uses his premise as a springboard for imagining the fantasies, jokes and spiritual credos with which ordinary men might somehow survive barbaric incarceration.


CHRONICLE
Another curtain lifts: Chelsea House Publishers is planning a series of books on gay and lesbian topics for teen-agers, and MARTIN DUBERMAN, the author and historian, is deep in the throes of matching subjects to authors for 40 projected books.
Thirty will be biographies and the other 10 will be on health, social and cultural issues.
His title is editorial consultant, but that does not begin to describe the responsibilities he has undertaken.
"I will be doing pretty much everything, including choosing which authors will write which books, who will be the biography subjects and what will be the issues," said Professor Duberman, who is Distinguished Professor of History at two branches of the City University of New York, Lehman College and the Graduate Center.
He is also the founder of the Center for Lesbian and Gay Studies at the Graduate Center and the author of numerous books and plays, including "In White America," first produced in 1963.


Let the Mayor Choose the Board
The Bronx Borough President, Fernando Ferrer, has now been joined by Mayor David Dinkins in his effort to win the resignation of Ninfa Segarra from New York City's Board of Education.
Ms.
Segarra, one of four members of the board who constitute a contentious majority, adamantly refuses to step down.
Two issues have grabbed headlines.
One is Ms.
Segarra's dispute with Mr.
Ferrer and the Schools Chancellor, Joseph Fernandez, over AIDS education.
The other is her habit of flooding the Chancellor's office with memos on education matters large and small.


Policy on Haitian Refugees Blurs in Political Transition
A freighter carrying 62 Haitian refugees sailed into downtown Miami early today, forcing a test of immigration policy at a time when Washington is sending mixed signals about its intentions toward boat people from the troubled Caribbean nation.
Officials of the Immigration and Naturalization Service here said the refugees, 43 men and 19 women found in two concealed compartments, had requested political asylum after the cargo ship was intercepted by United States Customs inspectors.


Review/Country; Woes in the Heartland
"I'm trying to shed that girl-next-door image," remarked Suzy Bogguss, the rising young country star who made her local debut at the Bottom Line with a five-member band on Thursday evening.
Like many country singers who play New York City for the first time, Ms.
Bogguss, who has two albums, "Aces" and "Voices in the Wind" (Liberty), on the charts, seemed to view the city as alien, slightly intimidating territory.
The singer, who was born in Illinois and now lives in Nashville, expressed a guarded admiration for the fact that in New York "y'all don't go to bed early."


Banc One Names Head For New Unit
The Banc One Corporation's No. 2 executive, John W. Westman, today was named president and chief operating officer of the recently acquired Valley National Corporation, which has holdings in Utah, Arizona and California.
In appointing a senior executive to a hands-on role at Banc One's fourth-largest operating unit, the company, based in Columbus, Ohio, is hoping to imprint its culture quickly and earn back its investment, analysts said.


When Children Play
ON a morning when you decide to sleep late, little Rachel slips downstairs to play a computer game.
She has learned the basic operations for using a Macintosh, and there are a few games on the family computer that she loves and can play unattended.
Or so you think.
What's this folder called "Taxes?" Into the trash can.
"Great American Novel?" It is so much fun to click and drag.
"Newsletter?" See the trash can bulge.


Cease-Fire or No, Serbian Shells Fall
Despite a pledge by Serbian commanders to honor a cease-fire across Bosnia, Serbian nationalist forces have mounted a new offensive against this old Muslim and Croatian town, raising concern that a new phase in the war may be beginning.
After a reduction in fighting around Sarajevo and some other battle zones, United Nations officials had hoped the hostilities were winding down, but today they had to assess what the new attacks might portend.


American Express Sets A 1-2 Punch
ONLY a month after unexpectedly turning its agency lineup upside-down, the American Express Company is aggressively intensifying advertising for its charge cards as its agency, Ogilvy &amp; Mather New York, delivers to consumers and retailers a sharply competitive one-two punch.
One punch comes from the first major endorsement by the comedian Jerry Seinfeld, star of the eponymous sitcom on NBC.
In commercials that began running Saturday in seven large markets, including Los Angeles and New York, Mr.
Seinfeld, in his characteristic edgy persona as a commentator on life's irksome annoyances, mocks rival credit cards, like Visa, issued by banks.


Classical Music in Review
'L'Elisir d'Amore'  Metropolitan Opera
The Met's candy-colored production of "L'Elisir d'Amore" essentially had a new cast on Saturday night; only Heidi Grant Murphy remained from the lineup first heard on Nov. 2.
Kathleen Battle sang Adina, as she did last year, and the purity of her voice gave the performance a firm musical base, although at times her perpetual poise constricted the character's mercurial temperament.
By contrast, Francisco Araiza brought Nemorino vibrantly to life; his voice may be a little thin, but his sense of theater is unerring.
"Una furtiva lagrima" had a languid, narcissistic tone, belying Nemorino's cardboard naivete.
Enzo Dara, a veteran comic baritone, dryly pranced his way through the role of Dulcamora, perhaps too dryly.
And Roberto Frontali made his Met debut as Belcore, a role with few vocal rewards; he displayed a strong, agile voice beneath the required layers of inane posturing.


Observer; It Never Sleeps, Either
"Have a heart" is the command of the young moocher with his palm up on Eighth Avenue.
What ever happened to "Grease my palm"?
This palm is attached to a body so young, athletic and full of sass that its operator can't possibly be a beggar, can he?
Probably a college student working on his thesis.
A field study, maybe, to find what percentage of theater-district strollers are so guilt-ridden that they will come across with baksheesh rather than admit to heartlessness.


Paula A. Neill Clothier, 37
Paula Antoinette Neill, owner of And Why Not?, a clothing boutique in Fort Greene, Brooklyn, died on Friday after she was struck by a commuter train at the Baldwin Station of the Long Island Rail Road.
She was 37 years old and lived in Baldwin, L.I.
Ms.
Neill, a former dietitian, founded the boutique four years ago to showcase fashion and art by young black men and women.
She was born in Jamaica and came to the United States in 1970.


BRIEFS


Eugene Weintraub, Music Publisher, 88
Eugene Weintraub, a music publisher who helped introduce the music of contemporary Russian composers to American audiences, died on Thursday at Beth Israel Hospital.
He was 88 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died of complications following surgery, said his wife, Lilien.


Patterns
The Cashmere Crowd
They used to say there were five seasons in the garment industry: fall, winter, spring, summer and slack.
For the last few years there has been a sixth, the sample-sale season.
This season got under way last week in New York, the home of the sample sale, with bargain hunters lining up like rock fans hours before the doors opened.
The lure was showroom samples of men's and women's clothing, and leftover merchandise at below-wholesale prices.


Behind Kohl's Silence
Chancellor Helmut Kohl of Germany has remained conspicuously silent in the bitter debate over European farm policies.
Page A6.


Soviet Nuclear Dumps Disclosed
Russian authorities have disclosed the precise sites where four nuclear submarines laden with missiles and torpedoes have sunk as well as the locations near the Arctic island of Novaya Zemlaya where several Russian reactors and other radioactive waste were dumped over the last 30 years.
The disclosures are part of Russian-American negotiations on how to monitor the dumped radioactive material and do what is possible to prevent its escape.


Honda Names Woman To Head Plant in Ohio
Following the defection of two top executives to BMW, the Honda Motor Company has named Susan J. Insley to supervise Honda's engine plant in Anna, Ohio, making her the highest-ranking woman in American automotive manufacturing.
In a field dominated by male engineers, the appointment of Ms.
Insley, who is 46 years old, is doubly unusual because of her background as a lawyer, teacher and legislative aide.


Cheapest Protection of Nature May Lie In Taxes, Not Laws
COULD the exploding cost of environmental protection, widely seen as part of America's productivity problem, become part of the solution?
A new generation of environmental researchers, as comfortable with the theories of Adam Smith as they are with those of Darwin or Mendel, thinks taxes that penalize polluters could make the economy fitter and leaner, even as it makes the environment cleaner.
Their case is outlined in a report from the World Resources Institute, by no coincidence released last week to gain maximum attention from the nascent Clinton Administration.


A Resignation At R. H. Macy
Mitchell Finkelstein, who has presided over the production and development of private-label apparel in Hong Kong for R. H. Macy &amp; Company, is resigning to pursue other interests, a spokesman said yesterday.
As the son of Edward S. Finkelstein, the former chairman of Macy who took the company private in a management buyout in 1986 and resigned two months after it entered bankruptcy-law proceedings in January, Mitchell Finkelstein was a controversial figure inside Macy.
This summer he was forced to give up his title as chairman of Macy's product development division, which was bestowed in the weeks before the company filed for bankruptcy-law protection and created a great amount of dissension within management ranks.


Classical Music in Review
Royal Philharmonic Orchestra  Carnegie Hall
Under the leadership of Vladimir Ashkenazy, the Royal Philharmonic Orchestra has become one of Britain's finest ensembles, ceding pride of place only to the London Symphony.
It is a finely balanced group, eloquent in all sections.
On recordings, Mr.
Ashkenazy has distinguished himself as a proponent of the early- and mid-20th-century repertory: Sibelius, Rachmaninoff and Shostakovich especially.


Tsongas Has Abdominal Surgery To Determine if Cancer Recurred
Former Senator Paul E. Tsongas of Massachusetts underwent abdominal surgery at a Boston hospital last week to determine whether his cancer has recurred, spokeswomen for Mr.
Tsongas and his doctors said.
Mr.
Tsongas, an unsuccessful candidate for the Democratic Presidential nomination this year, went home from Brigham and Women's Hospital yesterday, said Diane Ossinger, a spokeswoman for Mr.
Tsongas at his law offices in Boston.


Peace Efforts By Mobsters Recounted
Leaders of three Mafia families summoned feuding factions of the Colombo family to secret meetings last year in a futile effort to avert bloodshed, a turncoat witness testified yesterday in a Federal racketeering-murder trial in Brooklyn.
Providing an inside glimpse of the Mafia's peacemaking efforts, the witness, Alfonso D'Arco, who identified himself as the former acting boss of the Lucchese family, said he and other leaders of the Lucchese, Gambino and Genovese groups tried to prevent a Colombo war.
The talks were successful for a time, but the prosecutors have noted that shooting broke out in the fall of 1991, leaving at least 10 dead.


Yeltsin to Keep Military Budget At Same Level
President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia told his top military leaders today that he would keep the total military budget at last year's level, but would increase spending on arms and equipment 10 percent.
That plan presumably offered a measure of reassurance to the armed forces, which have been disoriented and demoralized by the collapse of the Soviet Union and a radical drop in military spending.
But Mr.
Yeltsin also assailed the officers for moving far too slowly in reorganizing and reducing the vast Soviet military machine, and he demanded that they crack down on arms pilferage and corruption.


Chemical Fumes Disrupt School


Magic's Williams Will Be Out Indefinitely
Orlando Magic forward BRIAN WILLIAMS, who has not played since collapsing in practice on Nov. 13, is suffering from clinical depression and will be out indefinitely, the team said yesterday.
Williams, 23 years old, has been plagued by fainting and dizzy spells since August.
Team officials met with him yesterday at Florida Hospital in Orlando, where he has been undergoing treatment.


Four Officers Injured In Dispute at Prison
A disturbance involving about 200 inmates at the Connecticut Correctional Institution at Enfield last night left four officers and two prisoners injured, officials said.
The incident began about 8:30 P.M. with a dispute between an inmate and an officer in a yard at the high-security facility, said Bill Wheeler, a spokesman for the Department of Correction.
He said he did not know what caused the dispute.


A Monday Night Showcase Endures
In Year 23, ABC's "Monday Night Football," has reigned in prime time longer than "Gunsmoke" or "M*A*S*H" and only one season fewer than Ed Sullivan.
It survived the raucous showbiz years of Howard Cosell and Don Meredith and still thrives under Al Michaels, Dan Dierdorf and Frank Gifford.
Despite a slight dip in ratings for the season from 17.1 at this time last year to 17.0, "M.N.F." is ranked seventh among all prime-time shows (after a final 12th place finish and 16.6 rating in 1991).





U.C.L.A. Fast Breaks From Its Past
The starting center and the top reserve forward of the U.C.L.A. basketball team are from Czechoslovakia, which makes for unusual talk on the court.
If they are simultaneously in a game and one of them says "Som volny," it means, "I am open."
The center -- burly, 6-foot-10-inch Richard Petruska -- is almost desperate to assimilate, however.
Posting up during the Bruins' first-round preseason National Invitation Tournament game last Wednesday, he called for the ball, saying, "Ya, am open." He meant it, and scored a team-high 21 points as U.C.L.A. beat St.
Louis, 68-54.


G.E. Will Sell Aerospace Unit For $3 Billion
The General Electric Company said yesterday that it would sell its aerospace division to the Martin Marietta Corporation for $3 billion in a deal underscoring the wrenching new era for the military-industrial complex.
The sale removes G.E. entirely from the military and aerospace electronics businesses it has held since World War I. However, G.E. will continue to sell aircraft engines to the military.


Kovalev Gets Taste Of Minors
Aleksei Kovalev may be a Ranger superstar of the future, but today he is the highest-paid member of the club's farm team in Binghamton.
Kovalev, the 19-year-old rookie right wing from Russia, was demoted hours before the Rangers played the Stanley Cup champion Pittsburgh Penguins last night at Madison Square Garden.
"It's the feeling of the coaches and myself that he is playing a different game than the rest of the team is playing," said Neil Smith, the president and general manager of the Rangers.
"His linemates never know where he is going to be. He's having trouble communicating. He's a young boy coming from a different environment. He's got to learn the fundamentals of picking up your check, the one on the ice, not the one in the office. He knows the other one."


'80 Hostage Dealings by G.O.P. Verged on Impropriety, Panel Says
After a six-month inquiry, a Senate panel concluded in a report today that Ronald Reagan's top campaign aides came perilously close to improper conduct by aggressively monitoring President Jimmy Carter's hostage negotiations with Iran in 1980.
"They were operating on the outer limits of propriety, considering their status as private citizens without authority to interfere in the conduct of the foreign relations of the United States," said the report by the Senate Foreign Relations Subcommittee on Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs.


No Second-Guessing On Chiefs' No. 1 Pick
When the Kansas City Chiefs made free safety Dale Carter of Tennessee their first-round pick and the 20th overall selection in the National Football League draft eight months ago, skeptics wondered if the Chiefs had squandered a high pick by using it in an area that was one of the team's strengths.
The Chiefs had long featured one the league's swiftest and most effective secondaries.
Saftey Deron Cherry was retiring, but returning was the group's nucleus, cornerbacks Kevin Ross and Albert Lewis.
There appeared more pressing needs elsewhere, possibly a quarterback to groom or more size and speed at receiver.


Pros and Amateurs to Break the Ice
The concept was new, but the bones were not.
Rosalynn Sumners, one of eight competitors taking part tonight and Tuesday in the United States Pro-Am Figure Skating Challenge, said she would not perform any vintage triple jumps just to impress the judges.
"That's not part of what I do anymore," said Sumners, who won the silver medal at the 1984 Winter Olympics in Sarajevo, Yugoslavia.
"I'm 28 years old now. I'm a successful professional with another life. I'm not going to get all nervous about tenths of a point."


With Talks Stalled, Israelis Face New Violence
With the Middle East peace talks marking time and, some feel, in need of resuscitation by the incoming Clinton Administration, Israel is being buffeted by new blasts of violence that make clear that the negotiations have brought no letup in the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
The violence has been accompanied by a deterioration in attitudes about the usefulness of the talks in Washington, which have been suspended until Dec. 7.


Bridge
A dark-horse foursome from South Carolina led a strong field of 40 teams into the final two sessions of the Open Board-a-Match Teams at the American Contract Bridge League's Fall Nationals here today.
Tom Rutledge and Richard Guarneri, both of Charleston, and Bob McMahon and Happoldt Neuffer, both of Columbia, finished Sunday's qualifying play with 35 boards.
That was half a board ahead of Bob Blanchard, Jim Krekorian and John Greenspan, all of Manhattan, and Drew Casen of Boca Raton, Fla.
Leading the Women's Board-a-Match Teams with 37.1 boards were Jo Ann Mannfield of Philadelphia, Joann Glasson of Morrisville, Pa., Lynn Blumenthal of Bellevue, Wash., and Susan Urbaniak of Mercer Island, Wash.
In second, with 33.9 boards, were Darlene Hammond of Escondido, Calif., Sue Lyski of Portland, Ore., Laurie McIntyre of Ottawa and Barbara Sion of Las Vegas.


Peruvian Election Free of Fraud, U.S. Officials Say
United States officials said today that Congressional elections on Sunday, in which President Alberto K. Fujimori appears to have won a majority of the seats, were free of any serious voter fraud and represented a significant step in the country's return to democracy.
But the United States officials stopped short of predicting when more than $120 million in United States economic aid would be released, saying that will depend on how autonomous the new Congress is and whether Peru will be able to improve its record on human rights.


Free to Be (Having Fun) at the Mall All Night Long
RICHARD FELDT is a veteran security guard who's seen many strange things on his shift at the South Hills Mall here.
Malls are meccas for the good and bad, the imaginative and cliche'd, the commercial and well-meaning in modern American life, all under one roof with ample adjacent parking and open late through the holidays for your convenience.
In fact, these concrete-surrounded fortresses of fashion and citadels of schlock have everything American cities have except the bad weather, sidewalk fears and permanent populations.
That's because these cities close at night -- 9:30 comes, and, clang, these indoor worlds simply shutter themselves against the forces of darkness outside.


Pepsico Planning to Widen Spain Soft-Drink Operation
Pepsico Inc. announced today that it was acquiring for approximately $320 million all of Kas S.A., a popular Spanish soft-drink manufacturer, and a 70 percent stake in Knorr Elorza S.A., a bottling and distributing joint venture for both Pepsi and KAS products.
The move is intended to strengthen the relatively strong position of Pepsi in Spain, its sixth-largest market outside the United States and second-largest European market after Britain.


Nations Chide U.S. for Low Taxes
Exasperated with the failure of the United States to reduce its budget deficit, an organization representing 24 industrial nations said today in an unusually blunt report that the American Government must consider increasing taxes.
It suggested a 25-cent-a-gallon increase in the tax on gasoline and a 5 percent national sales tax.
The report, issued by the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, said the Federal deficit of nearly $300 billion threatened to push up interest rates around the world as well as undermine the American Government's plans to increase investment.


Delay in Hanoi Ties Is Sought
As the United States and Vietnam take tentative steps toward ending their 17-year diplomatic and economic separation, groups of veterans and relatives of military personnel missing in Southeast Asia have begun a battle to delay the reconciliation.
For the moment, their target is Senator John Kerry, the Massachusetts Democrat who heads the Senate Select Committee on P.O.W.-M.I.A.
Affairs.


Dinkins's Mission: Trying to Relegate Crown Heights to the Past
Mayor David N. Dinkins's immediate goal in delivering a televised address on race relations at noon tomorrow is to place the tumult over the Crown Heights verdict behind him, mayoral aides said yesterday.
But they said the brief address is as much about the future as about what happened in a Brooklyn courtroom last month or on the streets of Crown Heights a year ago: Can he demonstrate the leadership to bring the city together and get himself re-elected?
"Thanksgiving is an appropriate time to bring people back to the family table who may have been away for a long time," said Peter J. Johnson Jr., a lawyer and mayoral adviser who was drafting Mr.
Dinkins's speech yesterday.
"I don't know if he has any expectations that the debate will end or become immediately focused and less personal, but I think he believes it is imperative that he do something."


Rodman Is Reinstated by the Pistons
DENNIS RODMAN was reinstated by the Detroit Pistons yesterday following a three-hour meeting with club officials.
Rodman, the National Basketball Association's leading rebounder last season, had been suspended without pay since last Thursday because he refused to play.


or Arctic Data, Ask a Polar Bear
THE helicopter bucks and sways.
Dr.
Malcolm A. Ramsay is riding behind the pilot over the wind-whipped taiga of northern Manitoba.
He anchors his left arm in the open window and aims a rifle at the lumbering yellowish-white shape below.
The rifle gives a faint pop and a four-inch long Telazol tranquilizer dart jabs the shoulder of the big, hungry polar bear.
Within four minutes it is temporarily immobilized.


Republican Runs Hard in Georgia Runoff
Amid cheerleaders, bunting and an array of Republican stars, Paul D. Coverdell today completed his campaign to unseat Senator Wyche Fowler Jr. on the same note of slashing attacks with which he began more than 18 months ago,
The 53-year-old insurance company owner told the crowd of about 200 at the City Club in Marietta near here that unlike the Democratic incumbent he would keep his promises if elected, and that unlike Mr.
Fowler he would not say one thing in Washington and another back home.


Westinghouse Will Try to Liquidate Its Losses
In bid to end a financial crisis that threatened to overwhelm it, the Westinghouse Electric Company said yesterday that it would close down its financial services business, sell some profitable lines of business to raise money, slash dividend payments and shuffle upper management.
The company said it would take a fourth-quarter pretax charge of $2.65 billion to cover losses in financial services and the costs of operating the division until it could be liquidated.
This comes in addition to $2.8 billion in previous write-offs involving the unit, largely as a result of bad real estate loans made in the 1980's.
The operations of financial services include corporate financing, commercial and residential real estate financing and leasing.
Shift in Plans
"This comprehensive plan enables us to put our financial services problem behind us," Paul E. Lego, chairman of Westinghouse, said in a statement.
The company previously said it had wanted to shrink its credit subsidiary in an orderly manner, but continuing losses and the downgrading of its debt securities left it shut out of commercial paper markets and dependent on a dwindling line of credit from banks.


Herman's Places Account in Review
Herman's Sporting Goods has placed in review its account, previously handled in-house, with billings estimated at $30 million.
Industry executives who spoke only on condition of anonymity confirmed a report of the review this week in Advertising Age.
The agencies said to be participating in the retail chain's review are DDB Needham Chicago and three New York shops: Backer Spielvogel Bates Inc.; Scali, McCabe, Sloves,and Young &amp; Rubicam.
Though Advertising Age and some executives included J. Walter Thompson U.S.A. in New York as a participant, others said that agency was not included.


INSIDE
What Revolt in Congress?
Few new members of Congress, it appears, are showing the will to fulfill campaign promises to challenge the Washington system.
Page A11.
Cutbacks at Westinghouse
Westinghouse will close its financial services business, sell off some profitable lines, cut dividends and shuffle management.
Page D1.
Move Against Drivers' Union
New York prosecutors want a trustee to run the newspaper deliverers' union to eliminate what they say is Mafia control of the union.
Page B1.
Surviving Under the Volcano
A cameraman was pulled from an active volcano in Hawaii after spending two days on a ledge in a steaming lava pit.
Page A10.
Roy Acuff Is Dead
The singer and fiddler, known to Grand Ole Opry listeners as the King of Country Music, was 89.
Page D20.


Knapp Communications Is for Sale
The owner of Architectural Digest and Bon Appetit, two visually stylish magazines that cater to affluent readers, was put up for sale today.
Industry sources speculated that the two magazines would sell for about $150 million to $200 million.
The magazines' parent company, Knapp Communications Inc., is privately held.
Company officials declined to disclose Knapp's net income, but did say that both magazines earn operating profits.
Knapp, based in Los Angeles, had revenue of $90 million in the year that ended last Jan. 31.


50 Plead Guilty in Medicaid Fraud Scheme
In a case that authorities described as the largest of its kind, 50 people, including 38 pharmacists, have pleaded guilty to taking part in a scheme to fill bogus Medicaid prescriptions and resell the drugs, Federal prosecutors in New York City said yesterday.
Prosecutors also announced the indictment of 11 other people, 6 of them doctors, in a smaller but equally elaborate operation to bilk Medicaid through dummy medical clinics.


Sports of The Times; Flak Jacket Required
DAVID BROWN, tall and lean, looks almost brittle, especially given the dangerous, the alarming, the gruesome position he finds himself in: a Giant quarterback who might see action.
The Giants, as the Red Cross among others is aware, play the Cowboys in Dallas on Thursday.
Brown knows that the Cowboys' defense is among the nastiest in the National Football League.
"When they smell blood," said Brown yesterday, "they all come after you. If not, then they sit back and just let the front four attack."


3 Turks Killed; Germans Blame A Neo-Nazi Plot
In the worst episode of violence against foreigners since Germany was unified three years ago, a woman and two girls, all of Turkish nationality, burned to death today after firebombs were thrown into their home.
Federal prosecutors quickly took over the criminal investigation, saying the bombers were "endangering the internal security of the German Federal Republic and seeking to liquidate, invalidate or undermine the basis of our Constitution."


Review/Television; A Search for Father: Success Without Reward
Although Marco Williams begins his affecting account of his efforts to track down the father he never knew with the reminder that about half of America's black families do not have a father in the home, he is not delivering a sociological treatise.
Despite the misleading title, "In Search of Our Fathers," tonight's "Frontline" offering is the story of one special young man, and therein lies its special strength.
Mr.
Williams, a 30-year-old documentary maker, first learned his father's name when he was 24.
The details, like much else in this documentary, are left vague but the important things come through.
He grew up in a Philadelphia household run by women, all of whom had borne children to men who promptly disappeared from their lives.
"Four generations of women raised children in this house," he says, "and they all did it without husbands."


People
*
Michael C. Hall was named to the new position of executive vice president and client service director at Leo Burnett U.S.A., Chicago.
He was previously vice president of national advertising at Pizza Hut, Wichita, Kan. *
Barbara Friedmann, advertising promotion director at Parenting magazine, New York, was promoted to the new position of marketing director at the Parenting Group, which includes Parenting and other titles like Baby Talk.
Also, Deborah Mignucci, Eastern advertising manager at Parenting, was promoted to the new position of advertising director at the Parenting Group.


FRENCH NOW AGREE THEY LACK A VETO OVER FARMING PACT
France acknowledged today that it had no legal authority to veto a farm trade agreement between the European Community and the United States, but insisted it did have the right to block community acceptance of a broader global trade agreement.
The fear of a French veto had hung over the farm agreement reached Friday after Agriculture Minister Jean-Pierre Soisson, and then Prime Minister Pierre Beregovoy, called the compromise unacceptable.
While neither official referred to a veto, the harsh remarks were interpreted by some trade officials and many journalists as a threat of such action.


Review/Music; Singing Out in Annual Tribute to Richard Tucker
Opera fans love galas the way Americans love parades.
There's nothing very subtle about a brass band, and when you get tired of one, there is another just down the street and coming your way.
And so it is at concerts like the Richard Tucker Music Foundation's 17th annual gala on Sunday: voice addicts celebrating singing at full throat and in small sound bites, avoiding all the while worrisome confrontations with plot and dramatic subtlety.
It gives events like these a built-in artistic success.
The Tucker concert also raises money for scholarship programs and names a yearly winner, this time Deborah Voigt.


Municipal Art Society Is Nongovernmental
To the Editor:
"New York City's four-month experiment to test a French company's street toilets worked beautifully," you write in "Pay Toilets, an Unqualified Success" (editorial, Nov. 13).
"But there will be no permanent program unless the Dinkins administration pushes it aggressively through red tape and barbed wire." You add: "The proposal must go through hearings and approvals by agencies like the City Planning Commission and the Municipal Art Society."
Modern government is complicated, and concerned citizens often find its workings hard to understand.
You justify complaints about red tape by citing delays that might be created by a phantom agency.


Homeless Policy, in Contempt
State Supreme Court Justice Helen Freedman's decision to hold four New York City officials in contempt may look like grandstanding.
But given foot-dragging on homeless policy and the urgent need for reforms that should have been carried out years ago, she made a reasonable choice.
The case before her arose from legal rulings that require the city to provide immediate shelter for families with no place to sleep.
They now report to Emergency Assistance Units, where caseworkers are supposed to find placements for them in apartments or hotels.


Handling Fame a Round at a Time
A tricky business this being heavyweight champion.
Coco, who is furry and has probably never heard of the Marquess of Queensberry, offers an object lesson.
On Tuesday of Week No. 1 in the reign of Riddick Bowe, Coco was taken by Bowe to be groomed.
By Wednesday, Coco, a 2-year-old gray chow, had yet to make it back to the Bowe household on Lourdes Drive in Fort Washington, Md.


By Design; Boots for All Seasons
Designers in Paris and New York favored finishing off their decidedly flimsy spring fashions with some sort of boot.
The avant-garde chose "grunge" combat-style versions, usually unlaced to flop about the ankles as the models strode aggressively about the runway.
Variations on high-topped clumpy sneakers were also popular.
Karl Lagerfeld accessorized his meltingly feminine styles for the House of Chloe with pastel hosiery that descended into matching-toned ankle-high flat-heeled laced-up booties.
And for his own Lagerfeld collection the designer showed -- even with sensational black cobweb-lace and silk evening dresses -- a kind of toned-down ankle-high suede motorcycle boot.
Talk about contrast.


New Way to Combat Car Theft: Newark Police With Paint Guns
Newark officials yesterday unveiled an unusual new approach that they said would cut into the rash of car thefts that have plagued the city.
They announced the creation of a new team of police officers who will use non-lethal paint guns to pelt escaping cars with globs of blue or yellow fluorescent paint so the cars can be easily spotted later.
The officials urged residents to call the police whenever they spot a vehicle with a telltale paint blob.


Foyt Hires Gordon as His Driver
A.
J.
FOYT, who had nine drivers (including himself) in his car during the 1992 Indy-car season, announced yesterday that he has settled on one for 1993: ROBBY GORDON, a 23-year-old sports-car driver and off-road racer from Orange, Calif.
"He's cocky, he's arrogant, and he wants to win," Foyt said yesterday in a conference call, "and that's the way you've got to be if you want to win today."


Corrections
An article on Saturday about compulsive gambling misidentified the company for which Richard Kunnes, a doctor and insurance executive, works.
He is the chief operating officer for Prudential Psychiatric Management.


China, Too, Knows a Generation Gap; Degrees of Fallenness
To the Editor:
In "Capitalism Thins the Ranks of China's Rulers" (letter, Nov. 10), Timothy Tung states that a relative of a Chinese leader who has left government service for private enterprise is called a "guandao," which he translates as "fallen official." That is incorrect.
Although "dao" in Chinese is the same character meaning "fall, fallen," here it is short for "daoba," a phrase.
"Guandao" means "official engaging (with his or her influence) in profiteering," distinctly different from a fallen official.
S.
J.
HU  Los Altos, Calif., Nov. 10, 1992


Sexual Harassment in the Senate
Ten women who have worked with or for Senator Bob Packwood of Oregon have given explicit accounts of what they say were unwanted sexual advances from Mr.
Packwood.
The accounts, reported last weekend in The Washington Post, cover alleged sexual harassment over a 20-year period.
The women tell similar stories: that Mr.
Packwood arranged to get them alone, then tried to kiss and fondle them, often provoking strenuous resistance.


Jordan King Tells Fundamentalists Not to Meddle
King Hussein, who recently made a startling foreign policy shift by distancing his Government from Iraq, opened a new domestic front today with a tough warning to Islamic fundamentalists.
The King accused the fundamentalists of seeking power through subversion, in collaboration with Iranian and Sudanese authorities.


You Can't Push a Button for New Miracle Cures
To the Editor:
Re "Scientists Fluff the Answer to a Billion-Dollar Question" (The Week in Review, Nov. 1): Research scientists have hardly fluffed the answer to how best to apportion the National Institutes of Health budget.
The problem is that spending policy is becoming ever more dictated by what makes good politics than by what makes good science.
The public expects fundamental advances in the prevention and treatment of disease, leading N.I.H. administrators to ask, What is the most effective way to distribute funds for basic biomedical research?
Those administrators who work hard to solicit funds for the N.I.H. from Congress, and determine how the money will be spent, do not like the answer the basic research community gives.
That is, experience proves that untargeted research provides the greatest strides forward, establishing paths for targeted research to follow.


500 More Jobs Will Be Cut At Grumman
The Grumman Corporation announced plans yesterday to eliminate 500 jobs and said it had completed closing its airplane manufacturing plant in Bethpage, L.I., where the company began assembling airplanes in the 1930's.
The cutback of 500 management and administative jobs, which the company said would be completed by March 31, is part of a reorganization in which Grumman is combining its airplane manufacturing group with its space and electronics group.
The two businesses are closely related, as some of Grumman's biggest contracts are for the manufacture and equipping of airplanes using sophisticated electronics for surveillance.


Editors' Note
An article about Marla Maples in The Home Section on Aug. 20 described her home life, her relationship with Donald Trump and her new career on Broadway.
The article reported that Chuck Jones, who was then Ms.
Maples's publicity agent, had been arrested in the theft of lingerie and shoes from her apartment, and that he had been videotaped "licking and sniffing" some of the shoes.
The article gave no source for those reports and offered no independent verification.
The videotape mentioned in the report is held by the police, who will not release it for viewing.


James M. Stuart, 59, A Venture Capitalist
James Milton Stuart, an investment banker and venture capitalist, died on Friday at St.
Vincent's Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 59 years old and lived in Purchase, N.Y.
Mr. Stuart's family reported his death yesterday and said the cause was a heart attack.


Hostetler Will Be Out, Graham In vs. Cowboys
Jeff Hostetler, the Giants' embattled quarterback, was discharged from the Hospital for Special Surgery in New York today after overnight observation because of a concussion.
Hostetler, who is still suffering from nausea and headaches, will miss the Thanksgiving Day game against the Cowboys in Irving, Tex., meaning that rookie Kent Graham will start.


Ethicists Struggle to Judge the 'Value' of Life
LOIS HOYT, who has liver and colon cancer, has decided that enough is enough.
She told her doctor that she does not want any operations or chemotherapy or radiation treatments, even though they could prolong her life.
Her doctor, she said, agreed.
"He just said, 'Don't do anything too hastily,' " Mrs.
Hoyt said.
But the 75-year-old Mrs.
Hoyt, whose health care is paid for by Medicare, had a choice to accept or refuse treatment.
In refusing, she said, she expects to savor her remaining time and die in her four-poster bed in her Manhattan apartment.


Handley Just Won't Communicate, Giants Say
The war of words, or lack of them, between the Giants' players and coaches intensified a bit more today, one day after Sunday's 47-34 loss to the Philadelphia Eagles.
Carl Banks, a Giants inside linebacker for nine years and a defensive captain for four, said there was a communications gap between players and coaches "and no one to bridge it." Coach Ray Handley said he saw no communications gap.
The loss to the Eagles dropped the Giants' record to 5-6 and severely dimmed their playoff hopes, especially since they must play the strong Dallas Cowboys (9-2) on Thursday.
Banks said an open line between players and coaches could help.


No Headline
We cannot keep accepting daily reports about attacks on foreigners in this country as if they were weather reports. -- BURKHARD HIRSCH, spokesman for Germany's Free Democratic Party.  [ A7:1. ]


S. Charles Bleich; Economist, 76
S.
Charles Bleich, an economist and former vice president of the Committee for Economic Development, a nonpartisan public-policy organization, died on Sunday at Bishop Sherman Nursing Home in Smithtown, L.I.
He was 76 years old and lived in East Hampton, L.I.
Mr.
Bleich, who had been ill with pneumonia, died of acute respiratory failure, said his wife, Anne.


Europe's Monetary System Is Staring at Another Crisis
Europe's monetary system looked more shaky than ever today as governments and central banks battled to head off another full-fledged currency crisis.
Spain, Ireland and Norway all raised interest rates today to bolster their currencies, and Denmark said it would raise rates if necessary.
There was even some pressure on currencies generally considered strong.
The Bank of France, for example, felt compelled to intervene in the markets to support the franc.


Watching the Weather His Own Way for 60 Years
After a lifetime observing the weather, much of it from his own backyard, Edward C. Childs has developed an enviable syncopation with nature.
He steps outdoors, dogs dancing around him.
The wind has shifted, he notices -- a wind almost imperceptible to others.
"It's coming from the east," he says quietly, sunshine pouring down around him through evergreens edged with snow.
An instant later, nowhere near a television set or a radio, he reaches his conclusion: rain is on the way.


Accounts
*
Coopers &amp; Lybrand, New York, said yesterday that it had placed in review its account, previously handled in-house.
A spokesman for the accounting firm confirmed a report of the review in Adweek this week.
He said Avrett, Free &amp; Ginsberg, New York, and Hill, Holliday, Connors, Cosmopulos, Boston, were participating in the review, but declined to discuss whether other agencies were involved.
Billings were not disclosed.


Commercial Diets Lack Proof Of Their Long-Term Success
Bowing to pressure from diet experts and Federal regulators, commercial diet programs are scurrying to collect data about their long-term success, data that do not now exist.
They are also putting more emphasis on programs designed to help customers keep lost pounds off -- often charging additional fees -- in the hope that when the data are collected they will help prove their programs' long-term worth.


Books of The Times; Lady Chatterley and the Hippie
The Trespassers  By Robert Roper 264 pages. Ticknor &amp; Fields. $19.95.
D.
H.
Lawrence's novel "Lady Chatterley's Lover," first published in 1928 and banned in England until 1960 (and in the United States until 1959), created a sensation with its frank depiction of sex.
The novel, however, was not merely a portrait of "the warm blood-sex that establishes the living and revitalizing connection between man and woman." It was also a searing indictment of post-World War I England, providing both a fierce, disturbing portrait of a sterile society undermined by industrialism and class-bound conventions and a plea for its regeneration through passion and a return to nature.


Hampson Cancels Performance Series
The baritone Thomas Hampson has canceled all his appearances in "Eugene Onegin" at the Metropolitan Opera this season because of a bronchial problem, a Met spokesman said.
Mr.
Hampson was scheduled to sing the title role on Dec. 4, 7, 16, 19, 22 and 26.
Dwayne Croft, singing Onegin for the first time at the Met, will replace him on the first two dates.
No replacements have been announced for the rest of the series.
Information: (212) 362-6000.


Kohl Silently Avoiding a Conflict With Mitterrand on Trade Accord
With French opposition to the agricultural compromise reached by Europe and the United States threatening to split the European Community, one key voice has been conspicuously silent, that of Chancellor Helmut Kohl of Germany.
Mr.
Kohl has chosen not to weigh in publicly, though he authorized his Government spokesman last week to issue a ringing endorsement of the agreements between community and American negotiators on reducing European subsidies to grain and oilseed farmers.
Today his trade and agriculture ministers publicly supported it with equally unmistakable enthusiasm, leaving no one in any real doubt about where the Chancellor stood.


Transactions
Hockey  National Hockey League
DEVILS--Recalled Kevin Todd, center, from Utica of the American Hockey League.
Sent David Emma, center, to Utica.
ISLANDERS--Recalled Tom Kurvers, defenseman, from Capital District of the American Hockey League.


A Fish Called Surimi
A fish by any other name can still be dangerous for individuals allergic to fish and fish products.
"Surimi," a processed food product that is derived primarily from Alaskan pollack, is frequently used in such foods as imitation crabmeat, seafood snacks, and "meatless" products such as hot dogs, pizza toppings and sausages and can cause a severe allergic reaction in fish-allergic individuals.
Dr.
Jonathan Musmand of Tulane University Medical Center reported a confirmed case of one such allergic reaction to surimi at the Nov. 14 meeting of the American College of Allergy and Immunology in Chicago.


Paddington Selects Saatchi &amp; Saatchi
The Paddington Corporation said yesterday that it had awarded Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Advertising in New York its Amaretto di Saronno liqueur account, with billings estimated at $3.5 million, after a year and a half at Grace &amp; Rothschild in New York.
Roger W. Slone, Paddington's senior vice president for marketing in Fort Lee, N.J., confirmed a report of the assignment in Adweek this week.
He said Saatchi bested the incumbent in a four-month review, adding that since Saatchi's public-relations subsidiary already handles all of Paddington's brands, assigning the agency the advertising "seemed like a logical move."


Lessons Across Six Decades As Clinton Tries to Make Jobs
Eager to put his own stamp on economic policy, President-elect Bill Clinton promises to do what every President since Franklin D. Roosevelt has done: come up with a new program to create jobs.
After President Bush took a largely passive attitude toward creating jobs -- and paid a heavy price for the sluggish economy on Nov. 3 -- Mr.
Clinton has made it clear that he plans to be more aggressive.


New Congressmen's Revolt Shows Early Sign of Fading
After months of plotting to purge Congress of pork and perks, a rebellion by incoming House freshmen is quickly fading before the new lawmakers fire a single shot.
The unfocused drift of what some new lawmakers had predicted would be an open revolt was graphically displayed here today when only 14 Republicans out of the 110 incoming freshmen attended a meeting bent on trimming the privileges of seniority, fighting for term limits and slashing the legislative budget.


After Kinship and Marriage, Anthropology Discovers Love
IF, as Stendhal said, "Love is like a fever," then that fever infects all peoples, anthropologists say.
Some influential Western social historians have argued that romance was a product of European medieval culture that spread only recently to other cultures.
They dismissed romantic tales from other cultures as representing the behavior of just the elites.
Under the sway of this view, Western anthropologists did not even look for romantic love among the peoples they studied.
But they are now beginning to think that romantic love is universal and is a rogue legacy of humanity's shared evolutionary past.


Tornadoes Strike North Carolina, Bringing Toll in South to 25


Mother in Abuse Case Says Her Daughter Flirted
In a stormy court session marked by the judge's threatening lawyers with contempt for shouting in front of the jury, the mother of the mildly retarded woman who is central to the Glen Ridge sex assault case said under persistent questioning today that her daughter flirted with and propositioned teen-age boys.
The mother's acknowledgement came after she had spent three days resisting a barrage of questions from defense lawyers insinuating that her daughter, who has an I.Q. of 64, was promiscuous and sexually active before March 1, 1989, when the state charges that she was assaulted.


New 2-Year U.S. Notes Sell Well
The bond market received a lift yesterday from a successful Treasury auction of two-year notes, but prices were still down and yields up for the day.
Trading was very thin in the beginning of this holiday week.
The market will be closed on Thursday for Thanksgiving Day, and the Public Securities Association has recommended that trading end at 1 P.M. on Wednesday and Friday.


Beijing Journal; Counterfeit Train Ticket? No Problem. It's China.
Lin Liangxi, a budding tycoon, saw his manufacturing venture collapse early this year after he tried to get a refund for three train tickets.
The clerk at the train station suspected that they were forged, and the police seized Mr.
Lin and confirmed that the tickets were fakes.
In Mr.
Lin's hotel room, the authorities found 254 more fake tickets hidden in two packages of instant noodles.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY
MAYOR'S SPEECH LOOKS TO FUTURE
Mayor Dinkins's televised address on race relations tomorrow is, aides say, about both the past and the future.
Besides being an attempt by the Mayor to place the tumult over the Crown Heights verdict behind him, the speech is also seen as a chance for him to demonstrate whether he has the leadership to bring the city together and to get himself re-elected.
B3.
JUDGE ORDERS CBS TO GIVE UP TAPES
A Federal judge ordered CBS News to surrender a "reality" news-show videotape showing Secret Service agents ransacking a Brooklyn apartment for evidence in a criminal case, strewing furniture and the contents of drawers and closets about while an absent suspect's wife and child cower on a couch.
B3.
NEW PRESSURE ON SEGARRA
The pressure on Ninfa Segarra to resign from the Board of Education increased when Mayor Dinkins joined Fernando Ferrer, the Bronx Borough President who had appointed her, and said she should step down.
But Ms.
Segarra stood firm B3.
SMOOTHER PATH FOR TRUMP
City Council leaders and Donald J. Trump have agreed on changes to Mr.
Trump's proposed development on the Upper West Side that are expected to bring Council approval for the plan.
A giant television studio in the original blueprint will be eliminated.
B2.
SERGEANT INDICTED IN DRUG THEFT
A New York City police sergeant has been indicted on charges he stole cocaine and marijuana to be used as evidence from a safe in the Staten Island precinct where he worked.
B4.
GUILTY PLEAS IN PRESCRIPTION RING
In a case that authorities described as the largest of its kind, 50 people, including 38 pharmacists, have pleaded guilty to taking part in a scheme to fill bogus Medicaid prescriptions and resell the drugs illegally.
B3.
TESTIMONY ON MAFIA PEACE ATTEMPT
Leaders of three Mafia families summoned feuding factions of the Colombo family to secret meetings in an effort to avert bloodshed, a witness testified in a Federal trial in Brooklyn.
The talks apparently worked -- for a time.
B4.
REGION  NASSAU SHIFTS ON SLUDGE PLAN
Just one week before they were to award a $200 million contract to build two plants to process sewage sludge, Nassau County officials said that they had a better idea: ship the sludge elsewhere.
The officials said they would request an extension on a court-mandated Dec. 1 deadline to award the contract.
B5.
ALBANY INCUMBENT WINS RECOUNT
Republicans who have controlled the State Senate in Albany thought they had lost one of their own this month when election results indicated that Senator Jess J. Present from southwest New York has lost to a Democrat.
A recount shows that wasn't so.
B4.
DOING SOMETHING ABOUT THE WEATHER
Living on the 6,500 acres of Great Mountain Forest, Edward C. Childs has developed an enviable syncopation with nature, so much so that he runs one of 20 climatological stations named by the National Weather Service.
For 60 years he has filed weather data twice a day.
B5.
Our Towns by Andrew H. Malcolm B5 Chronicle B4


Simulation Predicts Arctic Ozone Holes
FUTURE accumulations of a gas that promotes global warming may lead to ozone "holes" over the Arctic similar to those now detected over Antarctica, a study says.
The effects of such holes are unclear but "any alteration we're making to the atmosphere is something to be concerned about," said John Austin, a principal scientific officer at the Government's Meteorological Office in Bracknell, England.


GPA Seeks Delay of Some Bank Payments
The GPA Group said today that it had asked its banks to allow it to postpone some debt payments as part of a plan to pull out of its deepening financial problems.
GPA, which leases jets to airlines and is the world's largest single purchaser of aircraft, has agreed to purchase hundreds of new planes in coming years.
But because of a slump in leasing activity, it can no longer afford to pay for them all and repay its debts at the same time.


Chess
No one facet of the game deteriorates when a top player ages; every one does, at random.
Emanuel Lasker, world champion for 27 years and one of the greatest endgame geniuses of all time, complained late in his career of his lack of knowledge of the endgame.
Incredible.
Most aging players complain of their reduced ability to create and calculate middle-game combinations.
What seems to bother them most, however, is failures in the openings.
Usually this results from a decline in invention, in the drive to create new ideas and plans, in a reveling in adventure.
Often the older player is committed to the openings for which he was famous years ago and has not reworked them in response to the demands of recent theory and practice.


A.M.A. Guidelines Ask Doctors to Help Identify Abuse of Elderly
Citing estimates that two million older Americans become victims of mistreatment every year, the American Medical Association yesterday issued its first guidelines to help doctors identify and treat abuse of the elderly.
The guidelines are part of the group's Physician's Campaign Against Family Violence, which last June published similar guidelines on domestic violence and the abuse and neglect of children.
The new guidelines recommend interviews and other methods for discovering cases of physical abuse, and they cover several kinds of mistreatment and other behavior, like coercion in legal or financial matters.


Robert L. Harkay, 69; Led Hungarian Group
Robert L. Harkay, president of the American Foundation for Hungarian Literature and Education, died on Thursday at his home in Queens.
He was 69 years old.
Mr. Harkay died of cancer, his daughter, Agnes, said yesterday.


Services for Angela Carter
A memorial service for Angela Carter, the British author who died in February, will be held today at 6:30 P.M. at Symphony Space on Broadway at 95th Street in Manhattan.


Business and Health; Banks Look Hard At Cost of Benefits
AUTO and steelmakers and other employers that provide generous health benefits for retirees are feeling heat from their bankers.
The banks are looking hard at enormous charges against profits that some companies will soon report under a new accounting rule.
Some are renegotiating their long-term loans, which typically can be called for payment if earnings targets are missed.
Most companies are trying to reduce the charges by cutting back on their promises to future retirees.
American Telephone and Telegraph and the regional Bell companies have already persuaded their unions to accept specified dollar amounts for retiree health benefits, replacing open-ended commitments to cover illnesses regardless of costs.
Similar cost-cutting proposals will be a central issue in next year's auto and steel negotiations.


Corrections
A chart yesterday showing differences in average prices for some common drugs in California and Mexico rendered one name incorrectly.
The drug is Ceclor, not Cector.
The chart also misstated some prices and one quantity.
Mevacor costs an average of $57.62 in California and Xanax costs $54.08; Tagamet costs $19.16 in Mexico.
The correct quantity for Zantac was 60 150-milligram tablets.


Found: A Place in Manhattan with Lots of Light, a River View and No Overhead


Back on the Campaign Trail


Credit Ratings Are Lowered For 3 Insurance Companies
Credit ratings on three leading insurance companies were lowered yesterday by two rating agencies because of losses from Hurricane Andrew and the continued erosion of commercial real estate values around the country.
Moody's Investors Service Inc. lowered its rating on $2.2 billion of debt issued by the Prudential Insurance Company, the nation's largest insurance company, to AA-2 from AA-1.


Yankees Cry Foul in Attempt to Keep Hayes
Having lost their third baseman in the expansion draft, the Yankees are trying to retain him and the other two players they lost to the Colorado Rockies and the Florida Marlins by claiming that the draft was invalid.
A baseball official said yesterday that the Yankees' position looks like "an attempt to throw up mud because they lost Charlie Hayes," but the Yankees had documented their stance on the draft well before it was held last Tuesday.


A Theory Of Clouds And Earth Ice Cover
THE belief that the Earth of almost a billion years ago was extensively covered with ice is being revised.
A new study shows that if the early ice age had been as severe as thought, the Earth could never have thawed out and would still be a frozen planet.
The study, published in a recent of the journal Nature, is the first to account for the existence of carbon dioxide clouds and their impact on the climate of those times.


Retirement Eludes Our Oldest Civil Servants
To the Editor:
You report Nov. 12 that the Dinkins administration and labor leaders have agreed on an early-retirement program to eliminate 2,500 New York City jobs by summer without layoffs.
To cut the city work force for budgetary reasons by offering early retirement is a farcical sham because hundreds of city employees who are senior in age and title are being forced to remain on the payroll against their wishes and at the expense of younger employees threatened with layoffs.
These older employees are bereft of pension equality with their peers simply because their pension plan predates July 1976.


Max Kronstein; Chemist, 97
Dr.
Max Kronstein, a New York research chemist with at least 20 patents to his credit, died on Sunday at his home in Riverdale in the Bronx.
He was 97 years old.
He died after a brief illness, his family said.


You Can't Push a Button for New Miracle Cures; What Puzzles Scientists
To the Editor:
Perhaps the only topic that puzzles biomedical scientists more than the mysteries of the human body is how best to spend our national research dollars.
Despite the complicated nature of this problem, you lambaste researchers for failing to offer revolutionary solutions in response to a recent call by Bernadine Healy, National Institutes of Health director, and suggest scientists don't care about the health of the public and cannot be trusted to direct the future of scientific fund granting (Week in Review, Nov. 1).
Serious solutions require a more rigorous analysis.
Consider the immensity of the task: In fiscal year 1991 the N.I.H. received 15,111 independent grant proposals, awarding 4,190 of them a total of $812,845,349.
No single individual within the agency is in charge of handing out all that money; rather, it is awarded through the deliberation of more than 100 peer review teams, each of which considers the proposals in only a small field.


No Partial Deal for Iraq
When it comes to chiseling on U.N. resolutions, Saddam Hussein is in a league of his own.
His personal envoy argued before the U.N.
Security Council yesterday that since Baghdad has finally been muscled into partial compliance with the arms-control provisions of the Persian Gulf war cease-fire resolution, the U.N. should grant partial relief from the international economic embargo that gives that resolution its teeth.
The Iraqi request has been dismissed out of hand, as deserved.
There can be no such thing as partial compliance by a proven outlaw regime.
But the legal and practical link between genuine arms control and the ending of sanctions is real.
Should Iraq ever opt for full compliance, it would be entitled to seek full relief.


Officer Is Indicted on Charges of Stealing Drugs
A New York City police sergeant has been indicted on charges that he stole crack and marijuana being held as evidence in the Staten Island precinct where he worked, the Staten Island District Attorney said yesterday.
In announcing the 47-count indictment against Sgt.
Patrick Fay, District Attorney William L. Murphy said the theft of six envelopes of crack and three of marijuana and tampering with police records forced the authorities to drop charges against eight suspects in drug-possession cases.


Fire Damages 18th Floor of Commercial Building


Next: Wireless Widgets
OF the hundreds of new products on display last week at the Comdex/Fall trade show in Las Vegas, Nev., some of the most intriguing were ones that cannot yet be bought.
They were clear indicators, however, of trends in the personal computer industry.
It will not be long until these prototypes enter the mainstream.
Wireless communications widgets were everywhere, in various forms and in various stages of completion: on stage in elaborate product announcements, in hotel suites where the curtains were tightly drawn, in Plexiglas "look but don't touch" display cases on the show floor, and even peeking from people's pockets in smoky bars.


Corrections
An article on the Media Business page on Nov. 16, about the marketing of Donna Tartt's novel "The Secret History," referred incorrectly to a player in the Chicago Cubs' formidable double-play combination of the early 1900's.
It was Johnny Evers (not Evans) who was the second baseman in "Tinker to Evers to Chance."


A Fine Ranger Effort, but Nothing to Show for It
Like snowflakes, no two Ranger defeats are alike.
Amid their recent flurry of futility, last night's 5-2 loss to the Pittsburgh Penguins at Madison Square Garden was one of the Rangers' better efforts.
Honest.
No snow job here.
The coach and the captain, on the same page for this one, agreed.


China, Too, Knows a Generation Gap
To the Editor:
"An Illiterate Peasant From Nowhere Speaking Volumes About China" (The Week in Review, Nov. 8), the report on a "conversation" between a Chinese peasant and your correspondent, is fascinating.
Interviews with ordinary people are indispensable for grasping the realities of life in any country.
I doubt, however, that it was justified to represent the insights of this single peasant as speaking volumes about China.


On My Mind; Our German Crisis
In my files is a collection of letters and articles denouncing the idea that Nazis could ever again be a threat in Germany or Europe.
They began arriving a couple of years ago, after I had written columns saying that Germany and the West had rushed into German unification as if memories of Nazis, Auschwitz, Rotterdam, slave labor, Holocaust were not an indelible part of human history, as if the danger of the past becoming the future was not even worth mentioning before the papers were signed.


Roy Acuff, 89, Singer, Dies; The King of Country Music
Roy Acuff, the singer and fiddler who was known to millions of Grand Ole Opry listeners as the King of Country Music, died yesterday at Baptist Hospital in Nashville.
He was 89 years old.
He died of congestive heart failure, a hospital statement said.


New Approach in Search for Sailor
Rescue officials expect to shed new light today on what has happened to MIKE PLANT, the veteran solo sailor who has been missing on the Atlantic Ocean for nearly a month.
The United States Coast Guard said yesterday that a French ocean-going tug, the Malabar, was scheduled to rendezvous this morning with Plant's capsized boat, the 60-foot Coyote.
The yacht, which was spotted upside-down Sunday, is in an area about 700 miles southwest of Ireland.


Heavy Snowstorm Hits Texas


Big Crowds Greet Bhutto in Pakistani City


Campus Journal; A Tribute to Malcolm X Goes Awry
A plaque intended to be a tribute to Malcolm X at the University of Rhode Island has angered many black students, who say the words of the slain Black Muslim leader inscribed there misrepresent what he said.
The quotation, etched in granite on a recently built addition to the main library, came from a longer statement by Malcolm X, parts of which were omitted.


AT THE DELI WITH: Neil Young; Still Searching For a Heart of Gold
NEIL YOUNG and the Carnegie Deli are two things that probably haven't changed much since the 60's.
The deli still has framed 8-by-10 celebrity glossies, tables full of tourists and a pastrami sandwich taller than the span of the average human mouth.
Mr.
Young still has hair the consistency and manageability of reddish-brown straw, and a face that seems carved out of a mountainside.
He still dresses in flannel shirts and denim jeans, and he still flashes a peace sign every now and then.
On an autumn evening, Mr.
Young is sitting at a back corner table in the Carnegie Deli, on Seventh Avenue at 55th Street.
He's in town on business -- a new album, "Harvest Moon," has just been released by Reprise -- but in the manner of a genial tourist, he's just ordered an egg cream.


Germans, Hazy About Past, Distrust the Future
To the Editor:
"Where Are Germany's Leaders?" (editorial, Nov. 12) is right on target, but a recent business trip adds some dimensions to the call for a look within, rather than at foreigners.


U.N. Again Rejects Plea by Iraq to Ease Sanctions
For the second time in eight months, the Security Council today turned down Iraq's plea for a relaxation of the economic sanctions levied on Baghdad for having started the Persian Gulf war.
After two days of debate, the 15-member Council agreed unanimously that Iraq had failed to meet the conditions imposed by the terms of the cease-fire in October 1991.


Hamilton Takes the Dare, Back Flip and All
Scott Hamilton read the rules very carefully, and he decided there was no law against a back flip.
To the crowd-pleasing professional figure skater, this was tantamount to a dare.
So Hamilton flipped twice tonight, head over boots, during his artistic program at the United States Pro-Am Classic in Hersheypark Arena.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  THE LETTER . . . OF THE LAW
In a case pitting an editor and well-known writing teacher against one of the nation's most venerable publications, a Federal court judge ruled that Harper's magazine had broken copyright law by publishing portions of a letter written by Gordon Lish, an editor at Alfred A. Knopf, without his permission.
B3.
CONVICTION IN SLAYING OF HASIDIC WOMAN
An unemployed handyman was convicted of murdering a Hasidic woman, who was stabbed to death during a burglary in her apartment in the Crown Heights section of Brooklyn.
B3.


If Elected, Majors Will Serve
Tennessee Coach JOHNNY MAJORS said yesterday he will coach the Volunteers in a bowl game if they get an invitation.
There has been some question whether Majors would stay on past the regular-season finale on Saturday against Vanderbilt.
Majors quit on Nov. 13, effective Dec. 31, because the university would not extend his contract.
The Vols (7-3) are expected to get a bid to the Hall of Fame Bowl on New Year's Day if they beat the Commodores (4-6).
"If we do get a bowl bid, I plan to coach the bowl game," Majors said.
"I've been very involved with these young men, from recruiting to seniors. I've been leaning in that direction. I was informed it was my decision to make, so I plan to do that."


Clinton to Use Economic Conference to Build Support
Advisers to President-elect Bill Clinton said today that a meeting on the economy scheduled here next month, originally described as an important policy conference, would be a televised discussion aimed at building support for his economic proposals.
The conference will be held Dec. 14 and 15 in Little Rock, probably at the State House, Clinton aides announced at a news conference.
It will resemble Mr.
Clinton's highly successful town meetings during the campaign; he will preside over the conference and ask questions at the sessions, whose participants include what Clinton aides called "real Americans."


Food Notes
Specializing in Tarts
The word "attitude" can suggest a certain unpleasant disdain, but at Food Attitude, a new food shop, the reverse is true.
The shop, at 127 East 60th Street, is owned by Pierre Weber, a young Alsatian baker, and is irresistibly welcoming.
Mr.
Weber, who has owned J. P.'s French Bakery, 54 West 55th Street, for two years, is a third-generation baker.
His jewel-like fruit tarts and tartlets, shimmering with delicate glazes and constructed on flaky pastry, come in myriad flavors: apple, apple tatin, pear tatin, apricot and linzer are just a few.
Most individual tartlets are $3.45.
Eight-inch tarts with baked fruit are $16; with fresh fruit and custard, $21.95.


'Solitary' Is Closing
"Solitary Confinement," a drama by Rupert Holmes, is to close after the matinee on Sunday at the Nederlander Theater, 208 West 41st Street, mid-Manhattan.
The Sunday matinee of the play, directed by Kenneth Frankel and starring Stacy Keach, will be its 25th regular performance; it had 15 previews.


Prices Up Despite Economic Data
There are days when investors and traders do what they want to do rather than what analysts think they will do.
Yesterday was one of those days.
The credit markets ignored data signaling economic growth, which would normally have knocked prices lower and yields higher because of the inflationary implications.
Instead, they bought the five-year notes that the Treasury auctioned at a much lower yield than expected, which meant money-saving prices for the Treasury.
And they leaped on an afternoon report showing weak retail-store sales, sending prices of bonds and notes higher.


Eating Well
AFTER two weeks of traveling through northern Italy, I have been cured of lumping all Italian food together.
Never again will I suggest that eating the way the Italians do is the easy road to low-fat living.
You ought to see the butter and the cheese in Piedmont, in the northwestern part of the country.
Fonduta, a sauce of cheese, butter and eggs that is poured over lots of things, including pasta and polenta, will surely go directly to your arteries, but what a sublime journey!


For Bakeries, Thanksgiving Is a Pie-Making Marathon
HE annual job of roasting a turkey sends tens of thousands of people racing to the phone for hot-line help.
But when it comes to the inevitable pies that end the meal, no such safety net is needed.
Thanksgiving pies are very often bought, not made.
The frenzied pre-Thanksgiving pie makers are the dedicated professionals in bakeries who mix, roll, cut, fill, flute and bake nonstop as the countdown leads to Thursday.
The North Pole on Christmas Eve has nothing on a bakery just before Thanksgiving.


The Team That Builds Steinways
AT a time when quite possibly more ergs are expended in working out than working and more calories burned on Stairmasters than on stairs, it is both instructive and inspiring to observe the rim-bending crew at the Steinway piano factory in Astoria.
Working in silence, under the supervision of their foreman, Ralph D'Alleva, six strong men glue together 22-foot-long strips of matched maple to form a piece of laminated wood weighing about 600 pounds.
They carry it on their shoulders to a special bench where they pull and wedge and clamp, bending the 18-ply thickness into the curvaceous shape of a grand piano.
They are producing the sturdy frame of a concert grand piano costing $60,000.


October Surprise: Not Proven
Did Ronald Reagan's campaign aides connive with Iran in 1980 to delay the release of American hostages and thereby prevent an "October surprise" that might benefit Jimmy Carter?
A six-month Senate inquiry has found no credible evidence to support this allegation.
Indeed, the inquiry concluded that the "great weight of evidence is that there was no such deal."
But instead of ending the October surprise controversy, the carefully qualified judgment of special counsel Reid Weingarten will only whet it.
As the special counsel emphasizes, the Senate subcommittee investigation was given only limited powers, kept on a starvation budget and denied crucial documents.


Take the Records and Run?
In an unduly casual memo, White House Counsel Boyden Gray has told members of President Bush's staff what records they may and may not remove or destroy when they leave office.
He advised resolving doubts in favor of preservation.
But he also said it was O.K. to make off with scratch-pad notes and telephone logs that illuminate the official record.
That takes on added interest because the transition from George Bush to Bill Clinton is the first change in party control under the post-Watergate Presidential Records Act, designed to prevent Presidents bent on secrecy from destroying documents.


Weinberger Denounces His Indictment as a Political Move


Market Chaos Imperils Europe's Currency System
Mounting tensions in the currency markets pushed Europe's monetary system a step closer to breakdown today, despite continuing efforts by governments and central banks to snuff out the crisis.
Weaker currencies like the Irish pound declined in value again, and several countries pushed up short-term interest rates as they tried to head off waves of speculative selling.


Accounts
*
Coopers &amp; Lybrand, New York, to Hill, Holliday, Connors, Cosmopulos Inc., Boston and New York, to handle the accounting firm's account, previously managed in-house.
Hill, Holliday was awarded the account in a review that also included Avrett, Free &amp; Ginsberg, New York.
Billings were not disclosed.


Bronx District Attorney Moves to Ban Plea Bargains in Felony Cases
Robert T. Johnson, the Bronx District Attorney, has decided to ban plea bargains in felony cases in a move that legal experts said could cripple the borough's criminal-justice system by overburdening judges, crowding jails and allowing some suspects to go free.
Considered by some experts a necessary evil in an overwhelmed court system, plea bargains are the leading way criminal cases are decided in New York City and around the nation.
In the Bronx, only 6.5 percent of the 10,141 felony cases last year went to trial, while more than 84 percent involved a plea bargain.
Virtually all of the other cases resulted in dismissal.


Review/Television; History's Pendulum Defeats Custer Again
It has been more than a half-century since movie audiences first saw Errol Flynn, as a dashing Gen.
George Armstrong Custer, die with his boots on at the Little Big Horn, along with all those extras playing the 262 other United States cavalrymen who fell with him on June 25, 1876.
That has been enough time for Americans to be made aware of a point of view other than the settlers-against-savages version long promoted by Hollywood, the popular press, traveling shows and some histories.
In recent decades, it has been the Indians' turn to be romanticized.
"Last Stand at Little Big Horn," written by the producer Paul Stekler and the Blackfoot novelist James Welch, is in accord with the revised consensus without getting sappy.
For the Plains Indians, says the narrator, N. Scott Momaday, the encounter with Custer was "one of many battles to prevent the theft of their land." Their hour of success was just a passing episode in a profound defeat.
The accounts of the white side come largely from the usual historical sources, embellished by photographs.
The Indian version is told in stories and songs handed down through generations and is accompanied by drawings.
That alone suggests the nature of the differences between the Lakota and Cheyenne peoples, who made their homes in the Montana Territory, and the pioneers and gold-seekers from the East.
Yet the irreconcilable points of view have been fitted together in a coherent hour that goes beyond the brief battle at the Little Big Horn to what America's westward expansion meant for those who were simply in the way.
The program has no criticism of the cavalrymen, described as impoverished young immigrants and farm boys, who did not ride or shoot nearly so well as western movies would have it and who endured miseries in unwelcoming territory.
The program makes the case that they were serving the political and economic interests of grander classes and the imperatives of an expanding nation.
As for Custer, whose image his widow, Elizabeth, dedicated herself with considerable success to polishing for more than 50 years after his death, tonight's program contributes to his debunking as a swaggering, egotistical self-promoter who rashly led his men to their deaths.
Yet at the time, he was portrayed as a martyr, and the massacre of his outnumbered troopers became a pretext for wiping out the Plains Indians.
A son of the Lakota leader Crazy Horse, speaking for his people, says, "Wherever we went they came to kill us."
Much of the nation seems to understand now that no just compensation is possible for what was done to America's Indians, but it is possible, at least, to tell their story in a way that treats them as human beings.
Narrowly avoiding a popular tendency to demonize whites and glorify Indians, the latest offering from "The American Experience" makes an intelligent and moving contribution to that cause.
The American Experience Last Stand at Little Big Horn  PBS, tonight (In the New York area, Channels 13 and 49 at 9) Written by Paul Stekler and James Welch; produced and directed by Mr.
Stekler; Margaret Drain, senior producer for "The American Experience"; Judy Crichton, executive producer for "The American Experience"; N. Scott Momaday, narrator.


Their Best Defense Is a Terrific Offense
No one has ever accused Mark Whipple of running up a score, especially after his University of New Haven football team scored 60 points against rival Southern Connecticut last season and lost, 64-60.
"After that, I told the players, 'I guess we'd better score at least 65 points a game," said Whipple, now in his fifth year as the New Haven coach.


Corrections
A map yesterday with an article about the Miami landing of a freighter carrying Haitian refugees showed its route incorrectly.
A corrected map appears today on page A16.


Graham Bypasses Rival Giant Quarterbacks
On Thanksgiving Day a year ago, Kent Graham had just finished his final game as quarterback for Ohio State.
Four months ago, when the Giants opened their training camp, Graham ranked fourth among four quarterbacks, behind Jeff Hostetler, Phil Simms and Jeff Carlson.
And when Dave Brown signed late and reported, Graham became No. 5, at least in the minds of the Giants' coaches.


2 Economic Signs Hint Of Growth
Two new reports suggest that the economic picture is getting a bit brighter.
Signaling a possible upturn in manufacturing, the Commerce Department reported yesterday that orders for big-ticket factory goods -- cars, airplanes, machines and the like -- shot up 3.9 percent in October, the biggest gain in more than a year, to $124.4 billion.


French Socialists Look for Support on Farm Deal
Isolated in Europe and unpopular at home, France's Socialist Government is looking for a strong vote of support for its rejection of a farm trade agreement between the United States and the European Community when the National Assembly debates the issue here Wednesday.
But while opposition parties have also denounced the accord as harmful to France's one million farmers, they are resisting the call for "national cohesion," hoping instead to exploit the Government's difficulties in the run-up to parliamentary elections next March.


Ambitious Talk on College Loans
Throughout the Presidential campaign, it was one of Bill Clinton's biggest applause lines: junk existing loan programs and replace them with a new plan that gives every American the chance to go to college, if he or she is willing to give something in return.
It was a classic Clinton message of benefit and sacrifice, and it also played to the hearts of middle-class voters worried about paying for their children's college educations.


Things to Do With Parts of That Post-Holiday Turkey
THIS is the time of year to take advantage of good buys on turkey, which is plentiful everywhere in November.
My family loves roast turkey, not only at Thanksgiving, but also as a main dish for company year round.
Each time we prepare it, my wife makes turkey soup afterward with a stock she creates from the cooked turkey bones.
Sometimes she adds pasta and vegetables to the stock, as in this recipe; other times she thickens the stock with a light roux and stirs in spinach or another green.


COMPANY NEWS;
A basic measure of the General Motors Corporation's financial health fell today, as Moody's Investors Service Inc. lowered its ratings on an array of G.M. debt securities, worth about $70 billion.
The downgrading was the latest in a string of unfavorable developments for G.M.
The company has reported gargantuan losses in recent quarters, and a recent shake-up of top management has focused attention on years of indecisive leadership.


U.N. VOTES TO URGE U.S. TO DISMANTLE EMBARGO ON CUBA
The General Assembly delivered an unexpected rebuke to the United States today, overwhelmingly passing a resolution that calls for an end to Washington's 30-year embargo against Cuba.
Dozens of nations that usually back the United States either voted for the resolution, which Cuba sponsored, or abstained.
Most of the allies declining to come to Washington's support made it clear that they were using the nonbinding vote to signal their anger at a new American law that tightens the longstanding embargo.
The law extends American jurisdiction beyond the boundaries of the United States to cover foreign subsidiaries of American companies.
A Post-Cold-War Vote
The law, called the Cuban Democracy Act of 1992, received final passage by the House on Sept. 24, and was signed by President Bush on Oct. 23.
It was enthusiastically supported by Gov.
Bill Clinton in his Presidential campaign.


Book Notes; A Writer Who Took His Power From Pain
After Paul Monette won the 1992 National Book Award for nonfiction last week for "Becoming a Man: Half a Life Story" (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich), a memoir of discovering and accepting his homosexuality, several friends threw together a party.
"We were all standing there, laughing and drinking and reveling, when one of my friends turned to me and said, 'It's so nice not to be doing this at a funeral,' " Mr.
Monette said in a telephone interview this week from his home in Los Angeles.
"I think this award sends a very happy message. Some people will see it as just a politically correct decision in a year filled with political hatred and intolerance toward the gay and lesbian community. But I think, among other things, including what I hope is appreciation for my book, this award is for all of us, everyone from Edmund White to Rita Mae Brown and a whole group of young gay and lesbian writers who are writing now. It's an acknowledgment that our literature is significant."


Scientists Take New Paths In Search of Baldness Cures
TRACY PATTIN, a 35-year-old actress, first noticed that her hair was thinning when she was about 16 years old.
Gary R., who is 29, and Steve C., 25, two East Coast businessmen, began to experience worrisome hair loss in their late teens and early 20's.
But hair loss is not the only thing that they have in common: they all chose to fight back against failing follicles.
Their methods of attack -- chemical, electrical and surgical -- bear witness to the many weapons being marshaled by drug companies, private researchers and cosmetic surgeons in the battle against baldness.


County Bus and Car Collide, Injuring 7
A bus with 20 people aboard and a car carrying six people collided head-on yesterday afternoon in Croton-on-Hudson in Westchester County, seriously injuring seven people, the police said.
The Croton-on-Hudson police said the Westchester County B line bus and a four-door sedan collided at the corner of Cleveland and Melrose Avenues about 3:30 P.M., when the roads were slick because of an earlier rainstorm.


Midmonth Vehicle Sales Up by 4.8%
Sales of domestically built vehicles rose 4.8 percent in mid-November, led by a sharp increase in sales of pickup trucks, mini-vans and sport utility vehicles.
But car sales remained sluggish.
The outcome of the Presidential election does not seem to have motivated consumers, as was expected by many retail dealers.
"The slightest thing stops a deal from going through," said Scott Lawson, general manager of Island Chevrolet-Buick-Pontiac in Fernandina Beach, Fla.


Accused Officer Indicted Again
A New York City police officer charged last June with the killing of a Brooklyn liquor store owner during a holdup has been indicted in another robbery, at an Upper East Side restaurant, the Manhattan District Attorney, Robert M. Morgenthau, announced yesterday.
The arrest last June of Officer Robert Cabeza, 29 years old, of Queens, in the liquor store slaying, and the arrests a month earlier of six active and former police officers accused of drug dealing, prompted Mayor David N. Dinkins to appoint a panel to investigate police corruption.


45 Nanny Agencies Accused Of Using 'Unsavory' Practices
In New York City's first crackdown on the private child-care industry, 45 agencies were given summonses yesterday for operating illegally or for lying about whether they had checked the references of nannies they had referred to parents.
The summonses were issued by the Department of Consumer Affairs, which said that 17 of the agencies did not have the necessary city licenses and were operating illegally.
Most of the others were cited for failing to run their license numbers in advertisements, as required.


Theater in Review
Hippolytos La Mama 74A East Fourth Street East Village Through Saturday By Euripides; a Kannada version in verse by Raghunandana, based on the English translation by Robert Bagg; directed by Vasilios Calitsis; co-produced by Evangelos Tsurdinis; set by George Ziakas; costumes by Prema Karanth; lighting by Howard Thies; sound by Tim Schellenbaum; music by B. V. Karanth and Philip Kovvantis.
The State Theater of South India, Nataka Karnataka Rangayana presented by La Mama Etc., in association with the Consulate General of Greece, the Alexander Onassis Center for Hellenic Studies, Cult Productions and Christopher G. Kikis.
WITH: Prameela Bengre, M. S. Geetha, Saroja Hegde, Hulugappa Kattimani, Alexandra Lazaridis, Jagadeesh Manevarthe, N. Mangala, K. R. Nandini, K. C. Raghunath, Mandya Ramesh, S. Ramu and Anju Singh.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-13  CUBA VOTE PUNISHES U.S.
Expressing displeasure at a new U.S. law, the General Assembly passed a non-binding resolution calling for an end to the 30-year American embargo against Cuba.
A1  The Security Council refused to lift sanctions on Iraq.
A3  CHINA RETREATS ON HUMAN RIGHTS
In an apparent halt to talks that began the thaw after Tiananmen Square, China seems to be suspending its discussions with the U.S. on human-rights issues.
A12


Air Rivals Matching Fare Cuts
Delta Air Lines agreed yesterday to match the winter discounts America West Airlines disclosed on Monday.
All the major airlines have now agreed to offer the discounts, which average 30 percent, on competing routes.
The debt-plagued industry thus finds itself holding another sale less than a week after it retreated from an attempt to raise fares as much as $30 on connecting flights.


Petra Kelly Memorial
A memorial service for Petra Kelly, the founder of the Green Party in Germany, and her companion, Gert Bastian, will be held Tuesday from 5:30 to 7 P.M. at the chapel of the Church Center for the United Nations, 777 U.N.
Plaza, at 44th Street and 1st Avenue.
The couple died Oct. 1 in what the German police said was a murder and suicide.


Missing the Bus (Subway, Train)
When the remarkable 10-year capital program that rescued New York City's transit system ran out a year ago, state legislators couldn't summon the statesmanship to pass a new long-term plan.
They approved merely a makeshift one-year capital plan for the regional network of subways, buses and commuter rail lines run by the Metropolitan Transportation Authority.
The Legislature's dodge has badly hampered the M.T.A.'s ability to plan, design and construct vital projects.
It left intact unfair state financing formulas that favor the suburbs over the cities.
And it made inevitable yet another eleventh-hour melodrama over increasing transit fares.


Carjacking Unit For New York
The New York City Police department has formed a special unit to investigate and combat carjacking, Police Commissioner Raymond W. Kelly said yesterday.
The number of carjackings in the city has dropped in the last several years, Mr.
Kelly said, "but it's such a traumatic event that it's very troubling."


Ex-Clipper Adjusts To a Life With Riley
When the Knicks acquired Charles Smith from the Los Angeles Clippers, they didn't really believe they were getting the next Karl Malone.
They had good reasons, however, to expect more than the next Brian Quinnett.
Smith came to the Knicks with a four-year professional career scoring average of 18.4 points.
The word "proven" was in every sentence that described the 6-foot-10-inch Smith's offensive game.
But two weeks into his first season in New York, caught in a numbers crunch, Smith looked like a Californian on his first trip to Manhattan, scared and lost.


Bank Money Market Yields Mixed for Coming Week
New yields on bank money market accounts and certificates of deposit will be set today at levels flat with last week in the New York area and up slightly from those in other areas.
Analysts at The Bank Rate Monitor said the average certificate of deposit yield last week rose 2 to 3 basis points.
Last week marked the fifth consecutive week of rises in the five-year C.D., a sign that the downslide of the last 43 months has ended. (The latest rate will be posted today.)


Save at Least Some Bosnians
Bosnians in the towns of Travnik, Gradacac, Bihac and Tuzla live in every bit as much terror as those in the now sadly famous Sarajevo.
They are threatened by a new Serbian offensive, the precursor to ever more deadly ethnic cleansing that is certain to generate ever more refugees.
That's the dire warning that Tadeusz Mazowiecki, Poland's former Prime Minister, gave the United Nations General Assembly after a trip to observe the Bosnian situation.
It's not just empty anguish.
The Security Council can do something concrete to protect the townspeople -- deploy blue-helmeted U.N. troops around these towns to create safe havens.
To reduce the danger to the troops and the towns they protect, the U.N. can also enforce its own no-fly ban and compel the Serbs to hand over their heavy guns, as they have solemnly pledged to do since a London peace conference in August.


Temple Names a Black Head Coach
RON DICKERSON began living his dream yesterday when he became the only current black head football coach in Division I-A after being given a five-year contract to revive Temple University's program.
"Finally, the dream is a reality," said the 44-year-old Dickerson, who had been turned down seven times in bids for other head jobs.
He praised Temple for the decision to go beyond the color barrier, saying, "A lot of universities are afraid to make that move for whatever reason."
Temple's president, PETER LIACOURAS, said the university expected Dickerson to brake the Owls' "football free-fall" and produce a competitive program in the Big East Conference.


Theater in Review
On the Bum, or the Next Train Through  Playwrights Horizons 416 West 42d Street Clinton Through Dec. 13 Written by Neal Bell; directed by Don Scardino; set by Allen Moyer; costumes by Sharon Lynch; lighting by Kenneth Posner; sound by John Gromada; production stage manager, Dianne Trulock.
Presented by Playwrights Horizons, Mr.
Scardino, artistic director; Paul S. Daniels, executive director.
WITH: Bill Buell, William Duell, Jim Fyfe, Kevin Geer, John Benjamin Hickey, Robert Hogan, Cynthia Nixon, James Rebhorn, Joyce Reehling, Ross Salinger, Campbell Scott, Maureen Shay and J. Smith-Cameron.


Man Guilty Of Murder Of Woman In Brooklyn
An unemployed handyman was convicted yesterday of murdering a Hasidic woman, who was stabbed to death during a burglary in her apartment in the Crown Heights section of Brooklyn.
More than 30 spectators, many of them women from the Hasidic community in Crown Heights, sat quietly in the small, fourth-floor courtroom as the jury found the defendant, Romane LaFond, guilty of killing Phyllis LaPine while committing a burglary in her home on Feb. 6.


Inquiry Under Way at Colorado State
One day after dismissing Coach EARLE BRUCE, Colorado State athletic officials admitted yesterday that the school was being investigated by the National Collegiate Athletic Association.
Bruce was dropped Monday by Colorado State's president, ALBERT YATES, amid allegations of verbal and physical abuse of players.
Shaking and near tears, Bruce denied the allegations at a news conference.
Yesterday, The Loveland Reporter-Herald reported that Colorado State may have broken two N.C.A.A. rules regarding the length and frequency of practice sessions.


Lawmakers to Receive Sensitivity Training
Leaders of the New York State Assembly have ordered all 150 lawmakers in the chamber to attend a one-day sensitivity training workshop next month to discuss sexual harassment.
"I think it's long overdue," said the Assembly Speaker, Saul Weprin, a Queens Democrat.
"Some of us who think we know something about sexual harassment may find out as we read the cases in this workshop that there's a lot we don't know."


When a Little Turkey's Just Enough
A READER wrote recently that she thought the nutritional information for one of the Plain and Simple menus was out of whack: a recipe for pork tenderloin had far fewer calories than the accompanying sweet-potato-and-apple dish.
In an old-style menu, it would have been the other way around.
But this recipe called for four ounces of pork rather than eight ounces.
In the newer, healthier style of eating, you get most of your calories from fruits, vegetables and grains rather than from meat.
Carbohydrates fill you up without adding a lot of fat to the diet.


Review/Film: The Bodyguard; Tragic Flaw Meets Pampered Pop Star Over Multiple Risks
Deep inside the vague, unfocused excesses of "The Bodyguard," the tale of a buttoned-down security agent hired to protect a glamorous pop star, there lurks the potential for a compelling film noir.
Frank Farmer (Kevin Costner), the bodyguard of the title, could have been a loner in a last-chance profession, terminally alienated from his own past.
Rachel Marron (Whitney Houston), the glittery singer, could have been drawn tantalizingly as both treacherous vixen and damsel in distress.
Rachel could have been dangerously ready to confuse Frank's brand of peace and protection with love.
Frank could have fallen, and fallen hard.
And Rachel's household of hangers-on could have provided a full supply of trouble.
On the surface, all her minions -- including a sly publicity agent (Gary Kemp), a senior aide (Bill Cobbs), an oafish security chief (Mike Starr) and a music executive who is also Rachel's sister (Michele Lamar Richards), toady ceaselessly and devote body and soul to insuring Rachel's happiness.
But at least one of them also wants her dead.


Russians Asked U.S. Aid to Raise Lost Atom Sub
Russian scientists sought American financial and technical help earlier this year to raise a nuclear submarine that sank off the coast of Norway in 1989, saying they were afraid it would leak radiation into the Barents Sea, a Defense Department official said today.
But the Pentagon, fearing that the submarine might break apart and release radiation as it was lifted out of the water, rebuffed the Russian request, arguing that the submarine was not leaking radiation.
Additionally, the Pentagon was concerned that the Russians scientists were not making an official request on behalf of the Russian Government.


Panel Recommends Adding Vitamin to Food to Prevent Birth Defect
In a landmark decision, an advisory committee of the Food and Drug Administration recommended today that food, most likely flour, be fortified with folic acid to prevent a common and devastating type of birth defect.
If the advice is followed, it would be the first new fortification of a food since 1974, when iron was added to enriched flour to prevent iron deficiency anemia.
It would also be the first fortification made to prevent a birth defect.


CHRONICLE
In an unusually frank speech yesterday, QUEEN ELIZABETH II said that 1992 has been a particularly painful year for her.
Addressing 700 guests who gathered in the Guildhall of the City of London for a luncheon celebrating 40 years of her reign, the Queen said, "1992 is not a year I shall look back on with undiluted pleasure."


Some Nurses Find Satisfaction in AIDS Care
HOSPITALS have long favored varying nursing schedules so nurses do not work exclusively with AIDS patients.
The practice is intended to alleviate the overwhelming stress and resulting burnout that are assumed to occur from providing extended care to people with AIDS.
But a new study shows that nurses who care for AIDS patients suffer less work-related stress and have fewer symptoms of burnout than do nurses who divide their time among various types of patients, including those with AIDS.


Yeltsin and Foes Seeking Economic Compromise
With a week to go before a meeting of the country's top lawmakers, President Boris N. Yeltsin and his opponents are moving gingerly toward a compromise on how to proceed with Russia's much-battered economic program.
"It is clear that Russia needs a respite from completely useless political confrontation," said Mr.
Yeltsin today, as he proposed a "political truce" until the country achieves political and economic stability.


Guerrero to Make Another Indy Run
ROBERTO GUERRERO, whose most notable achievement on the Indy-car circuit in the last two years was winning the pole position for this year's Indianapolis 500 -- and then crashing on the race's pace lap -- will get plenty of opportunity to redeem himself in 1993.
Car owner KENNY BERNSTEIN announced yesterday that Guerrero, of San Juan Capistrano, Calif., will be his driver for a full season of Indy-car racing in 1993.


Panel Recommends Adding Vitamin to Food to Prevent Birth Defect
In a landmark decision, an advisory committee of the Food and Drug Administration recommended today that food, most likely flour, be fortified with folic acid to prevent a common and devastating type of birth defect.
If the advice is followed, it would be the first new fortification of a food since 1974, when iron was added to enriched flour to prevent iron deficiency anemia.
It would also be the first fortification made to prevent a birth defect.


BRIEFS
Debt  *
Dayton Power and Light Co., Dayton, Ohio, is offering $225 million of 8.40 percent first-mortgage bonds due in 2022 at 99.490 to yield 8.447 percent through First Boston Corp.
Callable in five years, the bonds are rated A-2 by Moody's, A by S.&amp; P. and A+ by Duff &amp; Phelps. *
Miami, Fla., is tentatively offering $69.4 million of tax-exempt general-obligation refunding bonds with a maximum yield of 6.17 percent for an issue due in 2013 through underwriters led by Goldman, Sachs &amp; Co.
The bonds are insured by Financial Guaranty Insurance Co. and are rated AAA by both Moody's and S.&amp; P.


INSIDE
New Leads in Files Case
Newly found evidence suggests that the White House had an early role in the search of Bill Clinton's passport file, an official says.
Page A15.
Air Crash Kills 141 in China
A Boeing 737 bound for the tourist area of Guilin in China's Guangxi province crashed into a mountain, killing everyone aboard.
Page A12.
An Angel Who Says He Lied
The Guardian Angels' founder admitted six of his group's crime-fighting exploits were faked.
Others say the count is higher.
Page B1.
Insider to Lure Film Industry
New York City chose a member of the film industry to head its effort to draw back film production.
Page B1.


Bridge
A captainless team won the Open Board-a-Match Team Championship at the American Contract Bridge League's Fall Nationals here Monday night.
Mike Whitman of San Francisco headed a team in the final of the event, but was absent for business reasons.
His teammates, Richard Kata of Los Angeles, Garey Hayden of Tucson, Ariz., and Ira Cohen and Wafik Abdou of Bakersfield, Calif., took a big lead in the afternoon session and held on to win at night.
The standings were:


Prosecutors Drop Sex Case
A sexual assault case against a former supervisor at the Bronx Veterans Affairs Medical Center will be dropped, Federal prosecutors said yesterday, after one accuser said she had lied and four others declined to press charges.
Last summer, a woman who worked at the hospital accused Gregory A. Saunders, 28 years old, of raping her.
Another employee then said that she, too, had been raped by Mr.
Saunders, and three others accused him of fondling them.


A Huge Looking Glass for Japan
Droplet by tiny droplet, the world's largest single-piece telescope mirror is being formed at Corning's advanced products plant here, just a few miles south of the St.
Lawrence River.
The mirror, which will be over 27 feet in diameter and weigh 35 tons when completed more than a year and a half from now, is the main element in one of a new generation of ground-based telescopes designed to explore the outer reaches of the heavens.


Bayrd Still, Professor And Administrator, 86
Dr.
Bayrd Still, who spent four decades at New York University as a professor of history and founding director of the N.Y.U.
Archives, died on Thursday in Woodstock, Ill., the town of his birth.
He was 86 years old.
N.Y.U. said that it received the news of his death yesterday and that it did not know the cause.


CLINTON TO REVEAL GROWTH PLAN SOON
President-elect Bill Clinton plans to present his economic package to Congressional leaders before Inauguration Day, the chief of his economic transition team says.
Robert B. Reich, head of the economic team, said in an interview Monday night that Mr.
Clinton's economic advisers would present policy options to him by mid-December and that Mr.
Clinton would probably refine his campaign's broad economic plan into a more specific package by Christmas.


Theater in Review
Program for Murder  Variety Arts Theater 110 Third Avenue, at 14th Street East Village  Written by George W. George and Jeff Travers; directed by Allen Schoer; set by Edward T. Gianfrancesco; costumes by Deborah Shaw; lighting by Natasha Katz; special effects by Gregory Meeh; sound by Guy Sherman/Aural Fixation; production stage manager, Brian Meister.
Presented by Dick Feldman and Ralph Roseman, in association with Frederick M. and Patricia Supper.
WITH: Mary Kay Adams, Don Howard, Jon Krupp, Jill Susan Margolis, Colleen Quinn and Stephen Van Benschoten.


Review/Dance; 'Gypsy Passion,' a Night of Flamenco
Spanish Gypsies live and breathe flamenco, as "Gypsy Passion," an artfully conceived production from Andalusia, rightly suggests at the Plymouth Theater (236 West 45th Street, Manhattan).
Based in Jerez, the three generations of dancers and musicians on view perform with ingenuity, charm and dignity, qualities often submerged elsewhere in the firebrand exuberance and sensuality that the public associates with flamenco.


Panel Recommends Adding Vitamin to Food to Prevent Birth Defect
In a landmark decision, an advisory committee of the Food and Drug Administration recommended today that food, most likely flour, be fortified with folic acid to prevent a common and devastating type of birth defect.
If the advice is followed, it would be the first new fortification of a food since 1974, when iron was added to enriched flour to prevent iron deficiency anemia.
It would also be the first fortification made to prevent a birth defect.


WEST WILL EXPAND HIGH-TECH SALES
The Western trade group established to police high-technology sales to Communist countries radically shifted its focus today by opening its doors to its former enemies and urging them to join in controlling sensitive exports to nations threatening global security.
The 17-nation Coordinating Committee for Multilateral Export Controls, or Cocom, held a meeting today that Russia, Ukraine, Kazakhstan, Armenia and other successor nations to the former Soviet Union were allowed to attend for the first time.
American officials said the message to them was that they would receive increasingly sophisticated Western technology as they provided evidence they had imposed effective export controls.


Court Clears Way for Building On Pine Barrens of Long Island
Ruling on a case that halted virtually all development in Long Island's environmentally sensitive Pine Barrens for three years, New York State's highest court declared today that scores of separate building projects could proceed there without a study of their cumulative impact on the environment.
The unanimous decision by the Court of Appeals clears the main legal obstacle to more than 200 private construction projects in Suffolk County's Central Pine Barrens, a 100,000-acre area of scrubby pine trees and porous soil that sits atop Long Island's largest aquifer.
But the decision does not assure that they will go forward.


Where Riesling Is King, Experiments And Trouble Reign
HE black Mercedes turned off the busy road that hugs the north bank of the Rhine, ducked under the railroad overpass and began the back-and-forth climb up a switchback road.
Near the top of the slope, Peter Breuer drove into his vineyards, stopped the car, got out and walked to the edge of the path.
It was a warm day in early fall, just before the vines turn from green to vivid gold.
Only the bees and an occasional bird made any sound.
Barges on the river far below seemed motionless.
A long train hurried along the opposite bank, heading for Mainz or Frankfurt, but it, too, was silent from where we stood.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
Two new reports suggest the economy is improving.
Orders for big-ticket factory goods shot up 3.9 percent in October, the best gain in more than a year.
And the Conference Board's index of consumer confidence jumped 11 points, to 65.5, in November.  [ Page D1. ]
Sales of domestically built vehicles rose 4.8 percent in mid-November.
Sales of pickup trucks, mini-vans and sport utility vehicles jumped 14.4 percent, but car sales were sluggish.  [ D5. ] Companies
Ratings were lowered on an array of G.M. debt securities, worth about $70 billion.
Analysts said that even before this downgrading by Moody's, recent pricing of G.M. debt reflected heightened concern about the auto maker's finances.  [ D1. ]


Peter Geelan; Publishing Agent, 63
Peter Geelan, an international publishing agent, died Wednesday at his home in Las Vegas, Nev.
He was 63 years old.
Mr.
Geelan died of cancer, according to a friend, Robert Hagelstein, president of the Greenwood Publishing Group.
He reported Mr.
Geelan's death yesterday.


60-Minute Gourmet
CHILI has undergone quite an evolution in the last 10 years or so.
It used to refer to a mixture that included ground beef, usually beans of some sort, hot chili peppers and other seasonings.
Today, there are oddities like scallop chili, duck chili, squid chili, chicken chili, alligator chili and more.
The only common denominator is beans of some kind, and chili peppers.
Given all the variations on chili today, I decided to try a seasonal approach, using turkey.
Roughly equal amounts of white and dark ground turkey are cooked with the chili ingredients.
Ground turkey is widely available in supermarkets, and it is a versatile, low-fat source of protein.
Adding the dark meat makes the chili more moist.


Why De la Hoya Refuses to Part With His Gold
Oscar de la Hoya and a swarm of his friends made a mad dash across Century Park East Boulevard last week, with minimal regard for a traffic light.
"Oscar, aren't you worried about a jaywalking ticket?" asked the brother of one of de la Hoya's friends.


Sliwa Admits Faking Crimes For Publicity
The Guardian Angels' founder and leader, Curtis Sliwa, has admitted that six of his group's early crime-fighting exploits were actually faked and former and present associates contend that even more of the group's activities were publicity stunts.
Rather than riding the subways to protect the public, the associates said, Mr.
Sliwa and his wife, Lisa, run a group that has become little more than a security force for a block of midtown restaurants, its membership and activities exaggerated, its patrols, in trademark red berets, converging only on highly publicized situations.


Review/Television; History's Pendulum Defeats Custer Again
It has been more than a half-century since movie audiences first saw Errol Flynn, as a dashing Gen.
George Armstrong Custer, die with his boots on at the Little Big Horn, along with all those extras playing the 262 other United States cavalrymen who fell with him on June 25, 1876.
That has been enough time for Americans to be made aware of a point of view other than the settlers-against-savages version long promoted by Hollywood, the popular press, traveling shows and some histories.
In recent decades, it has been the Indians' turn to be romanticized.
"Last Stand at Little Big Horn," written by the producer Paul Stekler and the Blackfoot novelist James Welch, is in accord with the revised consensus without getting sappy.
For the Plains Indians, says the narrator, N. Scott Momaday, the encounter with Custer was "one of many battles to prevent the theft of their land." Their hour of success was just a passing episode in a profound defeat.
The accounts of the white side come largely from the usual historical sources, embellished by photographs.
The Indian version is told in stories and songs handed down through generations and is accompanied by drawings.
That alone suggests the nature of the differences between the Lakota and Cheyenne peoples, who made their homes in the Montana Territory, and the pioneers and gold-seekers from the East.
Yet the irreconcilable points of view have been fitted together in a coherent hour that goes beyond the brief battle at the Little Big Horn to what America's westward expansion meant for those who were simply in the way.
The program has no criticism of the cavalrymen, described as impoverished young immigrants and farm boys, who did not ride or shoot nearly so well as western movies would have it and who endured miseries in unwelcoming territory.
The program makes the case that they were serving the political and economic interests of grander classes and the imperatives of an expanding nation.
As for Custer, whose image his widow, Elizabeth, dedicated herself with considerable success to polishing for more than 50 years after his death, tonight's program contributes to his debunking as a swaggering, egotistical self-promoter who rashly led his men to their deaths.
Yet at the time, he was portrayed as a martyr, and the massacre of his outnumbered troopers became a pretext for wiping out the Plains Indians.
A son of the Lakota leader Crazy Horse, speaking for his people, says, "Wherever we went they came to kill us."
Much of the nation seems to understand now that no just compensation is possible for what was done to America's Indians, but it is possible, at least, to tell their story in a way that treats them as human beings.
Narrowly avoiding a popular tendency to demonize whites and glorify Indians, the latest offering from "The American Experience" makes an intelligent and moving contribution to that cause.
The American Experience Last Stand at Little Big Horn  PBS, tonight (In the New York area, Channels 13 and 49 at 9) Written by Paul Stekler and James Welch; produced and directed by Mr.
Stekler; Margaret Drain, senior producer for "The American Experience"; Judy Crichton, executive producer for "The American Experience"; N. Scott Momaday, narrator.


Jets Carry On an Unenviable Tradition
Aw, same old Jets. Or so it seems.
The franchise's 25th season without a winning record was guaranteed last Sunday thanks to the 24-3 loss to the New England Patriots.
Even if the Jets, now 3-8, win their remaining five games, starting with an upset on Sunday over the Kansas City Chiefs, they could reach only the .500 mark for 1992.
In their history, they have had only eight winning seasons.
They have wound up at the .500 mark 8 times and under .500 16 times.


Corrections
A map on Monday with an article about a delay in the European Community's plans to allow travel without passports among its 12 countries mislabeled the countries shown in white.
Those nine countries had originally planned to open their borders on Jan. 1, but are now delaying doing so.
The map also omitted labels for three former Soviet republics.
They are Belarus, Ukraine and Moldova.
A corrected map appears today on page A12.


Geo Campaign Features MTV Stars
Four of the "twenty-somethings" whose lives sharing a loft in SoHo were chronicled in the MTV series "The Real World" are entering the world of advertising, appearing in television commercials for Chevrolet's Geo line of vehicles, which are aimed at that age group.
The commercials, produced by Aviso Inc. in Lansing, Mich., for the Mid-Michigan Chevrolet/Geo Dealer Association, are expected to begin running in mid-December.
Raymond Ruppert, a senior vice president at Aviso, said that if the campaign succeeded, he would explore selling rights to it to Chevrolet/Geo dealer associations in other markets around the country.


J. Harvey Evans, 78, Shipbuilding Expert With M.I.T., Is Dead
J.
Harvey Evans, a naval architect and professor emeritus at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, died Monday at Mid-Coast Hospital in Brunswick, Me.
He was 78 years old.
A former resident of Lexington, Mass., he moved to a Brunswick retirement community a year ago.
He died of a heart condition, the university said.


Executive Changes
BEAR STEARNS COS., New York, named Curtis Welling senior managing director and head of stock capital markets.
DIME SAVINGS BANK OF NEW YORK appointed David S. Slackman senior vice president and director of planning and finance for consumer financial services.


Dinkins Turns to Industry Experience to Lure Films Back to City
New York City turned yesterday to a member of the film industry to head the Office of Film, Theater and Broadcasting to draw back major television and film production, which has largely abandoned the city in search of cheaper locations.
The selection of Richard Brick, a 47-year-old New York native, ends a long and troubled search, led by Barry F. Sullivan, the Deputy Mayor for Finance and Economic Development.


U.S. Ends an Era in the Philippines


REPUBLICAN OUSTS GEORGIA SENATOR
Paul D. Coverdell, a Republican who once led the Peace Corps, defeated Senator Wyche Fowler Jr., a Democrat, today in a close runoff election.
Mr.
Fowler, a one-term Senator from Atlanta, was defeated despite the efforts of President-elect Bill Clinton, who traveled to Georgia on Monday to campaign for his fellow Democrat.
Mr.
Clinton won Georgia on Nov. 3.


Open Positions on Short Sales Fall 1% on Nasdaq
Breaking the trend of much of the year, the number of shares sold short and not covered in over-the-counter trading fell in the latest month, the National Association of Securities Dealers reported yesterday.
Short interest dropped to a total of 458 million shares for the month ended Nov. 13, down 1 percent from the 462.8 million shares sold short in the previous monthly period.
But the short-selling was slightly more concentrated, with the number of companies with shares sold short climbing to 3,650, up slightly from 3,641 in the previous month.


Molln Journal; Years of Harmony, Strength in Grief
The stench of charred wood hung heavy today over the house on Muhlen Street where three Turks were burned to death Monday in a firebomb attack attributed to neo-Nazis.
All day long, residents of this placid old town came to view the scene.
Standing alone or in small groups, they shook their heads in dismay and murmured disbelief.
Many left candles or flowers, and more than a few wiped away tears.


The Pop Life
George Michael, Unhappy
The English rock star George Michael says he enjoyed his "affair" with CBS Records but can't stand his "arranged marriage" to Sony Music Entertainment.
As far as he's concerned, there's nothing left to do but file for "divorce."
In a suit filed last month in London against Sony's wholly-owned British subsidiary, Mr.
Michael said he wanted to break his contract because it was unfairly biased in favor of the record company and amounted to restraint of trade.
Mr.
Michael originally signed a contract with a CBS Records subsidiary in 1982, as a member of the duo Wham.
He renegotiated the deal as a solo artist in 1988, agreeing to deliver seven albums over 15 years.
When Sony bought CBS's records division that year, it also inherited Mr.
Michael's contract and back catalogue, as well as those of such stars as Bruce Springsteen and Michael Jackson.


Jackson Warns Rabbis and Black Ministers of Hate's 'Matchmakers'
Addressing a joint meeting of New York City rabbis and black ministers, the Rev.
Jesse Jackson appealed to them yesterday not to let loud-voiced "matchmakers" of hatred exploit black-Jewish tensions over the Crown Heights verdict for personal or political advantage, especially against Mayor David N. Dinkins.
"Matchmakers now stand to gain from our pain," Mr.
Jackson told the New York Board of Rabbis' annual Thanksgiving luncheon meeting with the city's African-American Clergy Council in Manhattan.
He mentioned no one by name and declined to do so in response to questions from reporters afterward.
But he said that there were "absolutely" such people among both blacks and Jews.


Islanders Tie Jets On Late Score
Jets 3, Islanders 3
WINNIPEG, Manitoba, Nov. 24 (AP) -- Pierre Turgeon's goal with 1:00 left in regulation capped a game-long comeback and gave the Islanders a 3-3 tie with the Winnipeg Jets tonight.
The Islanders trailed, 2-0, after the second period and 3-2 entering the final 90 seconds.
But with goalkeeper Mark Fitzpatrick on the bench for an extra attacker, defenseman Jeff Norton sent a perfect cross-ice pass from near the left boards to Turgeon, who stuffed the puck just inside the left post for his 13th goal.


Market Place; Going From Bad To Worse at Aura
THINGS could not have gone much worse this year for Aura Systems Inc.: Its auditor resigned in a dispute over its accounting; the Securities and Exchange Commission is investigating trading in the company's stock; the stock was threatened with delisting, and a number of shareholders sued the company.
But things are worse now.
Aura's general counsel, Samuel Guzik -- the man who has been the company's chief defender -- resigned with bitter accusations of his own.


10 Indicted in a Mafia Rob-to-Order Operation
Ten men who prosecutors say stole millions of dollars worth of food, televisions and clothing in a mob-run rob-to-order ring were indicted yesterday on racketeering and loan-sharking charges, the Manhattan District Attorney, Robert M. Morgenthau, said.
The ring is also accused of running illegal loan-sharking and gambling operations, but Mr.
Morgenthau said its primary business was stealing merchandise by the truckload, including kitchen appliances, televisions, men's shoes, women's clothing and meats.
Since 1987, when the operation is thought to have begun, it struck at an average rate of once every six weeks, and netted "several million dollars" in stolen goods, he said.


Drexler at 15,000-Point Mark As Unbeaten Blazers Win 8th
Trail Blazers 95, Spurs 91
PORTLAND, Ore., Nov. 24 (AP) -- Clyde Drexler scored 24 points and passed the 15,000-point mark for his 10-year career as the Trail Blazers defeated the San Antonio Spurs, 95-91, tonight.
The Trail Blazers remained the only undefeated team in the National Basketball Association with an 8-0 mark.


To Be A Jew In Germany Is to Plead: End the Hate
Ignatz Bubis says he understands why, after the unspeakable horrors of the past, few Jews have chosen to live in Germany, as he does.
But after the increasing horrors of the present, even he is beginning to wonder whether Germans have truly overcome their terrible legacy.
Mr.
Bubis, born in Silesia, was 18 years old when he returned to Germany as a survivor of the Nazi labor camps in Poland, where his parents had sought refuge from the Nazis.


Expansion Draft Will Stand, Yankees Are Told by Council
Invoking the "best interests of baseball" clause for the first time, Bud Selig and the major league executive council have told the Yankees they may take no steps to interfere with the assignment of the three players they lost in the expansion draft, including their starting third baseman, Charlie Hayes.
Selig, the council chairman, who is in charge of the major leagues in the absence of a commissioner, sent that message to the Yankees on Monday in a letter to Joseph Molloy, the club's managing partner, after the council had discussed the Yankees' position in a conference call last Friday.


A Correction: Europe Border Controls European Community Populations (1990 estimates)


Holiday Tomorrow
Thanksgiving is tomorrow.
Here are holiday schedules.
NEW YORK PARADE: Begins at 9 A.M. at 77th Street and Central Park West, then heads to Columbus Circle and down Broadway jto 34th Street, ending about noon.
GOVERNMENT OFFICES: Closed.
POST OFFICE: Express Mail and special delivery only; main post office open at 33d Street and Eighth Avenue.
BANKS: Closed.
PARKING: Sunday rules in effect.
SANITATION: No pickups or street cleanings.
SCHOOLS: Closed tomorrow and Friday.
FINANCIAL MARKETS: Closed.
TRANSPORTATION: Buses and subways on weekend schedule, some extra service.
Long Island Rail Road on weekend schedule.
Metro-North on holiday schedule, some extra service.
NEW JERSEY GOVERNMENT OFFICES: Closed; state and local offices closed Friday.
POST OFFICES: Express Mail and special delivery only.
BANKS: Closed.
SCHOOLS: Closed tomorrow and Friday.
TRANSPORTATION: N.J.
Transit on Sunday schedule.
CONNECTICUT GOVERNMENT OFFICES: Closed.
POST OFFICES: Express Mail and special delivery only.
BANKS: Closed.
SCHOOLS: Closed tomorrow and Friday.
TRANSPORTATION: Metro-North onholidayh schedule with some extra service.


Car Thief Stabs S. Carolina Methodist Bishop
The Bishop of the United Methodist Church in South Carolina was stabbed critically Monday night by a man trying to steal his car in Columbia, S.C., the authorities said today.
Suffering wounds from a large butcher knife, the Bishop, Joseph B. Bethea, was listed in critical but stable condition at Richland Memorial Hospital after five hours of surgery to repair damage to the intestines and pancreas.
Bishop Bethea, who oversees 1,070 United Methodist churches with 245,000 members, was walking to his 1991 Cadillac parked in a lot outside the church's administrative offices when he was accosted shortly before 6 P.M., said Willie S. Teague, the editor of The South Carolina United Methodist Advocate, a weekly newspaper for the church.
The man demanded the Bishop's car keys, Mr.
Teague said, and when he refused, the man stabbed him.


Metropolitan Diary
DEAR Diary:
I was shopping in the East Meadow, L.I., Pathmark supermarket, looking for a particular Sunshine snack cracker.
In the cookie and cracker aisle I spotted a young man stacking the shelves.


Weinberger Calls His Indictment a Political Move
In a rare display of anger, former Defense Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger lashed out today at the Iran-contra prosecutors, accusing them of using him as a political pawn by issuing a pre-Election Day indictment against him that raised new questions about President Bush's role in the affair.
Emerging from the Federal courthouse here after pleading not guilty to the new charge of making false statements to Congress, Mr.
Weinberger ripped into his accusers.


Sports of The Times; Baseball Is Searching For Direction
FOR many baseball executives, one of the most vivid memories of the dog-day decade of the 1960's was that far too many people in the game and out of it were ready to declare the sport dead.
The game, critics charged and fans lamented, was moribund, boring, outdated, its talent pool diluted and its ranks filled with greedy owners and players.
Although no notices of pending death have greeted modern-day baseball, the rhetoric of the 60's is creeping into the lexicon, again.
That is lost on no one, especially those charged with trying to revive an industry that pretty much left its image in tatters after a season of self-destructive behavior.


2 Charged in Fraud of Co-op Shareholders
Two of the principals of one of the city's largest and most successful co-op conversion companies were charged yesterday with diverting hundreds of thousands of dollars from shareholders in nine co-op buildings to their own accounts.
Robert Abrams, New York State Attorney General, charged Norman Dansker, 68 years old, and his wife, Gloria Dansker, 65, both principals in Coronet Properties, with grand larceny and real-estate fraud, in a 46-count indictment.
Also cited in the indictment were the Coronet Properties Company, the Coronet Realty Company and Arlington Avenue Associates, general partnerships in which the Danskers are principals.


Decision Finds Harper's Broke the Copyright Law
In a case pitting an editor and well-known writing teacher against one of the nation's most venerable publications, a Manhattan Federal court judge ruled yesterday that Harper's Magazine had broken copyright law by publishing portions of a letter written by Gordon Lish, an editor at Alfred A. Knopf, without his permission.
The case had attracted attention in publishing circles because of Mr.
Lish's reputation for flamboyance and self-aggrandizement and because it had the potential to affect a journalist's right to quote from first-hand sources.


Corrections
A brief article in Business Day on Thursday about an insider trading case involving the former co-chairman of the Cooper Companies referred incorrectly to a Federal judge's actions regarding Steven G. Singer, the company's chief operating officer, executive vice president and assistant general counsel.
The judge limited the amount that Mr.
Singer may distribute from a trust for the children of the former co-chairman, whose assets were frozen.


Parents Indicted in Attempt to Sell 2 of Their Children
A Long Island couple who authorities said are addicted to crack were arraigned today after trying to sell two of their children to an undercover detective for $1,500, the Suffolk County police said.
Karen Gelveles, 31 years old, and her companion, Mitchell Dedes, 23, of Mastic, were charged with endangering the welfare of a minor and unauthorized adoption after trying to sell their 4-month-old daughter and her 2-year-old brother to a detective posing as a buyer.
Endangering the welfare of a minor carries a maximum sentence of one year.


Public &amp; Private; Six for Women
So much is contained in a small story Bishop P. Francis Murphy recounted recently in Commonweal magazine.
The Auxiliary Bishop of Baltimore asked a class of first graders the number of sacraments, a question as elementary to Catholic schoolchildren as the ABC's.
"One little girl promptly responded: 'Six for women and seven for men,' " the Bishop wrote.


A Correction: Haitians' Route


Lobbyists on Clinton's Team: Potential for Conflict Endures
The top officials of Bill Clinton's Presidential transition team are lawyers and lobbyists whose collective client lists and board memberships include virtually every American industry and many foreign companies and governments.
The clients of these officials' firms sell things as diverse as Kermit the Frog and the uranium used in nuclear power plants.
The clients drill oil, build cars and run banks.
They sell cigarettes, fighter jets, spy satellites and wine.
Many of these clients have important matters pending before Federal agencies and Congress, which is precisely why they turned to Washington lawyers.


A 'Retreat,' Not a 'Summit'
The economic "summit" in Little Rock will actually be talks aimed at building support for the President-elect's proposals.
Page A18.


Mother in Assault Case Tells of Personal Turmoil
The mother of the complainant in the Glen Ridge sex assault case ended four days of testimony today by enduring more intense cross-examination about her daughter and sex, then telling the prosecution that she was "totally horrified" by the details of what prosecutors say was the attack.
As she has since taking the stand, the mother remained calm under a two-hour barrage of sex-oriented questions by a defense lawyer, Michael Querques.
But her composure wavered and she wept quietly as she began telling a prosecutor, Robert Laurino, her thoughts about the case.


Hermitage Displays War Booty It Had Long Denied Possessing
The night before a Red Army officer, Viktor Baldin, ordered his troops back to Russia at the end of World War II, he crammed a suitcase with sketches found in the basement of a German manor 50 miles northwest of Berlin.
After nearly 50 years in storage, the contents of that suitcase are now on display at the Hermitage Museum here.
The drawings are by Rembrandt, Van Dyke, Durer, Toulouse-Lautrec, Degas, Rodin, van Gogh and many other German, Italian, Dutch and French artists spanning four centuries.


Critic's Notebook; Sex and Skepticism for Thanksgiving
Thanksgiving on prime time is still stuffed with sentimentality; television entertainment has yet to meet a problem that can't be tidily solved seconds before the closing credits.
But the action, as usual, can be found less in the plots than in the characters.
And in that sense, the days of Norman Rockwell and Frank Capra are long gone, their rock-solid sense of security overtaken by a world of shifting relationships and tentative commitments.
Television times have changed, obviously, from the days of not just the heartwarming "Waltons" but also the frisky and carefully virginal "Mary Tyler Moore Show." Today's content veers unmistakably toward social and multi-cultural sensitivity, not to mention sexual candor.


When Banks Own Many Empty Houses
To the Editor:
Apropos your Nov. 15 report on the surge in home foreclosures, I have been wondering for some time whether or not we're on the road to repeating the experience of the early 1930's in housing.


Sports of The Times; A Champion's Homecoming: Bowe Goes Back to Brooklyn
Riddick Bowe emerged from the limousine in front of his old high school, and there were the familiar faces: his favorite cop, his pizza man, his godmother and the young men and women from Thomas Jefferson High School, looking for hope.
The school officials turned off the metal detector inside the front door, which was a good thing, considering all the hardware Bowe was carrying.
The championship boxing belt, brought home to Brooklyn, would have set off alarms all over the borough.


Jet Crashes in China, Killing 141; 5th Serious Accident in 4 Months
A Boeing 737 passenger airliner on a flight to a tourist spot in southern China crashed into a mountain today, killing all 141 people aboard, the official New China News Agency reported.
The agency quoted witnesses saying the plane belched smoke before it hit the ground and exploded in China's worst reported air disaster, but there was no immediate report of what went wrong.


Theater in Review
Words Divine A Miracle Play Intar 420 West 42d Street Clinton Through Dec. 13
Translated and adapted by Lorenzo Mans, based on "Divinas Palabras" by Ramon del Valle Inclan; directed by Max Ferra; production design, Rimer Cardillo; music by William Harper; lighting by Mark McCullough; sound by Fox and Perla; movement directors, Janet Watson and B. H. Barry.
Presented by Intar Hispanic American Arts Center, Mr.
Ferra, artistic director; Eva Brune, managing director, in association with the Mexican Cultural Institute of New York.


Loehmann's Account Placed in Review
Loehmann's, the discount clothing retailer, said yesterday that it had placed in review its $5 million account, which could wind up at its fourth agency in less than six months.
Douglas C. Meyer, vice president of marketing at Loehmann's in the Bronx, confirmed a report of the review in Adweek this week.
He said the account was being handled for now by Albrecht Advertising &amp; Design in New York, which in late September replaced the retailer's previous agency, Lois/U.S.A. in New York.


Michigan Moves to Ban Doctors' Aiding in Suicides
Two years after Dr.
Jack Kevorkian began a one-man crusade to help gravely ill people kill themselves with devices he made, and one day after a sixth woman committed suicide with such a device, the Michigan Legislature took steps today to ban the practice.
By a 72-to-29 vote, the Michigan House of Representatives passed a bill to make assisted suicide a felony punishable by four years in prison while a state commission studies the matter and makes recommendations for final legislation.
The commission's work is expected to take about 15 months.


Knicks and Celtics To Air on WNBC
WNBC-TV/Channel 4 will take the unusual step of pre-empting prime-time network programming on Dec. 18 to broadcast a Knicks-Celtics game from Boston.


City Hospitals Also Have Success Stories That Need Telling
To the Editor:
It is not easy working in a large, city hospital.
There are too many patients to treat, too few to treat them and a facility badly in need of renovation.
Unfortunately, the public's perception of the institution has been greatly shaped by news media focus on cases of mismanaged care.
Our successes are largely ignored.


Review/Music; Quartet In Its Debut At 92d St. Y
To perform, on a single program, the Mozart "Dissonant" Quartet, the Berg Opus 3, and the Beethoven Opus 131 would be an arduous undertaking even for a seasoned ensemble.
For a young group making its New York debut, the sequence looks almost suicidal.
But the St.
Lawrence String Quartet made the leap on Nov. 17, at the 92d Street Y inaugurating the Y's Young Concert Artists Series.
They not only survived, but triumphed as well.
Geoff Nuttall, Barry Shiffman, Lesley Robertson and Marina Hoover have been performing together only since 1989.
They have risen fast, however, winning competitions and recently completing a residency with the Emerson Quartet; their sound echoes the Emerson's superb balance.


Taps Played For Radio's Lush Format
"ELEVATOR MUSIC" has had a long, successful ride in the fractious New York radio market.
But the demands of advertisers, reflecting significant changes in the consumers who are the stations' listeners, are announcing, "last stop, everyone out" for artists like the 101 Strings and Mantovani and their lush, Muzak-like instrumental recordings.
The metropolitan region's final purveyor of elevator music, a format also known in the radio industry as beautiful music or easy listening, is Park Communications's WPAT, which simulcasts its programming on 930 on the AM dial and 93.1 on the FM dial.
For almost four decades, those sweet sounds -- described by somnolent announcers as "In the air, everywhere" -- brought high ratings and, consequently, robust advertising revenue, despite dismissals from fans of less saccharine music who derided orchestral versions of pop standards like "Smoke Gets in Your Eyes," "I Feel Pretty" and "The Way We Were."


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
7.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
4.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
2.62
2.89
4.52
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.20
3.27
4.40
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.40
3.45
4.46
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.43
6.47
6.99
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.53
7.54
7.93
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.50
8.50
8.94
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.40
6.40
6.90
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Shareholder Accuses Centel Of Bungling a Proxy Letter
A dissident shareholder of the Centel Corporation, the large telecommunications company whose management has agreed to a merger with the Sprint Corporation, said yesterday that Centel's management had bungled the mailing of some proxy solicitations, undermining the ability of shareholders to campaign against the merger.
Moran Asset Management of Greenwich, Conn., the dissident Centel shareholder that complained about Centel's mailing to stockholders, urged a one-week delay of the special shareholders meeting scheduled for next Wednesday in Chicago.
Centel management rejected the request for a delay.


Lunch With Penn and Teller? Just Not While You're Eating
THESE days, anyone who has lunch with Penn and Teller, the cheerfully uncivilized and deliberately offensive magic team, should wear foul-weather gear.
Unless one likes being splattered with goop when they seem to stick forks in their eyes.
And although their piece de resistance, a gory special-effects trick called "Linguine a la Stigmata," doesn't make a mess, it can cause queasiness.
It's part of the experience.


Germans, Hazy About Past, Distrust the Future; What They Must Do
To the Editor:
"German Attacks Rise as Foreigners Become Scapegoat" (front page, Nov. 2) mentions only one response under consideration by "mainstream politicians": a constitutional change that would tighten conditions on asylum.
Such a step would do nothing to address the belief of right-wing provocateurs that the police will look the other way when they harass foreigners and Jews, and Germany's widespread lack of tolerance and understanding of other cultures.


One Bird That Won't Be Served for Dinner


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about a meeting of freshman Representatives in Omaha referred incorrectly to an orientation meeting that Representative-elect Rick A. Lazio of Long Island plans to skip.
The meeting, scheduled for December in Annapolis, is sponsored by the Heritage Foundation, not by the Republican Party.


Chinese Apparently Halt Rights Talks With U.S.
In a rebuff to President Bush and a warning to President-elect Bill Clinton, China appears to have suspended its discussions with the United States on human rights issues, including American inquiries about specific political prisoners.
The action by the Beijing authorities halts a process that began in December 1990, when the Bush Administration hailed the talks as a sign of progress on human rights following the violent suppression of the democracy movement in June 1989.


COMPANY NEWS
DEXTER CORP., Windsor Locks, Conn., has agreed to sell its Rutland Plastics Inc. unit to Florida Capital Partners, a private investment firm funded by a venture capital unit of Chemical Banking Corp.
SARA LEE CORP., Chicago, announced it had been granted exclusive rights to negotiate for the acquisition of BP Nutrition's consumer food group in Bunnik, the Netherlands.


Quick Kudos (but the Check Is in the Mail)
Christine Fox of Roeland Park, Kan., was thrilled to receive letters from a United States Senator and a Congresswoman from her state early last month congratulating her for having won a $2,750 National Science Scholarship.
But she was also puzzled, because no official notification of her award had come.


A Plot to Kill Leaders In Lebanon Reported
Lebanese authorities uncovered a Muslim fundamentalist plot to assassinate the country's top leaders and a number of suspects have been arrested, press reports published here said today.
The reports, citing unnamed Government and security officials, said the scheme envisaged exploding a booby-trapped military vehicle across from a platform where President Elias Hrawi and senior Government leaders stood during the military parade here last Sunday on the 49th anniversary of the country's independence.


Ready or Not, the N.I.T. Final Four Is Hitting the Floor
During a luncheon yesterday in Manhattan to kick off tonight's semifinal games of the preseason National Invitation Tournament, each of the four participating coaches was asked about the more restrictive training period imposed by the N.C.A.A. last year to reduce time demands on student athletes.
Coach P. J. Carlesimo of Seton Hall had mixed feelings about the mandatory shift from Oct. 15 to Nov. 1 for the beginning of college basketball practice.


After Richter Is Benched (Gasp!), He Gets Defensive
Clean-cut in appearance and collegiate in style, Mike Richter has been the all-American boy since joining the Rangers in 1988 off the United States Olympic team.
He was even profiled in last week's New Yorker magazine, and how many hockey goaltenders can say that?
But Richter wasn't in his usual upbeat mood today at Rye Playland, as the Rangers practiced before traveling to Pittsburgh, where they will play the two-time defending Stanley Cup champion Penguins on Wednesday night in the second game of a home-and-home series.


No Headline
"I was never too happy with that punchy-punchy stuff. But he worked hard at it, and now he's the champion, but he'd better get some education, so he can keep it. " -- PEGGY HAYES, Riddick Bowe's godmother.  [ B11:3 ]


The Mayor On Television
Mayor Dinkins's speech on race relations will be broadcast live at noon today on nearly every local television station, including Channels 2, 4, 5, 7, 13 and 41.


Poland Reaches Deal With Monetary Fund
Negotiators for Poland and the International Monetary Fund reached an agreement today that opens the way for Poland to seek further relief from its international creditors.
The 14-month deal allows Poland to draw on about $700 million from the monetary fund.
But its most important effect will be on Poland's international debt, which has been one factor discouraging foreign investment in the country.


Gay Group Asks Accord In Job Dispute
Gay activists said yesterday that the president of Cracker Barrel Old Country Store Inc., a restaurant and gift-store chain, had "opened the door" to resolving a 20-month boycott to protest the company's anti-gay employment policies.
But the company's president and chief executive, Dan W. Evins, said he had no intention of meeting with members of Queer Nation, which has led demonstrations and a publicity campaign against the company.


Ter-Arutunian Memorial
A memorial service for Rouben Ter-Arutunian, the designer for dance, opera, theater and television, will be at noon on Monday at St.
Vartan Armenian Apostolic Cathedral, 630 Second Avenue, at 33d Street, Manhattan.
Mr.
Ter-Arutunian died on Oct. 17 at age 72.


West Might Extend Russians' Debt Schedule
Western governments expect to decide by next Monday to give Russia more time to repay some of the debts of the former Soviet Union, American officials said today.
An agreement to reschedule half the $70 billion foreign debt was made possible on Monday by Russia's tentative agreement to be responsible for the full amount, instead of sharing responsibility with the other republics.


New Evidence Found in Case Of Clinton Files
State Department investigators have obtained evidence suggesting that the White House may have been involved in conceiving and coordinating the search through Bill Clinton's passport files, a Federal official said today.
The official, who spoke on condition of anonymity, would not disclose the nature of the evidence.
But the State Department report on the affair that was issued last week hinted at one potential source: notes on telephone calls monitored by the department's communications center.


Personal Health
IF you have heard the growing number of obesity specialists who warn that diets are doomed to fail, you are probably wondering whether there is any route to weight control that might be more successful.
With food-focused holidays upon us, the tug of war between fear of fat and the desire to indulge is a source of personal torment for scores of millions.
Before you choose yet another commercial regimen that promises instant slimness or give in to gaining 10 or more unwanted pounds between now and the new year, it may pay to heed the lessons that have emerged from a stack of recent studies on weight loss and maintenance.
Ideal Weight
In any population, the distribution of body weight, like that of height, forms a bell-shaped curve: there are relatively small numbers of very heavy and very thin people at either end, while a vast majority of people are more or less of average weight and fall under the main hump of the bell.
Your body type and the weight that is biologically appropriate for you are determined primarily by the genes you inherited from your parents, and any adjustments made up or down are more or less limited by your biological heritage.
The sooner you come to terms with this fact and learn to accept the person you are, the happier you are likely to be.


Review/Music; Free Jazz By German Saxophonist
Peter Brotzmann, a free-wheeling extremist of German jazz, makes sounds with his saxophone that some would find ungodly and others heaven sent.
He has been a principal figure in free jazz since the 1960's; the sustained force of his playing has an American analogue only in the superhuman pianism of Cecil Taylor.
Appropriately enough, Mr.
Brotzmann was joined at Roulette on Friday night by two regular Taylor collaborators: William Parker on bass and Gregg Bendian on drums.
It was only the latest snippet of a trans-Atlantic dialogue that has already produced some major utterances, most notably the Free Music Production recording of Mr.
Taylor's "Alms/Tiergarten (Spree)," in which Mr.
Brotzmann wails above a big-band texture poised between Ellington and Varese.
On Thursday night, Mr.
Brotzmann promptly unleashed the stinging, shrieking tones that have become legendary both in free jazz and in industrial-noise rock.
His tour de force is a sort of polyphonic glissando in which separate scooping lines seem to sound at once.
Yet the evening's best moments were its quieter ones: respirations and rustlings intermingled, tremolo figures over a soft drum roll, a pensive three-note melody traded between bass and bass clarinet.
Returning refreshed after a long intermission, Mr.
Brotzmann dished up broad melody with a punkish sneer, but subtleties soon crept back into the texture.
Even during the evening's climactic assaults, the sound had an unexpected lightness, spinning in place rather than pressing against the walls.


Open Positions on Short Sales Fall 1% on Nasdaq
Breaking the trend of much of the year, the number of shares sold short and not covered in over-the-counter trading fell in the latest month, the National Association of Securities Dealers reported yesterday.
Short interest dropped to a total of 458 million shares for the month ended Nov. 13, down 1 percent from the 462.8 million shares sold short in the previous monthly period.
But the short-selling was slightly more concentrated, with the number of companies with shares sold short climbing to 3,650, up slightly from 3,641 in the previous month.


Luis Salazar; Research Assistant, 27
Luis Salazar, a research assistant at the Columbia University School of Public Health, died on Sunday at St.
Vincent's Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 27 years old and lived in Manhattan.
Mr.
Salazar died of leukemia, according to the School of Public Health, which announced his death yesterday.


Some Reverse Psychology by Riley Does the Job
Just to prove that he doesn't hold a grudge, Pat Riley gave Greg Anthony and Anthony Mason back their minutes.
Just to demonstrate that they had learned their lesson, Anthony and Mason made Riley look like the coaching genius he is paid so handsomely by the Knicks to be.
Just in case anyone believed Riley was ready to rotate eight players, and turn his team over to crafty veterans, he turned back against the grain of conventional wisdom last night, using Mason, Anthony and rookie Hubert Davis for the final 15 minutes 33 seconds of the Knicks' 98-88 victory over the Washington Bullets at Madison Square Garden.


Times Expands Discount Card
The New York Times Company said yesterday that it had widened the distribution of the Times Card, a dining and shopping discount card for subscribers to The New York Times.





U.S. Would Grant Hopis a Large Tract To Resolve Dispute
In an extraordinary step intended to settle the most bitter and tortured land dispute between American Indian tribes in this century, the Federal Government will propose ceding nearly 400,000 acres of public land in Arizona to the Hopi Indians.
The proposal, which requires the approval of Congress, will be announced Wednesday by the Interior and Agriculture Departments as a key to resolving a dispute between Hopis and Navajos that dates to the 1880's, when increasing numbers of Navajos began moving onto traditional Hopi land.


Los Angeles Schools Face Insolvency and a Takeover
The nation's second-largest school system stands on the verge of fiscal collapse.
The system, the Los Angeles Unified School District, says it will declare itself insolvent on Wednesday if a state judge permanently orders it to reverse a 12 percent pay cut imposed on teachers.
The State of California would then take over the system.


EASTERN COLLEGE REPORT
Ivy League's Best
Jay Fiedler, the Dartmouth quarterback who led the Green to a tie for the championship with Princeton, was voted the Ivy player of the year by the coaches.
Fiedler, a 20-year-old junior from Oceanside, L.I., will receive the Asa S. Bushnell Cup, matching a feat of two Dartmouth running backs, Al Rosier last year and Shon Page in 1990.
Fiedler, whose pass efficiency rating of 169 was first in Division I-AA, and six others were unanimous choices for the all-Ivy first team.
Two were his teammates, Lance Brackee, a 295-pound senior offensive tackle, and linebacker George Neos, who had 12 sacks.


Germans, Hazy About Past, Distrust the Future; A Conservative Liberal
To the Editor:
"Where Are Germany's Leaders?" (editorial, Nov. 12) deals admirably with the troubled condition of Germany.
The great miracle of postwar western Germany was the emergence out of Nazi devastation of several generations of outstanding leaders, determined to learn and apply the lessons of the German past.
To a large extent -- and with help from abroad -- they succeeded.


Unified Veterans Day
To the Editor:
Memorial Day, originally established as Decoration Day for decorating Civil War veterans' graves, and Veterans Day, originally Armistice Day, to celebrate the end of World War I, have both been changed to include participants in all our wars.
Why not combine them into one annual holiday honoring all our veterans?
There might be greater public interest in ceremonies and parades for veterans if they were held only once a year.
HELEN N. ROSENBERG  New York, Nov. 13, 1992


Review/Film; Political Ideology and Love
"The Crying Game" was shown as part of the New York Film Festival this autumn.
Following are excerpts from Vincent Canby's review, which appeared in The New York Times on Sept. 26.
Neil Jordan, the Irish writer and director, makes melodramas that are often very funny, fantasies that are common-sensical and moral fables that are perverse.
At heart, he is a madly unreconstructed romantic.
In his view, the power of love can work miracles of a kind that would send Freud back to his own couch.


Bush Asks France and Britain to Back Force of Monitors in Kosovo
President Bush has proposed to the leaders of France and Britain the creation of an international civilian force that could include Americans to monitor Serbian repression of the Albanian majority in Kosovo, senior Administration officials said today.
The proposal, sent in a letter late last week to President Francois Mitterrand and Prime Minister John Major, also urged them to consider backing an international demand to restore the autonomy of Kosovo, a region of the former Yugoslav republic of Serbia.


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Nov. 20
Nov. 13
Nov. 22
1992
1992
1991
Gasoline production, daily
7.4
7.2
7.1
Distillate production, daily
3.3
3.3
3.1
Gasoline stocks
210.2
207.8
202.7
Distillate stocks
136.5
138.4
138.6
Crude imports, daily
6.7
5.6
5.6
Product imports, daily
1.9
1.4
1.9
Crude stocks
324.0
320.0
346.8
Crude production, daily
7.0
7.0
7.4
Refinery utilization (%)
88.8
89.5
85.5
Source: American Petroleum Institute


Troubled Nuclear Factory Is to Be Shut in Oklahoma
The owner of an Oklahoma uranium processing factory that has been repeatedly cited by the Government for violations of nuclear safety and environmental rules announced today that it was indefinitely closing the plant and putting most of its 300 employees out of work.
The closing of the 22-year-old Sequoyah Fuels Corporation factory in Gore, 135 miles east of Oklahoma City, ends years of struggle by local residents who had raised questions about the plant's management, its record of accidents, including one that killed a worker in 1986 and injured dozens of others, and its role in contaminating the Arkansas River and groundwater.


Wine Talk
THIS, in case you didn't know it, is champagne time.
Or, to be precise, sparkling-wine time.
By the end of the year, Americans will have polished off some 173 million bottles of champagne and sparkling wine, 57 million of them from now to the end of December.
Not bad for a recession year.
What's more, Americans are probably going to drink more this year than last.
Only a tiny bit more, to be sure, but then, sparkling-wine consumption had been dropping steadily since 1985.
That year, we popped almost 220 million champagne corks.


Review/Opera; Met's First 'Boheme' Of Season
Puccini's struggling Bohemians and their tempestuous love affairs -- and probably more to the point, Franco Zeffirelli's Super-Verismo-Plus vision of mid-19th-century Paris -- returned to the Metropolitan Opera stage on Monday evening in the company's first performance of "La Boheme" this season.
Perhaps years of familiarity can blunt an operagoer's objections to the busy and often distracting detail of Mr.
Zeffirelli's extravaganzas.
Or perhaps, to put it differently, one is simply bludgeoned by their sheer weight into a resigned acceptance.
It may even be that Leslie Koenig's stage direction has muted some of the excesses, although it would be tough to point to examples.


Child's Slaying Laid to Unpaid $40 Loan
The body of a 7-year-old girl, missing since Sunday morning, was found yesterday in a vacant lot in the Bronx, and the police said an acquaintance of her mother kidnapped and killed her because he had not been repaid a $40 loan.
The suspect, Domingo DelValle Sierra, 35, of 2385 Lorillard Place in the Fordham section, was charged with second-degree murder after taking detectives to the vacant lot early yesterday morning, the police said.


Theater in Review
Words Divine A Miracle Play Intar 420 West 42d Street Clinton Through Dec. 13
Translated and adapted by Lorenzo Mans, based on "Divinas Palabras" by Ramon del Valle Inclan; directed by Max Ferra; production design, Rimer Cardillo; music by William Harper; lighting by Mark McCullough; sound by Fox and Perla; movement directors, Janet Watson and B. H. Barry.
Presented by Intar Hispanic American Arts Center, Mr.
Ferra, artistic director; Eva Brune, managing director, in association with the Mexican Cultural Institute of New York.


Cuomo Seeks to Avoid Increase in Subway Fares
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo said today that he had proposed to legislative leaders a transportation financing plan that would eliminate a projected New York City Transit Authority deficit without raising bus and subway fares next year.
The Governor's plan, according to administration and legislative officials, would include an increase of 50 cents in the $2.50 toll on Triborough Bridge and Tunnel Authority crossings.
That increase is already being considered by the Metropolitan Transportation Authority but, unlike the M.T.A., Mr.
Cuomo would exempt the Verrazano-Narrows Bridge between Staten Island and Brooklyn.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League
YANKEES -- Named Tim McCleary assistant general manager, baseball operations; Brian Cashman, assistant general manager, baseball administration, and Bill Bergesch, senior advisor, baseball operations.
DETROIT TIGERS -- Agreed to purchase Class-A Lakeland of the Florida State League.
SEATTLE MARINERS -- Named Sammy Ellis pitching coach and John McLaren bullpen coach.
TEXAS RANGERS -- Signed Benny Distefano, first baseman, to a minor-league contract with Oklahoma City of the American Association.
Florida State League
ST.
PETERSBURG CARDINALS -- Named Terry Kennedy manager.
Basketball  National Basketball Association
DETROIT PISTONS -- Waived Darrell Walker, guard.
GOLDEN STATE WARRIORS -- Placed Keith Jennings, guard, on the injured list.
Signed Paul Pressey, guard.
Continental Basketball Association
CAPITAL REGION PONTIACS -- Activated Steve Wright, center, from the injured reserve list.
COLUMBUS HORIZON -- Acquired Sean Tyson, forward, from the Yakima Sun Kings for a 1993 sixth-round draft pick and future considerations.
Placed Ed Horton, forward-center, on the injured reserve list.
FARGO-MOORHEAD FEVER -- Signed Carlton McKinney, guard.
QUAD CITY THUNDER -- Signed Kenny Drummond, guard.
Placed Phil Henderson, guard, on the injured reserve list.
YAKIMA SUN KINGS -- Signed Corey Gaines, guard. Football  National Football League
GIANTS -- Placed Sean Landeta, punter, on injured reserve. Signed Joe Prokop, punter.
GREEN BAY PACKERS -- Re-signed Brett Collins, linebacker, and Maury Toy, running back, to the practice squad.
TAMPA BAY BUCCANEERS -- Re-signed Mike Barber, wide receiver.
Waived Jeff Parker, wide receiver.
Added David Moore, tight end, to the practice squad.
Hockey  National Hockey League
DEVILS -- Assigned Janne Ojanen, center, to Cincinnati of the International Hockey League for conditioning.
MINNESOTA NORTH STARS -- Released Dan Quinn, center.
TAMPA BAY LIGHTNING -- Recalled Michel Mongeau, center, from Milwaukee of the International Hockey League.
TORONTO MAPLE LEAFS -- Acquired John Cullen, center, from the Hartford Whalers for a second-round draft pick in 1993 or 1994.
WASHINGTON CAPITALS -- Waived Mark Hunter, right wing.
Assigned Jeff Greenlaw, wing, to Baltimore of the American Hockey League.
College
BAYLOR -- Named Chuck Reedy football coach.
KINGS POINT -- Named Ed Winch and Tim McGrath men's assistant basketball coaches.
SOUTHEAST MISSOURI -- Announced the contracts of Dave Cheesebrough, defensive coordinator; Robert Cary, offensive coordinator; and Russ Ehrenfeld, defensive line coach, will not be renewed.
TEMPLE -- Named Ron Dickerson football coach and signed him to a five-year contract.
TENNESSEE STATE -- Fired Joe Gilliam, football coach.


Black Workers Played Role on the Home Front
To the Editor:
Your Nov. 11 review of the television documentary "Liberators: Fighting on Two Fronts in World War II" states, "Black workers weren't even allowed in the war industries." Not so.
While black workers continued to face discrimination in employment in World War II, substantial numbers worked in war-related industries, often in jobs previously closed to blacks.
One case I have researched was the Calumet Shipyard in Chicago, operated by Pullman Inc. as a wartime plant to build ships under contract for the Navy.


Books of The Times; Diderot, the Frenchman Who Excited Minds
Diderot  A Critical Biography  By P. N. Furbank  Illustrated. 524 pages.
Alfred A. Knopf. $30.
For readers who associate Denis Diderot only with his editorship of the Encyclopedie, that great French testament of the Age of Enlightenment, P. N. Furbank has written a biography that is full of delightful surprises about the man, his achievements and his circle of philosophers.
In our own Age of Disenchantment, when philosophers are not held in high esteem -- try to think of any who influence governments today through the power of their ideas and writings -- it is enlightening to recall a time when rationalism and faith in the progress of the human mind existed and, in some countries, provided the roots of revolution.


CHRONICLE
Another place, another species, but once again there is a Princess Diana garnering attention.
LAURA MAIOGLIO, the owner of the Barbetta Restaurant on West 46th Street, thought it would amuse the 90 guests at a dinner she gave there Monday for two culinary societies to see how truffle hounds dig up the delicacy.
So she had two pounds of white truffles, worth about $2,500, flown in from the province of Asti, in Italy.
They arrived with Princess Diana, a small truffle-hunting setter, and her handler, VINCENZO TESTA.
The truffles were buried in the restaurant's garden.


New Challenge for States: Making, Not Taking, Jobs
In state capitals across the nation, just as in Washington, government leaders are casting about for approaches, new and old, to reinvigorate their economies.
And the key to that, wherever it is tried, is creating jobs.
For decades, most states have taken the easy, politically expedient approach.
They have offered lucrative tax incentives, a proven technique that lures businesses away from neighboring states, enabling politicians to put hundreds or thousands of their constituents to work before the next elections.


Boeing to Slow Output, Leading to Job Cuts
The Boeing Company said yesterday that it would slow production rates on its 757 and 767 jetliners next year, resulting in the loss of an estimated 2,000 jobs in the Seattle area and 500 jobs in Wichita, Kan.
"The decision takes into account the cumulative recent requests of a number of our customers for changes in their delivery stream," said Dean Thornton, president of Boeing's commercial aircraft group.


Fingerprinting Welfare Applicants
Spurred by the State Senate's concern about welfare fraud, two counties, Rockland and Onondaga, have begun fingerprinting some welfare applicants and recipients.
The only other county in the nation to employ fingerprinting is Los Angeles County, where enthusiastic officials say $5.4 million was saved in the first six months after the program began in June 1991.
They say the savings resulted after 297 welfare recipients were caught, through their fingerprints, trying to apply for duplicate benefits, and after 3,010 applicants refused to be fingerprinted and were dropped from the welfare system.


Want to Buy the Bomb? No Problem.
The world may be sitting on top of the next nuclear crisis without even knowing it.
That is because at least five Middle Eastern countries -- Iraq, Iran, Syria, Libya, Algeria -- are working to develop nuclear weapons. (Israel already has the bomb.) Like Iraq, they are buying strategic technologies from Western companies.
They are also attempting to acquire nuclear materials from the former Soviet Union.
The U.S. has not learned the lessons of the Iraq debacle.
Half the equipment licensed for sale to Iran by the Commerce Department over the past four years is considered "nuclear weapons relevant" by the Energy Department.
Our export control system continues to obey commercial rather than strategic imperatives, despite overwhelming evidence that American technology is being used for weapons programs that could one day be turned against us.


NEW VIDEO RELEASES
Patriot Games  1992.
Paramount. $94.95.
Laser disk, $34.95. 1 hour 57 minutes.
Closed captioned.
R.


Albin Johnson, 102, Ex-Diplomat And a Reporter in World War II
Albin Johnson, a retired United States diplomat who in an earlier career as a foreign correspondent reported on some of the most important events of World War II and the period leading up to it, died on Nov. 17 at his home in Osterville, Mass.
He was 102 years old.
Mr.
Johnson was one of that small band of newspaper reporters who tracked the emergence of the world from one devastating war and its descent into another.


First Deficit in Decade At Troubled City Opera
The New York City Opera ended its 1992 season on Nov. 15 with its first deficit in a decade, and facing a grim financial picture.
Its administrative staff had already agreed to a wage freeze, and now Christopher Keene, the company's general director since 1989, has asked the unions, too, to accept a freeze.
Ticket sales for the year were lower than the company had projected.
And the board is scrambling to find new contributors to counter a decline in government and corporate funds.
City Opera first acknowleged its problems in June, about a month before the season opened, when it abruptly canceled a planned new production of Janacek's "Excursions of Mr. Broucek" in order to save about $400,000 of its $26 million budget.
But a report in Newsday yesterday suggested that the company could run out of money by next October -- just before the end of what was anicipated as a celebratory 50th season -- and that morale had been damaged by staff cuts.


London Journal; God Save the Queen (if It Doesn't Cost Too Much)
The flames that destroyed part of Windsor Castle last week are out.
But the debate they ignited over who, precisely, ought to pay to restore the landmark is still burning, sharply illuminating the increasingly uneasy relationship between the royal family and its more skeptical subjects.
While the Government of Prime Minister John Major has calculated that the sympathetic and politic thing to do is to foot the bill, which will run into tens of millions of dollars, a loud, broad-based minority of opposition politicians, republicans and disgruntled commoners argue otherwise.


Living in a Nightmare On Lower Sixth Avenue
To the Editor:
Lucius J. Riccio, New York City's Commissioner of Transportation, is convincing when he explains why it is taking so long to rebuild Sixth Avenue (letter, Nov. 11).
But for those of us who live along lower Sixth Avenue, the job has been a nightmare.


Preliminary Results of Biopsy Point to Return of Cancer in Tsongas
Preliminary results of a biopsy show that a lump in former Senator Paul E. Tsongas's abdomen is cancerous.
Mr.
Tsongas, an unsuccessful candidate for the Democratic Presidential nomination this year, said he had not received a final report on the biopsy and other tests performed on tissue that was removed in an abdominal operation last Thursday.


Sports of The Times; Some '92 Thank You Notes
ON too many other days of the year, the schemers and scoundrels of sports are in the headlines.
But on Thanksgiving Day, it's time to remember the good people who just by being themselves make sports' little corner of the world a better place to be:
Arthur Ashe, whose grace under pressure has never wavered either on or off a tennis court.


Syntex Has Loss as Core Drug Sales Slow
The Syntex Corporation today reported lower sales and a net loss, which it attributed to a slowdown in demand for core products and a restructuring charge.
The charge stems from the decision to close or scale back several manufacturing plants and is intended to cover severance costs for employees whose positions are eliminated.
For its first fiscal quarter, Syntex reported a loss of $6.1 million, compared with earnings of $132.3 million, or 59 cents a share, in the comparable period a year ago.
The loss includes a restructuring charge of $180 million.
Sales fell 2 percent, to $492.2 million, from $501.7 million in the first quarter of the 1992 fiscal year.


Essay; Rating World Spookery
There is this "dead drop" in a tree in Farragut Square, just outside my office.
Responding to a coded request in this space for assessments of intelligence agencies, some of the world's leading counterspies have dropped off their evaluations of each other's espionage operations.
Here, then, is the first annual international spookery peer review.
Gathering and evaluating capabilities are given up to four "cloaks"; covert operations capacity is symbolized in "daggers."


Police in South Africa Search Trains To Curb Violence


Books of The Times; The Complications of the Simple Life
An American Homeplace  By Donald McCaig  Illustrated. 228 pages. Crown Publishers.


Money Market Funds Show Little Movement in Yields
The average yields on tax-exempt money market funds edged lower in the latest week, while those on taxable funds were unchanged for a second week, according to the most recent survey by IBC/Donoghue's Money Fund Report.
Tax-exempt yields slipped for the third straight week as assets rose by $619 million, to $98.1 billion.
Analysts said the changes in the latest week were so slight that there did not seem to be strong forces at work.
The average number of days left to maturity of securities being held in fund portfolios edged ahead to 64 from 63.


Corrections
Articles on Saturday and Sunday about the former Chief Judge of the New York State Court of Appeals, Sol Wachtler, referred incorrectly to Stanley R. Chesler, and a correction in this space on Monday gave his title incompletely.
Mr.
Chesler is a United States magistrate judge in Newark.


Unit for Animal-Disease Study Trims Safeguards
When the United States Agriculture Department created a center to study foot-and-mouth disease, the deadly livestock infection, it selected Plum Island, 850 remote acres dotted with scrub pines off the northeastern tip of Long Island.
The virus could be so easily transmitted, and its escape would be so catastrophic, that Congress demanded it be studied offshore.
Beyond the water barrier, there was an extensive system of precautions, including an elaborate showering procedure for employees, decontamination and a weeklong enforced quarantine for cars leaving the island.


INSIDE
Concern at Disease Center
Workers say cutbacks undermined safety at an animal-disease research site off Long Island.
Page B1.
French Assail Trade Pact
French parties joined in denouncing a European-American trade accord but divided on a response.
Page A3.
Detroit's Big 3 Rebuff Honda
The United States auto makers' main trade organization ejected Honda, its only Japanese member.
Page D1.
Another Battle for Tsongas
Preliminary biopsy results show that a lump in former Senator Paul E. Tsongas is cancerous.
Page B19.
A Shock for Wall Street
A high-flying electronics company stunned investors by suspending top officials for inflating profits.
Page D1.
Sailor Search Abandoned
The Coast Guard has declared the solo yachtsman Mike Plant missing and presumed dead.
Page B21.


Essay; Rating World Spookery
There is this "dead drop" in a tree in Farragut Square, just outside my office.
Responding to a coded request in this space for assessments of intelligence agencies, some of the world's leading counterspies have dropped off their evaluations of each other's espionage operations.
Here, then, is the first annual international spookery peer review.
Gathering and evaluating capabilities are given up to four "cloaks"; covert operations capacity is symbolized in "daggers."


Israel's Censor Upbraids 4 Foreign Reporters
Israel's military censor has complained that four foreign correspondents violated censorship laws in their reporting on a fatal army training accident.
Asserting that the purported violations compromised national security, military officials said today that the reporters faced possible sanctions.
The correspondents involved represent The New York Times, The Miami Herald, The Times of London and The Independent of Britain.


Regional Bank Rates
Following are average annual effective yields, in percent, on money-market accounts and C.D.'s offered on Nov. 25, 1992 by the 10 largest banks and savings institutions in each of the 10 largest metropolitan areas.
Money Mkt.
6-Mo. C.D.
New York
2.69
2.89
Los Angeles
2.80
2.98
Chicago
2.77
3.17
San Francisco
2.77
2.87
Philadelphia
2.92
2.96
Detroit
2.87
3.04
Boston
2.81
3.00
Houston
2.67
3.11
Dallas
2.65
3.10
Washington
2.85
3.20
Bank Rate Monitor Index*
2.78
3.03
*Annual effective yields offered by 100 large institutions in the 10 largest U.S. markets. (Source: Bank Rate Monitor, N. Palm Beach, 33408)


Getting Rid of Tracking
To the Editor:
"Should Tracking Be Derailed?" (Education Life, Nov. 1), on ability grouping, or "programs that prepare students for clearly diverging futures," shows that tracking is being derailed in a relatively small proportion of schools across the country.
In these schools, educators have shown it is possible to take the most at-risk students and, with appropriate support and proper motivation, enable them to succeed with programs and materials formerly reserved only for the most able.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
7.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
4.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.25
2.62
4.38
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.22
3.20
4.39
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.42
3.40
4.44
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.47
6.43
6.99
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.53
7.53
7.96
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.50
8.50
8.94
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.40
6.40
6.90
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


A Campaign Needs Help to Give Help to the Neediest; From Struggling Business Owners to Strapped Parents, Charities Find Many Require Aid
When clients first stopped calling her employment service last spring, Mitzie G. thought that the telephone was out of order.
Every few hours she checked for a dial tone or crawled under her desk to examine the wiring.
Sometimes she had friends ring her to make sure that the lines were working.
The truth, as she finally admitted to herself, was that the recession was destroying her business.
After nearly a decade of finding jobs for the unemployed, she was joining their ranks.
Would she lose her house, which symbolized how hard she had struggled for her children?


Partial Reimbursement for Ohrenstein Legal Bills
The State Comptroller has ruled that the state should reimburse the Senate minority leader, Manfred Ohrenstein, $1.3 million for his successful legal defense against charges that he abused his office for political ends.
But the Comptroller, Edward V. Regan, disallowed $480,000 in additional legal fees requested by Mr.
Ohrenstein.
Mr.
Regan, in a ruling made public today, rejected that amount because the hourly rates of up to $400 charged by some of Mr.
Ohrenstein's lawyers were far above the $255 top rate paid by the state, said Marvin G. Nailor, a spokesman for the Comptroller.
Mr.
Ohrenstein has already paid the bill.


Seton Hall Advances to N.I.T. Final


Faulk Heads the Field
San Diego State running back MARSHALL FAULK leads the Walter Camp Football Foundation All-America team announced yesterday.
Faulk, the first player since Herschel Walker to gain more than 3,000 yards in two seasons, is the top rusher in major college football.
Joining Faulk in the backfield selected by coaches and sports information directors at 107 Division I-A schools were quarterback GINO TORRETTA of Miami and Georgia running back GARRISON HEARST.
The defensive team was led by Florida State linebacker MARVIN JONES and two Alabama linemen: ERIC CURRY and JOHN COPELAND. (AP)


Token Clerk Is Shot
A subway token clerk was shot in the chest and seriously wounded last night in the Bedford-Stuyvesant section of Brooklyn when two men forced their way into a booth at the Euclid Avenue station of the A line and shot him during an attempted robbery, according to transit police.
Lieut.
Robert Valentino, a spokesman for the transit police, said the clerk apparently was off duty at the time of the shooting, but appeared at the booth about 10:30 P.M. and asked the regular clerk to admit.
When she admitted him, a gunman at his back pushed into the booth, a struggle ensued and the offduty clerk was shot and wounded.
He was taken to Brookdale Hospital Center, where he underwent surgery early this morning.


When Ukrainians Call Russians 'Moskali'
To the Editor:
"Ukraine Facing the High Costs of Democracy" (front page, Nov. 6) refers to "Moskali" as "the derogatory Ukrainian term for Russian great-power chauvinists who refused to accept Ukraine as a nation." You further report on Ukrainian objections to the adjective "great" when applied to the Russians.


Rahal Wins Award
BOBBY RAHAL, whose consistency helped his own first-year team win the Indy-car championship, was voted 1992 Driver of the Year.
"What a year," Rahal said after yesterday's announcement.
"After all that's happened, this one is really icing on the cake."
The 39-year-old Rahal, who also was the 1986 Driver of the Year, beat out Nascar stars DAVEY ALLISON and ALAN KULWICKI.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY
DINKINS SPEECH ANSWERS CRITICS
In a 16-minute speech, Mayor Dinkins delivered a strong personal defense of his role in racial unrest in the Crown Heights last year and appealed for peace.
Confronting an issue that could splinter the coalition that elected him, Mr.
Dinkins also announced a plan "to increase the peace" and attacked critics who have accused him of holding back the police during the unrest and who say he should denounce the jury that acquitted a black youth in the slaying of a Jewish scholar.
A1.
Excerpts from speech. B3.
Black and Jewish New Yorkers react. B3.  NEW AGENCY FOR HOMELESS SYSTEM
The city's troubled homeless system will be managed by a new agency that will operate city shelters and contract with nonprofit groups to provide drug treatment, job training and other services to the homeless, city officials said.
A1.
Landlord of West Side hotel asks city not to place homeless families in two buildings.
B4.
QUEENS SCHOOL BOARD CALLED TO MEETING
Schools Chancellor Fernandez summoned a Queens school board to a meeting that could be the first step toward disciplining it for refusing to adopt a curriculum that teaches first graders to respect gay people.
The president of the board said the board would refuse to attend, although one member said he planned to do so.
B3.
UNION INTENDS TO SUE GUARDIAN ANGEL
The president of the transit police union said that his group would file a civil lawsuit against Curtis Sliwa.
Mr.
Sliwa has admitted that a number of his group's early crime-fighting exploits were fakes intended to garner publicity.
B6.
REGION
SHOREHAM PLAN: FUEL TO FRANCE
Long Island utility customers will pay $74 million to ship slightly used nuclear fuel from the defunct Shoreham nuclear power plant to France for reprocessing under a plan announced today by the state agency charged with demolishing the plant.
The shipments, scheduled to begin next year, would be the first large-scale commercial shipments of spent fuel from American nuclear power plants overseas, and they have prompted fears from opponents that the precedent could eventually contribute to the spread of plutonium, an essential ingredient in nuclear weapons.
B8.
SWEEPING HEALTH-CARE REFORM POSSIBLE
The New Jersey Legislature will soon consider a complicated and untested package of health-care reforms that may produce one of the most radical systems in the nation.
B8.
ADVERTISEMENT IGNITES INTERSTATE FEUD
IKEA, the home-furnishings retailer, thought that an advertisement for its store in Elizabeth, N.J., was innocent enough.
But the ad -- about a sales tax break for those who shop at the store -- has New York State officials fuming.
B11.
New York State ordered to reimburse Senate minority leader for his defense.
B10.
Agreement to clean up New Jersey park contaminated with chromium. B12.
Election results show record turnout in Connecticut. B13.  Holiday Schedules B4


Dance in Review
'Concerto Barocco'
New York City Ballet  New York State Theater


The Many Faces and Facets of Keeping 'Falsettos' Afloat
Charles Lippman, a rabbi.
Sister Grace Rowland, a nun.
The Rev.
Frank Nelson, a priest.
Leanza Cornett, Miss America 1993.
Five students from Stuyvesant High School.
William Joseph of Cleveland and his children, Robyn and Bill.
Twin brothers from Glendale, Calif.
And oh, yes: Dr.
Ruth.
All of them have become fodder in the promotion of the Broadway musical "Falsettos." Since last summer, ads for "Falsettos" have also shown a doctor, a policeman and a manicurist, as well as blacks and Asians and theatergoers with Irish, Italian and Jewish names.
Their approving smiles have been photographed, and their endorsements of the show have appeared in a series of jokey but attention-getting newspaper and magazine advertisements that characterize the show as universal family entertainment.


In a Test, Video Cameras Replace the Steno Machine in Jersey Courts


Rangers Feast on Penguins
Adam Graves is much to polite to gloat.
Oh, the folks in Pittsburgh would never believe that -- would never believe that Graves, the "ax murderer," the "villain," as they call him -- is anything but a supreme jerk.
Graves slashed their superstar, Mario Lemieux, in the playoffs last spring, and all of Pittsburgh will never forgive him for that.


HOME IMPROVEMENT
RIDDING homes of indoor air pollutants should concern all homeowners and apartment dwellers.
Among indoor air pollutants, radon and lead are considered the greatest threats to public health nationwide by the Federal Government and national health organizations.
Here are some important facts and some steps for dealing with these pollutants.
Radon
Radon is an invisible, odorless, radioactive gas produced by the natural breakdown of uranium.
Virtually all soil contains some uranium and therefore some radon.


French Politicians Sound Like Farmers (i.e., Angry)
France's political parties today unanimously denounced a farm-trade agreement last week by the United States and the European Community, but the main conservative opposition bloc refused to endorse the Government's strategy for reversing the agreement.
While Prime Minister Pierre Beregovoy promised Parliament that France would veto any broader, global trade package harmful to the country's interests, the conservative opposition voted against a confidence motion proposed by the Government, arguing that its stance was not tough enough.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Ice-T  The Ritz


Solo Sailor Is Presumed To Be Dead
Mike Plant, the 42-year-old solo ocean sailor whose disappearance at sea while en route from New York to France produced an extensive two-week search in the Atlantic Ocean, was declared missing and presumed dead yesterday.
The United States Coast Guard called off its search for Plant after divers from a French vessel examined the capsized hull of the sailor's racing yacht, the 60-foot Coyote.
There was no sign of Plant in the overturned hull.
His life raft, which was partly inflated, was attached to the cockpit.


SCIENTISTS DEBATE MISSIONS IN SPACE
Ten years of experiments in growing larger, purer protein crystals in the low-gravity environment of space have produced disappointing results and have yet to fulfill earlier, often extravagant expectations or justify the high costs of space missions, a team of scientists has concluded.
The scientists, writing in today's issue of the journal Nature, said the experiments showed that in many cases the virtual absence of gravity can affect the growth of biological crystals, sometimes altering their size, quality and structure.
But they said the tests had "not yet accomplished any significant breakthrough in protein-crystal growth" and so far had failed to demonstrate that this was "a wise way to spend ever more scarce government research dollars."


Garden Q.&amp; A.
Growing Garlic
Q.
I would love to try growing garlic myself but don't know how.
Is it difficult, and where can I get it? -- Mario Jaime Munoz, St.
Louis.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Negativland  Knitting Factory


A Courtroom Experiment in High-Tech Video; Cameras and Tape Decks Replace Traditional Reporter and Steno Machine
Judge Jonathan N. Harris smiles more often in his courtroom these days, now that five video cameras record everything.
As part of an experiment intended to cut costs, cameras, microphones and tape decks have replaced the traditional court reporter and steno machine to make the official record of proceedings before Judge Harris.
Instead of just cold words on paper, the record is now graphic.
It contains all the language of the written record as well as body language, inflections, sneers, snorts, grimaces and other expressions and gestures.


In Wreaths, Anything, Even Evergreens
Even those who have never considered buying a wreath may be tempted this year.
A seemingly limitless range of handsome creations can grace holiday doors, walls or tables, and many can be used all year.
As with most handmade works, no two are alike.
And best of all, many are available by mail.
"A hobby turned into a business" is what Elise Harnett called her shop, Sweet Myrtle in Blue Hill, Me.
That is where she fashions wreaths from home-grown plants that she dries in her barn.
A 12-inch floral design, typically covered with dried larkspur, roses, yarrow and artemisia, is $41, and a 14-inch wreath covered with moss, bark, rose hips and handmade birds' nests is $31.
A 10-inch heart-shaped wreath on a twig base interwoven with mosses and lichens is $14.
Sweet Myrtle's address: P.O.
Box 116, Blue Hill, Me. 04614; (207) 374-2180.


BRIEFS
Debt  *
Central Maine Power Co. has filed a shelf offering for up to $160 million of general and refunding mortgage bonds. *
Detroit Edison Co. has filed for up to $325 million of general and refunding mortgage bonds.
Ratings  *
Crestar Financial Corp.'s senior debt was raised to BBB+, from BBB, by Fitch Investors Service.
The bank holding company is based in Richmond. *
Imcera Group Inc.'s senior debt rating has been raised to BBB+, from BBB, and preferred stock rating to BBB, from BBB- by the Standard &amp; Poor's Corporation.
Imcera, which is based in Northbrook, Ill., and its subsidiaries manufacture medical products and chemicals. *
Signet Banking Corp.'s senior debt was raised to BBB+, from BBB-, by Fitch.
The multibank holding company is based in Richmond. *
Southern California Edison Co.'s senior secured debt rating has been lowered to A+, from AA, and senior unsecured debt to A, from AA-, by S.&amp; P. The company is a unit of SCEcorp, based in Rosemead, Calif.


Markets Closed For Holiday
Because of the Thanksgiving Day holiday, all financial and commodity markets in the United States will be closed today.
Government offices, banks and many businesses will also be closed.
Most markets overseas will be open.


Company's Profit Data Were False
Until yesterday, the report cards on the Comptronix Corporation, an electronics company in the small Alabama town of Guntersville, were glowing with the praise usually reserved for the best pupils.
Prospects for the company, which makes products like electronic circuit boards, in its rapidly expanding high-technology niche were judged most promising.
To those who made it their business to know the company, its top executives appeared focused and aware of the challenges they faced to maintain the company's heady growth.
As recently as Tuesday, a Merrill Lynch analyst, Melinda Reach, rated the company above average.


William H. Moore, 77, Executive Who Tried to Save Penn Central
William Harreld Moore, the railroad man who tried but failed to save the debt-ridden Penn Central Transportation Company in the early 1970's, died Monday at a nursing home in Potomac, Md.
He was 77 years old.
Mr. Moore died of cardiac arrest, his family said.


IRISH VOTE COVERS ABORTION QUESTION
As the Irish voted in a national election today, they had already been told by pollsters and other experts how they would select a new Parliament and how they would deal with three constitutional amendments that would liberalize the abortion law.
No one will know if the estimated 1.7 million voters agreed with the predicters before Thursday, when the ballot-counting begins.
The results on abortion will probably be clear in the afternoon, but a close parliamentary election could drag out the count to Friday or Saturday, under a system of proportional representation that can involve 10 counts for a single seat.


Pact Is Reached to End Delays on Cleaner Air
A member of Congress and his environmental allies have reached an agreement with the Bush Administration that settles a lawsuit over delays in putting parts of the Clean Air Act of 1990 into effect, lawyers in the case said Tuesday.
The agreement imposes a new schedule on the Environmental Protection Agency to issue 15 air-quality regulations, this time under supervision by the Federal District Court in Washington.


William H. Moore, 77, Executive Who Tried to Save Penn Central
William Harreld Moore, the railroad man who tried but failed to save the debt-ridden Penn Central Transportation Company in the early 1970's, died Monday at a nursing home in Potomac, Md.
He was 77 years old.
Mr. Moore died of cardiac arrest, his family said.


Doubled Sales; With That Hair, Barbie Is Looking Like a Billion
The Barbie doll in all her variations will breach the $1 billion sales mark this year, in no small measure because of the popularity of Totally Hair Barbie, the nation's fifth-best-selling toy.
Mattel Inc., which was preoccupied with financial problems in the early 1980's, has more than doubled sales of its perennial favorite since 1987, when Barbie sales were $430 million.


Parent &amp; Child
Family conversations sometimes take on the intensity and strategies of a tennis match at Wimbledon.
The child serves his request, has it stopped at the net by the parent, then tenaciously responds with different verbal shots, trying to score his point.
"May I stay up another half-hour?" "No." "Why not?" "It's your bedtime." "But everyone else stays up later!" "Go to bed." "Please, just this once." "That's what you said last time." "How about another 20 minutes?" "Ten minutes." "But . . ." "Ten minutes, and not a second more!" "Oh, O.K."
Game, set, match.


Robert Huntoon, 83, Former U.S. Official
Robert D. Huntoon, a former official of the National Bureau of Standards, now the National Institute of Standards and Technology, died Saturday at Prince George's Hospital Center in Cheverly, Md.
He was 83 years old and lived in Mitchellville, Md.
Mr. Huntoon died of congestive heart failure, a stepdaughter, Harriett Underwood said.


Corrections
An article on Monday about the removal of Dobbs Ferry's Acting Police Chief because he failed a Civil Service exam referred incorrectly to the search for a replacement.
The Dobbs Ferry Board of Trustees has named Sgt.
George Longworth, an 11-year veteran of the village police, to fill the position beginning Dec. 1.


McMillan and Friend Robbed
Jets cornerback Erik McMillan was excused from practice today after he and a female friend, Roxanne Garcia, were robbed at gunpoint at McMillan's home in Baldwin, L.I., on Tuesday night.
According to a report Garcia filed with the Nassau County Police Department, three men wearing ski masks approached Garcia's car after she parked in the driveway of McMillan's home, forced her out of the car and then forced their way into the house when McMillan answered the door.


London Journal; God Save the Queen (if It Doesn't Cost Too Much)
The flames that destroyed part of Windsor Castle last week are out.
But the debate they ignited over who, precisely, ought to pay to restore the landmark is still burning, sharply illuminating the increasingly uneasy relationship between the royal family and its more skeptical subjects.
While the Government of Prime Minister John Major has calculated that the sympathetic and politic thing to do is to foot the bill, which will run into tens of millions of dollars, a loud, broad-based minority of opposition politicians, republicans and disgruntled commoners argue otherwise.


Dendranthema: Still Mum for Short
A colorful hail and farewell is going on in the Bronx, where the Botanical Garden, in an autumnal salute, has crammed a greenhouse full of chrysanthemums -- effusive pinks and fire-truck reds, fragile yellow spiders and fluffy purple pompoms.
As a knockout there are scarlet cascades, plants grown from single shoots that have been pinched, disbudded and overfed until they cover eight-foot-high frames with hundreds of blooms.
But -- and this will come as a shock to gardeners innocent of what goes on behind the botanical scenes -- there is not a single proper chrysanthemum in the whole show.
The plant's botanically correct name is now Dendranthema, or, to be precise, Dendranthema X Grandiflora.


Review/Rock; Experts in Plumbing the Depths of Misery, in Every Way Possible
The scene was purgatorial: bodies packed together and churning, hands upstretched toward a stage where a man was yowling, "What the hell am I?" It was top-20 fun, 1990's style, when Alice in Chains headlined a triple bill of Seattle rock bands at Roseland on Tuesday night.
Alice in Chains recently released "Dirt" (Columbia), a best-selling album about the torments of heroin addiction.
In rock, simplicity and clarity yield power, and the band's set gave bleak introspection the impact of arena rock.
Its songs recast the late 1960's and early 70's hard rock of Black Sabbath and Led Zeppelin, adding the ominous drones and cymbals of Pink Floyd and removing every bit of utopian fantasy or blues bravado.
It's hard rock that no longer believes in the possibility of transcendence or escape; it rubs its nose in its own misery, as if the only chance at catharsis is through self-knowledge.
"It's time to face exactly what I am," Layne Staley sings in "Hate to Feel."


Teaching High School Students How to Work
In the morning, they are two high school girls with big hair, red nails, and bored looks in physics class.
Sylvia Velez doodles.
Susan Colarusso chews gum.
They wonder what they have to gain by memorizing the difference between velocity and acceleration.
But in the afternoon they are cheerful exemplars of the job-training approach that economists, in unusual numbers, are endorsing as a tonic for the nation's ailing economy.
As members of a youth apprenticeship program here, called Project ProTech, they spend part of their high school days cultivating a marketable skill, in their case as hospital technicians.


Ex-A's Employee Cites Schott Racial Remarks
Marge Schott, under fire in Cincinnati and in baseball after she admitted in a deposition to making racist and anti-Semitic remarks, made racial slurs in the presence of other baseball club owners, a former member of the Oakland Athletics' front-office staff said yesterday.
Sharon Jones, who worked for the Athletics for 12 years before leaving early this year, related a telephone conference call held by Peter Ueberroth, then the baseball commissioner, in which Schott, the owner of the Cincinnati Reds, spoke disparagingly of blacks and specifically referred to a former employee several times as a "nigger." Phone Conversation Detailed
Jones, executive director of college relations at Mills College in Oakland, said she decided to make Schott's remarks public after she read a newspaper article that quoted Schott following her meeting last Monday with Bill White, the National League president.


Dance in Review
Sanghi Wagner and Hank Smith  Movement Research Series Judson Memorial Church Greenwich Village


Home Video
Mayhem Intensified
American action thrillers dish out violence with the best of them, but this week, by way of Hong Kong, comes another breed of mayhem in "The Killer," a film by John Woo released on tape by Fox Lorber.


Hotel Owner Alters Stance On Homeless
Bowing to the objections of residents, the manager of two Upper West Side residence hotels has asked New York City not to place homeless families in either one.
The request could make it more difficult for the city to satisfy a court order to get the homeless out of welfare offices now serving as temporary shelters.
And it could affect the position of four city officials, including the First Deputy Mayor, Norman Steisel, who have been ordered to spend one night in those offices if the city cannot demonstrate improvement in dealing with homeless families.


Rivera to Quit Top Position In Fire Dept.
Fire Commissioner Carlos M. Rivera, who rose through the ranks to preside over budget cuts and management snarls at the nation's largest fire department, announced yesterday that he would retire in January.
Mr.
Rivera, the first Hispanic commissioner in the New York City Fire Department's 127-year history, said he was stepping down for personal reasons after 35 years as a firefighter and almost 3 as the department's top official.


Calendar: Art, Toys, Gardens And Tours
Talents Lost to AIDS
Cooper-Hewitt Museum, 2 East 91st Street; (212) 860-6862.
A display of work by designers and architects who have died from AIDS starts on Dec. 1, World AIDS Day.
The exhibit, which runs through Feb. 28, will include work by Roger C. Ferri, Alan Buchsbaum, Terry Gentille and Peter Todd Mitchell.
Open Tuesday, 10 A.M. to 9 P.M.; Wednesday through Saturday until 5 P.M.; Sunday, noon to 5 P.M.
Admission is $3; students 12 years old and older and people 62 and older, $1.50; no charge for members and from 5 to 9 P.M. on Tuesdays.
Walking Tour
92d Street Y, 1395 Lexington Avenue; (212) 996-1100.
There will be a tour of the Islamic Cultural Center, the mosque on Third Avenue at 96th Street designed by Skidmore, Owings &amp; Merrill, on Dec. 6.
Women should wear long skirts or pants, and head coverings.
Fee, $15.
Advance registration is required.
Paper Menagerie
American Museum of Natural History, Central Park West at 79th Street; (212) 769-5100.
The annual origami holiday tree, which features more than 2,000 folded-paper dinosaurs, birds, fish, mammals and insects, will be on display in the Theodore Roosevelt Hall through Jan. 11.
Open daily, 10 A.M. to 5:45 P.M.; Friday and Saturday until 8:45 P.M.
Suggested admission is $5; children 12 and younger, $2.50.
British Colonial Fabrics
Grolier Club, 47 East 60th Street; (212) 966-6565.
The Royal Oak Society is sponsoring a lecture on 19th-century fabrics, including chintz and silk, on Wednesday at 6 P.M.
Reservations are suggested.
Admission is $17; members, $12.
Along the Avenue
Municipal Art Society; (212) 439-1049; meet at Fifth Avenue and 34th Street, northeast corner.
The Municipal Art Society is sponsoring a tour that will explore the architectural history of Fifth Avenue on Sunday from 11 A.M. to 1 P.M.
Fee, $14.
Reservations are suggested.
Garden Trip
Horticultural Society of New York, 128 West 58th Street; (212) 757-0915.
The society is sponsoring a daylong bus trip to two sites: the Winterthur Museum near Wilmington, Del., known for its collection of American decorative arts; and the Longwood Gardens in Kennett Square, Pa., on Dec. 11 from 8:30 A.M. to 8:30 P.M.
Fee, $95; members, $85.
Antique Toys
Philipsburg Manor, Route 9 near Pocantico Hill Street, Tarrytown, N.Y.; (914) 631-8200 or weekends, (914) 631-3992.
An exhibition of 19th- and early-20th-century toys runs through Dec. 31.
Open Wednesday through Monday, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Admission is $6; those 60 and older, $5; children 6 to 17, $3.


Corrections
A music review yesterday about a performance by the German jazz saxophonist Peter Brotzmann at Roulette in Manhattan carried an incorrect byline in some copies.
It was by Alex Ross.
The review also included conflicting references to the performance date.
It was on Friday.


Economic Scene; High-Tech Stake, Political Sizzle
IS Bill Clinton in for clear sailing on international trade? Do not bet on it.
Last week's compromise over subsidies for France's cosseted grain farmers apparently broke the stalemate on world trade negotiations.
And the momentum behind the North American Free Trade Agreement now seems almost unstoppable.


It's Fun. It's Romantic. It's Soap Dishes and Towels.
It's the kind of place where couples are seen holding hands near the soap dishes and kissing in the cookie-cutter area.
Not that it looks anything like a honeymoon retreat.
On the contrary.
Mountainous displays of towels, wastepaper baskets and toilet-seat covers might be called more matter-of-fact than lovey-dovey.
Maybe it's Diana Ross on the tapes that fill the air or just the sense that shopping for all those homey kinds of things is, well, romantic.
But overwhelming is more the word that describes the 50,000-square-foot, city-block-wide Bed Bath &amp; Beyond store that opened Nov. 1 at 620 Avenue of the Americas, between 18th and 19th streets in an architecturally impressive building that was once the Siegel-Cooper Dry Goods Store, built in 1896.


Clinton Names Team to Probe U.S. Agencies
Beginning the real back-bending work of digging through the impacted, encrusted layers of each Federal department and agency to find out what, and who, is buried there, aides to President-elect Bill Clinton today announced the appointment of nine chief diggers, called "cluster coordinators."
The appointments come as Mr.
Clinton's transition operation moved from the initial business of organizing itself to the more daunting work of actually organizing a new Government.


Corrections
A report in the Metropolitan Diary column of The Living Section yesterday misidentified the auction house where Matisse's "Harmony in Yellow" sold for $14.5 million.
It was Christie's.


Holiday Traffic Is Especially Hazardous in Six States


Bush Ready to Send Troops to Protect Somalia Food
President Bush notified the United Nations tonight that the United States is prepared to send military forces to help deliver more food and medical supplies to the starving people of Somalia.
He made the decision after conferring with Acting Secretary of State Lawrence S. Eagleburger and a senior Defense Department aide this morning, an Administration official said.
Mr.
Eagleburger then flew to New York to deliver Mr.
Bush's message to Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali of the United Nations.


Bear, Stearns Sues Russia
Bear, Stearns &amp; Company may have learned all too well of the volatility of the former Soviet Union.
The securities and investment banking concern sued Russia and its largest auto maker yesterday for failure to pay their bills.
The complaint, filed in Federal court in Manhattan, asserts that Russia's Ministry of Industry and the Volga Automobile Associated Works owe the company $1.9 million plus other damages still to be calculated.


Dance in Review
'Donizetti Variations'
New York City Ballet  New York State Theater


ON THE RIVER BANK WITH/Billy Frank Jr.; Indians and Salmon: Making Nature Whole
TURNING off his car phone, Billy Frank Jr.  pointed to a tree, a weathered skeleton in the bog of the Nisqually River delta.
It was there, on Christmas morning 1854, that the Indians of southern Puget Sound gave up 2.2 million acres to the United States Government.
The treaty tree is dying, but the people who have lived near this river off and on for nearly 10,000 years are not.
That, in itself, is a miracle of sorts to Mr.
Frank.


The Trimmings Included Lights for the Cameras


Game of 'What If . . . ?' Is Lesson in Architecture
Three brainstorming sessions were held this fall to try to come up with innovative design ideas for public sites in New York City.
The resulting suggestions ranged from a glass pyramid over the Union Square subway station to a series of small ferry terminals along the Hudson River.
A show of the drawings and sketches will go on display at the National Institute for Architectural Education on Wednesday.
The sessions, held at Parsons School of Design, were in the form of charettes (pronounced shar-ETTS), intensive workshops intended to produce basic concepts as opposed to detailed architectural plans.


Even WASPs Deserve Better Than Bashing
To the Editor:
Your Nov. 13 editorial refers to a political campaign as "blind to so many different faces" and "deaf to so many voices." You appear to use the words "blind" and "deaf" to mean unaware, uninformed, uninterested, and thus imply that people with these disabilities share these attributes.
People who are blind and deaf are involved and competent; you should communicate this message, not because it is politically correct, but because it is true.
LOUIS ALTARESCU  Washington, Nov. 13, 1992


U.S. Hurdler Honored
American hurdler KEVIN YOUNG and German high jumper HEIKE HENKEL were named athletes of the year yesterday by the International Amateur Athletic Federation.
Young set a world record of 46.78 in winning the gold medal in the 400-meter hurdles at the Barcelona Olympics.
He dominated the event throughout the season, winning the overall I.A.A.F.
Grand Prix title.
Henkel capped her season with a gold medal in the women's high jump in Barcelona. (AP)


Colorado State Lists Charges Against Bruce
After releasing a list of five allegations against Coach EARLE BRUCE, including two N.C.A.A. violations, Colorado State officials began turning their attention to finding a successor and restoring calm to a program in turmoil.
Bruce, who was dismissed on Monday, has threatened to take legal action over his dismissal.


Chronicle
SHEILA DAY has been in business for only two months, but it has not taken her long to learn that when you are designing an Inauguration ball gown for the mother of the President-elect, it is wise not to divulge any details.
Mrs.
Day, who owns the Rose Boutique and Nail Salon in Crestwood, Ky., is in the throes of making a dress for VIRGINIA KELLEY to wear to the festivities on Inauguration night.
But she won't even hint at the style or color or fabric of the dress.
She did, however, talk yesterday about her relationship with Mrs.
Kelley.


Theodore M. Edison; An Illustrious Father Guided Inventor, 94
Theodore M. Edison, an inventor, environmentalist and philanthropist who was the last surviving child of the inventor Thomas Alva Edison, died on Tuesday at his home in West Orange.
He was 94 years old.
He died of Parkinson's disease, said a cousin, Kim Arnn.


Delta Given 2d-Largest Fine for Lax Maintenance
Delta Air Lines was fined $2 million today by the Federal Aviation Administration for failing to follow proper maintenance procedures.
The fine was the second largest ever levied against an airline for maintenance violations, signaling that the infractions were unusually serious, said Anthony J. Broderick, the aviation agency's associate administrator for certification and compliance.
But he said that the company's shortcomings had mostly been corrected, and that none of them had led to accidents.


A Clash Between Dell and an Analyst
Securities analysts, Wall Street's version of the Fourth Estate, are often cast in an adversarial role with the companies and industries they cover.
But it is rare that a relationship between an analyst and a company boils over the way the one between David R. Korus and the Dell Computer Corporation has.


How Ocean Spray Gave Cranberries Some Sparkle
Ocean Spray Cranberries Inc. has managed to take the homely, tart-tasting little cranberry beyond the familiar sauce of the holiday season to a range of products like sherbet and yogurt, cookies and muffins and even bagels.
It recently joined the "new age" drink parade with its Refreshers, a juice drink aimed at bridging the gap between soft drinks and pure juices.


Charlotte Jones, Actress in Plays On Broadway and Off, Dies at 76
Charlotte Jones, an actress who appeared in plays and musicals on and Off Broadway and in regional theater, died on Nov. 6 at Community Medical Center in Toms River, N.J.
She was 76 years old and lived in Toms River.
Her death was reported yesterday by her husband, Matteo Bocchino, who said she died of heart disease.


Minister of Information Is Dismissed by Yeltsin
Having set off a storm of criticism by dismissing the outspoken chief of central television, President Boris N. Yeltsin took another step today toward appeasing his opposition by accepting the resignation of his pugnacious Information Minister.
Coming only days before an important session of Russia's legislature, Mr.
Yeltsin's sudden dismissal of two men known for their support of openness in the press suggested to many today that he was so deeply committed to working out a compromise with the conservative legislators to achieve qualified support of his economic reform plan that he was willing to appear less than dedicated to an independent press and television.


Excerpts From Mayor Dinkins's Speech on Crown Hts. and Race
Following are excerpts from the speech on race relations given yesterday by Mayor David N. Dinkins:


Starks Has His Turn To Earn Redemption
It was an important night for John Starks, a productive night for Patrick Ewing and a successful night for the Knicks.
Leading throughout the second half, New York (7-4) snapped a four-game road losing streak by whipping the Minnesota Timberwolves, 99-78, at the Target Center.
It was the Knicks' third consecutive victory.
The Knicks have won every game since Coach Pat Riley shook up the team and the rotation by benching Starks, Anthony Mason and Greg Anthony in last Saturday's game against the Orlando Magic.


Put Communities Back in Community Colleges
To the Editor:
Community colleges, you report Nov. 11, are being forced to restrict access, as well as their goals.
You point to the need for more capacity and funds in community colleges throughout the country.


4 Wounded in Shooting in Grocery Store
Four people were shot and wounded last night in a dispute in a Washington Heights grocery store that spilled out onto the corner of Broadway and 150th Street, the police said.
Officer Andrew McInnis, a police spokesman, said three customers in the C-Town grocery began arguing with the manager over the price of cheese about 8:40 P.M., when one of the customers pulled a gun and fired.
The manager produced his own gun and fired back, and in the exchange of bullets the manager, an assistant manager and two customers, a man and a woman, were wounded, Officer McInnis said.


Shooting Baskets On the Road To Stardom
Lana Turner, legend has it, was discovered sipping a soda at a Hollywood drugstore.
Charles Mainah was found in a far more improbable place: on a basketball court in Nairobi, Kenya.
There's nothing quite like a Hollywood Cinderella story, and Mr.
Mainah, who is 18 years old, qualifies as the latest one.
A 6-foot-7-inch Kenyan with an easy smile, a winning personality and no acting experience whatsoever, he was chosen on Tuesday to co-star in a $17 million film, "The Air Up There," with Kevin Bacon.


A Coach's Life Lessons From a Bruising Season
The large man with the thinning hair and the booming Brooklyn voice greeted his guest from behind his desk with an appreciation of the obstacles that had been encountered before such a visit.
"A little harder to get into the building this year, isn't it?" Ira Levine said with a smirk that quickly melted into a smile.


No Toll Increases Without Electronic Scanners
To the Editor:
The announced intention of the Triborough Bridge and Tunnel Authority to increase bridge and tunnel tolls (news article, Nov. 17) seems to defy economics.
Planners who seek to discourage commuters from driving, seem baffled that frequent toll increases have done little to induce people onto mass transit.


Bond Prices Move Slightly Lower
Bond prices fell modestly and yields inched higher yesterday as the market reacted to more new signs that the economy was beginning to come back to life.
But traders and analysts said the market did not fall as much as it might have if the new data really signaled a strong revival in the economy.
Such a rebound would unnerve investors and traders because it would likely lead, first, to rising interest rates and, second, to a jump in inflation, two developments that are bad for bond prices.


SUCCESS REPORTED USING FETAL TISSUE TO REPAIR A BRAIN
For the first time, doctors have repaired brain damage in patients by implanting brain tissue from aborted fetuses.
Experts say the findings offer the first unequivocal evidence that implanted fetal cells can do the work of brain cells that have died -- making crucial brain chemicals.
Though the technique has been tested in only a few patients, the experts said it could lead to treatments for degenerative brain diseases, including Parkinson's, Alzheimer's and Huntington's diseases.
Dramatic Effects
Until now, fetal cell implants have had modest effects at best, and some experts questioned whether it was worth continuing the research.
But the results reported today in two patients treated in Sweden and others treated in the United States, suggest that the method can fulfill the almost excessive promise it long has held.


Ellen Furman Is Dead; Diabetes Foe Was 62
Ellen Furman, a founding member and a past president of the New York City chapter of the Juvenile Diabetes Foundation, died on Tuesday at her home in Manhattan.
She was 62 years old.
Mrs.
Furman died of complications of diabetes, said her family, which reported her death yesterday.


NEW BALKANS UNIT PREPARED BY U.N.
For the first time, the United Nations Security Council is preparing to send military observers to a tense area of the world in the hope that they can prevent a new eruption of violence.
Tuesday night the Council approved a plan by Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali calling for deployment of such an observer force in the troubled Balkan republic of Macedonia.
Most countries refuse to recognize Macedonia, which is not yet a United Nations member, but many fear that a new and disastrous outbreak of fighting between Christians and Muslims is imminent.


All You Do Is Just Sit Down
Our family Thanksgiving was as lovely and ordinary as any in America, a day at Uncle Don's and Aunt Elsie's in south Minneapolis, the windows steamed up, our coats piled on a bed, the baby asleep next to them, a Packers-Bears game on television, the little kids tearing around in the basement, the women coaxing the dinner toward the goal line.
Lavish aromas washed into the living room, and next to me on the couch Uncle Don lived and died with the Green Bay Packers.
He was a big man, a guard in the days of the single wing, and as he watched the screen he tended to move with the play.
And when the Packers blew a big chance with a bonehead play, or were betrayed by inept officiating, he had a hard time containing himself.
"Holding! You call that holding? He stuck out his hand and the other guy ran into it. Open your eyes!," he'd holler.
And then he'd demonstrate to me how holding differs from sticking out your hand as the other guy runs into it.


Ad for New Jersey Store Irks New York Officials
IKEA U.S.
Inc., the home-furnishings retailer, said it thought that an advertisement that it has been running this week in the metropolitan New York region for its store in Elizabeth, N.J., was innocent enough.
But the advertisement, about a sales tax break for those who shop at the store, has New York State officials angry at the State of New Jersey, the Metropolitan Transportation Authority and, not least, IKEA.


Unocal Truck Stop Business To Be Sold for $180 Million
The Unocal Corporation said today that it had reached an agreement to sell its truck stop network -- the nation's largest -- for $180 million to an investor group that includes some of the network's managers.
The buyer is a newly formed company, National Auto/Truckstops Inc., organized by Unocal's truck stop operators and the Clipper Group L.P., a New York-based portfolio manager.


Indiana and Seton Hall Have Friday Night Date
Normally, an early season game is supposed to tell a college basketball team something about itself, perhaps shed light on a new dimension or point to a missing ingredient.
Florida State traveled 900 miles to Madison Square Garden for the preseason National Invitation Tournament semifinal game and discovered something it already knew: the Seminoles need a quarterback.
Unfortunately for the Seminoles, the quarterback they need, point guard Charlie Ward, is currently calling signals for the football team and won't be available until Jan. 2.


Bridge
The field was tightly bunched in the semifinals of the Blue Ribbon Pair Championship at the American Contract Bridge League's Fall Nationals here this afternoon.
At the end of Tuesday's qualifying stage, the leaders were:


Dinkins, in TV Speech, Defends Handling of Crown Hts. Tension
Mayor David N. Dinkins delivered a strong and highly personal defense of his role in the Crown Heights racial disturbances in a televised speech yesterday that appealed for racial harmony and appreciation of New York City's diversity.
"Our city cannot be divided," Mr.
Dinkins declared, as he confronted an issue that was central in his election as Mayor, that has repeatedly challenged his leadership in office and that could become a focus of his expected re-election bid next year.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
The nation's economy grew by a surprisingly robust 3.9 percent in the third quarter, the Commerce Department said.
It was an unusually large upward revision of its previous growth estimate of 2.7 percent, which was already stronger than economists had predicted.
President-elect Clinton said he might rethink his short-term plans to spur the economy.  [ Page A1. ]


A STRONG UPTURN FOUND IN ECONOMY IN THIRD QUARTER
The nation's economy grew by a surprisingly robust 3.9 percent in the third quarter, the Government reported today, and President-elect Bill Clinton said the news might cause him to rethink his short-term plans to spur the economy.
The Commerce Department report represented an unusually large upward revision of its previous third-quarter growth estimate of 2.7 percent, which was already stronger than economists had predicted.
It was by far the strongest three months of growth since President Bush took office.


Coleman Is Slammed By Nets Over Criticism
The Nets, who have not played together all that well this season, were not staying together too well either today.
Hours before the New Jersey team defeated the Los Angeles Lakers, 100-98, most of the Nets' players went out to eat and to window-shop in groups of three and four.
No one invited the team captain, Derrick Coleman.


Living in a Nightmare On Lower Sixth Avenue
To the Editor:
Lucius J. Riccio, New York City's Commissioner of Transportation, is convincing when he explains why it is taking so long to rebuild Sixth Avenue (letter, Nov. 11).
But for those of us who live along lower Sixth Avenue, the job has been a nightmare.


U.S. Officials Criticize Plan on Land for Indians
A proposal to transfer nearly 400,000 acres of public land in Arizona to settle a century-old dispute between the Hopis and the Navajos came under sharp criticism today from Federal officials and a crucial member of Congress even as it was being hailed by Interior Secretary Manuel Lujan Jr. as a "once-in-a-century opportunity to settle this bitter dispute."
Some officials responsible for managing the land said the agreement was the fruit of a negotiation kept so secret that they did not even know it was taking place.
And Representative Bruce F. Vento, a Minnesota Democrat who is chairman of the House Interior Subcommittee on National Parks and Public Lands, called the proposal a "political ploy" by the Bush Administration and said he doubted Congress would ever approve it.


Nagle Is Benched But Has Company
Four days before the Jets play Kansas City, the only team in the National Football League with two players who have registered double figures in sacks, Coach Bruce Coslet benched starting quarterback Browning Nagle.
Ken O'Brien, who lost his starting job in training camp, will make his third start of the season.
His previous two starts, a loss against San Francisco and a victory over Miami, came only after injuries to Nagle.


The Feast
In certain parts of New York City, the streets are close to empty today.
Thousands have flocked to Herald Square and points north to watch the Macy's parade.
Thousands more are watching it on television.
"Tell me when the Rockettes come on!" is the shout from the kitchen, where the cook is hovering over more food than she, or he, wants to see again in a lifetime.
The subways, though, are fairly busy: Margaret, who lives in Brooklyn, is going to her mother's place in Manhattan; and Jack and Karen, who live in the Bronx, are on their way to her sister's in Queens.


Countries Agree To Hasten Steps To Guard Ozone
Spurred by recent evidence that the earth's protective ozone layer is being depleted even more extensively than feared, the nations of the world agreed yesterday to bring forward yet again the deadline for halting production of the most important ozone-destroying chemicals.
Meeting in Copenhagen, representatives of 87 countries moved up the phase-out deadline from the year 2000 to Jan. 1, 1996.
The chemicals affected, mainly chlorofluorocarbons or CFC's, are industrial chemicals widely used as refrigerants, solvents and cleaning agents.
The delegates set an even earlier deadline, Jan. 1, 1994, for chemicals known as halons which are used in fire extinguishers.


Backers of Haitian Military Growing Nervous Over Refugees
After the overthrow of Haiti's first democratically elected President 14 months ago, members of the elite who supported the military coup laughingly cheered the exodus of thousands of desperate boat people, calling the refugees Haiti's atomic bomb.
For most of a year, the elite's expectations have proven correct.
Although the United States quickly took a hard line against the coup, vowing to restore Haiti's elected Government, the appearance of a rag-tag flotilla heading for Florida abruptly relegated the reinstatement of the President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide, to the diplomatic background.


Corrections
An article on Oct. 2 about Gov.
Kirk Fordice of Mississippi referred incorrectly to the occasion on which he said he would call out the National Guard if the state was directed to raise taxes to finance historically black colleges.
The statement was made to the Mississippi Press Association, not to a largely white local Kiwanis Club.
Later, at a meeting of a Kiwanis group, Mr.
Fordice expressed regret for it.
The error was reported to The Times last week by the Governor's public affairs office, which said telephone messages left earlier at the newspaper's Atlanta bureau went unanswered.


Police Union To Sue Sliwa Over Hoaxes
The president of the New York City transit police union said yesterday that his group would file a lawsuit against Curtis Sliwa within the next two weeks charging that the Guardian Angels' founder and leader had injured the union's reputation.
Mr.
Sliwa has admitted that several of his group's crime-fighting exploits were faked to garner publicity for the Guardian Angels.
"He should have talked to his lawyer before he made the admissions," said Ron Reale, president of the Transit Police Benevolent Association.
"This is the final chapter to his book or an end to his movie, and he's not going to make any money on this."


For Good Behavior, Show Good Behavior
IT doesn't help simply to punish a child for whining, talking back or doggedly begging for something he has already been denied.
In fact, yelling at your child for yelling at you will probably do more harm than good since your actions contradict your words.
Your child needs to know what types of behaviors you find acceptable, even if they don't guarantee his satisfaction.
Here are some ideas that can help:
Try changing roles.


Listening to Dinkins on 2 Sides of a Racial Dividing Line; Black Students Praise Speech
About 30 black students and teachers at the Crown Heights' Fellowship and Peace Academy had only warm praise for Mayor David N. Dinkins's Thanksgiving eve racial-harmony speech yesterday.
They applauded what they called his effort to rise above politics and race -- as well as noting the special demands placed on New York's first black mayor -- in setting a moral tone for the city.
Sitting on folding chairs, the students sat in the front rows, their teachers in the back in an auditorium decorated with balloons and peace posters.
They were silent as they watched the noontime 16-minute speech on a large-screen television.


Events: Holiday Craft Sales Galore
Benefit Auction
American Craft Museum, 40 West 53d Street; (212) 956-3535.


CHINESE DISSIDENT FREED FROM PRISON
The Government said today that it had released a prominent dissident from prison 19 months before the completion of his sentence, apparently in a gesture to Western countries who have criticized China's human rights record.
The dissident, Bao Zunxin, a 55-year-old editor and a scholar at the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences, was released "on probation" after serving just over two-thirds of his five-year sentence for participation in the 1989 Tiananmen democracy movement.
The New China News Agency report said Mr.
Bao was released because he had shown repentance.


Honda Cut From U.S. Auto Group
The United States auto makers' main trade organization today ejected its only Japanese member, the Honda Motor Company.
The Motor Vehicle Manufacturers Association explained that it was limiting membership to the General Motors Corporation, the Ford Motor Company and the Chrysler Corporation "to focus on the common issues and interests that are unique to the domestic manufacturers." The action signals that the Big Three plan to strengthen their lobbying efforts on trade and other issues.


Listening to Dinkins on 2 Sides of a Racial Dividing Line; Dismay In One Hasidic Home
The eight Hasidic women surrounded the clock radio perched atop a tiny wooden "pushke," or Jewish charity box, in Henya Laine's living room on Montgomery Street in Crown Heights yesterday and braced themselves for Mayor David N. Dinkins's noon address.
For the next 16 minutes, the women, friends who gathered from all corners of the neighborhood, listening intently, scribbled notes and threw glances at one another -- some of half-hearted approval, some of disdain -- as the Mayor's voice boomed from the brown plastic radio. (Mrs. Laine explained that she had barred television because its programming doesn't square with Hasidim's ultra-orthodox religious teachings.)


Criminal Inquiry Begins in Clinton File Case
The Justice Department said tonight that it had opened a preliminary investigation to determine if Federal officials violated criminal law when they searched President-elect Bill Clinton's passport files.
The inquiry is seeking evidence of possible violations of the Privacy Act of 1974.
Under that law, the unauthorized disclosure or misuse of personal information in Government records is a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of up to $5,000.


DINKINS PROPOSES CREATING AGENCY FOR THE HOMELESS
Mayor David N. Dinkins will place New York City's troubled homeless system under a new agency that will operate shelters, officials said yesterday.
The new agency, which would eventually have a budget of more than $100 million, would also hire nonprofit groups to provide drug treatment, job training and other services for the homeless.


Samuel H. Sobel, 83, A Bronx Obstetrician
Dr.
Samuel Hillel Sobel, a Bronx obstetrician and general practitioner who retired in 1990 after 57 years of practice, died on Saturday at his Bronx home.
He was 83 years old.
He died of lung cancer, his family said.


Chronicle
Agatha Christie's play "The Mousetrap" has broken all sorts of records in the history of the theater in London's West End.
It opened on Nov. 25, 1952, has been seen by more than 9 million people, earned $32 million at the box office, has involved 259 actors and actresses.
The classic whodunit in which a guest is murdered in a country manor on a stormy night has been shown in 44 countries and translated into 24 languages.
To celebrate the 40th anniversary of the play, its first producer, Sir PETER SAUNDERS, 81 years old, who had predicted it would last 14 months, gave a luncheon yesterday for 650 at the Savoy Hotel.
The guests of honor were Prime Minister JOHN MAJOR and his wife, NORMA.


To Learn Self-Defense, Choose the Right Class
GROWING numbers of women around the country are learning how to kick and punch their way out of the grip of violent crime, enrolling in self-defense classes in record numbers.
But finding the right class can be baffling.
Gyms, women's centers, martial-arts organizations, Y's and some corporations offer classes in self-defense, but are they all equally effective?
Experts say no.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Terence Blanchard  Village Vanguard


Power Authority to Spend $74 Million to Send Nuclear Fuel From Shoreham to France
Long Island utility customers will pay $74 million to ship slightly used nuclear fuel from the defunct Shoreham nuclear power plant to France for reprocessing under a plan announced today by the state agency charged with demolishing the plant.
The shipments, scheduled to begin next year, would be the first large-scale commercial shipments of spent fuel from American nuclear power plants overseas, and they have prompted fears from opponents that the precedent could eventually contribute to the spread of plutonium, an essential ingredient in nuclear weapons.


Even WASPs Deserve Better Than Bashing
To the Editor:
In celebrating the ethnic diversity promised by a Clinton Administration in "America, and White Bread" (editorial, Nov. 13), you quote an anonymous "intimate" of President Bush as saying, "He was only comfortable with a damn white-bread crowd, a bunch of white male Protestant number-crunchers and bean counters." One has only to substitute different breads and ethnic groups to see the offensiveness of the quotation and your use of it.
WASP-bashing implicitly condones the kind of prejudice that all decent people hope to eliminate.
MICHAEL JOHN BURLINGHAM  New York, Nov. 13, 1992


Los Angeles Teachers Pay Dispute Is Sent to State Arbitration Panel
The troubled Los Angeles school system pulled back from the brink of insolvency today when a state judge threw the issue of pay cuts for teachers into arbitration.
But now the schools face the strong possibility of a teachers' strike.
Los Angeles Unified School District officials had said they would declare bankruptcy and allow the state to take over the system today if the judge made permanent his earlier order restoring a 12 percent pay cut imposed on teachers, librarians and nurses.


Review/Music; A Pianist Emerges From Semi-Retirement
Here is a man who took the difficult path.
Twenty years ago, Kun Woo Paik was poised for a big concert career: he had studied with Wilhelm Kempff and Rosina Lhevinne, won the Naumberg and Busoni piano competitions, given a series of acclaimed recitals.
Then, rather suddenly, he moved to Paris and went into semi-retirement.
On his own terms, he has found an unexpected middle ground between late-20th-century clarity and high-Romantic bravura.
He can draw enough thunder to raise the phantoms of legends, but behind the wash of tone there is an almost unsettling stillness and poise.
Unheralded and poorly attended, Mr.
Paik's recital on Sunday night at Alice Tully Hall explored some arcane and monumental regions of the repertory: Shostakovich's Prelude and Fugue No. 24, two of Busoni's Elegies and his Toccata, Rachmaninoff's bizarre First Sonata.
Mr.
Paik molded the Shostakovich into a single arch of ever-heightening tension, drawing a coldly passionate tone.
The distant tragic scenery of this music made for an unconventional curtain raiser, and the audience was perceptibly stunned.


Student, 15, Is Stabbed
A 15-year-old student at Thomas Edison High School walking to a Queens subway station was stabbed in the chest yesterday during an argument with another youth, the police said.
The dispute took place about 2:40 P.M. at the corner of 168th Street and Gothic Drive in Fresh Meadows, according to Sgt.
Ed Burns, a police spokesman.


Trenton Faces Deadline on Health Care
Forced into action by a Federal judge and the need to repair a system near collapse, the Legislature on Monday will consider a complicated and untested package of bills that may produce one of the most comprehensive programs in the nation for paying for hospital care for the poor.
The plan was shaped largely by political considerations and almost no one likes it entirely.
But if the proposed measures are adopted -- and the outlook is uncertain -- the changes will be sweeping.
They range from deregulating hospitals to requiring that insurance companies enroll everyone who applies, regardless of age, sex or health.


Ah, That First Feast In Wild Manhattan
I was very disappointed the first time I saw Plymouth Rock.
There it was, just a rock.
Somehow I was hoping for more of a to-do.
I thought that rock would be surrounded by Barricini chocolate turkeys, dancing sweet potatoes and Pilgrims in crepe-paper hats singing, "We gather together to ask the Lord's blessings."
But then Thanksgiving has always been my favorite family production.
We didn't live over the river and through the woods but on the Upper East Side of Manhattan.
Our mother never boiled cranberries for hours.
She dialed the takeout department of Cooky's restaurant.
So for me, the first Pilgrims' landing left a great deal to the imagination.


Schools Chief Orders Board To a Meeting
Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez yesterday summoned a Queens school board to a meeting that could be the first step toward disciplining it for refusing to adopt a curriculum that teaches first graders to respect gay people.
The president of the board said the board would refuse to attend, although one member said he wanted to do so.


RESULTS PLUS
INDOOR SOCCER United States Advances  Dale Ervine and Andy Schmetzer scored two goals each as the United States beat Argentina, 6-3, last night in Hong Kong and advanced to the semifinals of the FIFA World Indoor Soccer Championship.


Review/Art; 25 Years of Staying Creatively Off Balance
The stereotype that Italian mothers think their sons are geniuses may be considerably overdrawn.
But the notion seems true enough in front of Luciano Fabro's charming, capricious sculptures at the San Francisco Museum of Modern Art.
Although not widely known in the United States, Mr.
Fabro, who is 56 years old, is a prominent member of Arte Povera, the Italian art movement that formed in Milan and Rome in the late 1960's, becoming known for its stylish iconoclasm and unusual materials.
The initial impression created by Mr.
Fabro's 25-year retrospective is that he has never had an artistic idea he didn't like.
Whether working with marble, dyed fabric, thread or the pierced steel beams common to metal shelving, he seems to operate with the supreme self-confidence that only a mother's total, uncritical love can instill.


London Journal; God Save the Queen (if It Doesn't Cost Too Much)
The flames that destroyed part of Windsor Castle last week are out.
But the debate they ignited over who, precisely, ought to pay to restore the landmark is still burning, sharply illuminating the increasingly uneasy relationship between the royal family and its more skeptical subjects.
While the Government of Prime Minister John Major has calculated that the sympathetic and politic thing to do is to foot the bill, which will run into tens of millions of dollars, a loud, broad-based minority of opposition politicians, republicans and disgruntled commoners argue otherwise.


Commerce Secretary Is to Travel to China
A day after the White House angered China by announcing that its top trade official would visit Taiwan, Commerce Secretary Barbara H. Franklin announced today that she will travel to Beijing next month.
The trade official, Carla A. Hills, the United States trade representative, will become the first American Cabinet official to visit Taipei since President Jimmy Carter transferred American diplomatic recognition to China on Jan. 1, 1979.
Ms.
Franklin will become the first Cabinet official with economic responsibilities to visit China since the Tiananmen Square crackdown in June 1989.


Yanks Withdraw Bids to Cone, Drabek and Guzman
The Yankees, calling off an aggressive, wide-ranging initial campaign to sign one or more topflight starting pitchers, said last night that they had withdrawn contract offers to David Cone, Doug Drabek and Jose Guzman.
"It's all off the table," said Gene Michael, the general manager of the Yankees.


DIVISION APPROVED BY CZECHOSLOVAKS
Parliament today approved the division of Czechoslovakia into two nations at midnight on Dec. 31, ratifying a separation that was well on the way to becoming fact.
Commenting on the vote, Vaclav Klaus, Prime Minister of the Czech republic, said it was a "calming gesture to the whole world," signaling that the separation would not be accompanied by the kind of violence seen in Yugoslavia and the Soviet Union.


A Stirring Holiday Sermon
Mayor David Dinkins's timely and masterful speech on race relations in New York offered a welcome antidote to the venom the city has endured in recent weeks.
Appropriately, Mr.
Dinkins chose the day before Thanksgiving to remind New Yorkers of their obligation to reason and work together to preserve a civil society.
He spoke angrily, and justifiably so, of the "race-baiters and rabble-rousers" who recklessly accused him of anti-Semitism and even sought to make political gain from the murder of Yankel Rosenbaum, a Hasidic scholar killed during the Crown Heights riots two summers ago.


A.T.&amp; T. and MCI Are in a Dispute Over Patents
A.T.&amp; T. accused the MCI Communications Corporation yesterday of infringing A.T.&amp; T.'s patents on valuable long-distance telephone services to a market important for both companies: the $6 billion corporate and residential market in Canada.
A.T.&amp; T. also charged that MCI had signed an exclusive agreement with foreign telephone companies in violation of Federal communications law.
The dispute centers on an accord that MCI signed in September with a group of nine Canadian telecommunications companies, including Canada's principal carrier, Bell Canada.
If MCI succeeds in Canada, a major United States trading partner, it might well offer similar lucrative services in the larger markets of Europe and Asia.


Pitt Coach Is Let Go
Pitt Coach PAUL HACKETT was forced to resign yesterday after three seasons marked by poor records, declining fan support and the dwindling prestige of what was formerly one of college football's top programs.
Hackett, who had at least three years remaining on a multiyear contract that was extended only last year, was permitted to resign, but obviously was forced out.


Giants Are Reeling While Cowboys Rise
For the Giants, struggling through a season of disappointment, frustration and turmoil, Thursday's nationally televised game here against the Dallas Cowboys could not come at a worse time.
The Giants must regroup after Sunday's 47-34 horror-show loss to the Philadelphia Eagles.
Their season record is down to 5-6 and their hopes of making the National Football League playoffs are all but gone.


Cancer in a Presidential Candidate
American hearts go out to former Senator Paul Tsongas, who has just learned that a growth in his abdomen is cancerous.
Mr.
Tsongas won admirers everywhere with his tell-voters-the-truth campaign for the Democratic nomination this year.
The fates have not been kind to this courageous public servant, who has already survived two previous bouts with cancer.
But even as concerned citizens pray for his speedy recovery, it is important to recognize that his individual plight points to a public problem: How can the electorate learn whether candidates for the nation's highest office are healthy enough to handle it?


A Tobacco Strike Is Driving Italians to Desperate Ends
It is probably true that at no time since tobacco was introduced to Europe in the mid-16th century, has a small group of people forced an entire country to contemplate giving up smoking cigarettes.
But that is what has happened in Italy after 20 days of a strike by the workers who control distribution from the state tobacco monopoly.
There are no cigarettes to be had anywhere except from smugglers, who are themselves running low on stocks.


Gil Stein's Crucible by Cross-Check
When Gil Stein returns to work tomorrow morning, the National Hockey League president will hold a disciplinary hearing that may turn a harsh light on his philosophy of crime and punishment for his kinder, gentler league.
As a candidate for the new office of commissioner, Stein will show the team owners who employ him how he treats a star player who inflicts a serious injury upon another star player.
Unless Stein changes his current philosophy, the man who caused the injury will be allowed to continue playing while the man he injured misses up to six weeks with a broken arm.


Essay; Rating World Spookery
There is this "dead drop" in a tree in Farragut Square, just outside my office.
Responding to a coded request in this space for assessments of intelligence agencies, some of the world's leading counterspies have dropped off their evaluations of each other's espionage operations.
Here, then, is the first annual international spookery peer review.
Gathering and evaluating capabilities are given up to four "cloaks"; covert operations capacity is symbolized in "daggers."


COMPANY BRIEFS
FISONS P.L.C.  of Britain agreed to sell its American and Canadian health- care business to a unit of Ciba-Geigy for $140 million.
METRO AIRLINES' reorganization plan was tentatively approved by a Federal bankruptcy judge.


Republicans Taking Heart From Senate-Runoff Victory in Georgia
Republicans today hailed the victory of Paul D. Coverdell over Senator Wyche Fowler Jr. in Tuesday's runoff as a rebuke to President-elect Bill Clinton, who campaigned for the incumbent, and an admonition to Mr.
Clinton to temper some of his plans.
But Democrats scoffed at reading such sweeping conclusions into the narrow victory by Mr.
Coverdell, a former Peace Corps director in the Bush Administration.
They suggested that the Republicans, hungry for some good news after the defeat of President Bush, were grabbing at straws, trying to build some fighting spirit before the Clinton Administration takes over.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-13  OZONE DEADLINE NOW 1996


Thanksgiving
NEW YORK
PARADE Begins at 9 A.M. at 77th Street and Central Park West, then heads to Columbus Circle and down Broadway to 34th Street, ending about noon.
GOVERNMENT OFFICES Closed.
POST OFFICE Express Mail and special delivery only; main post office open at 33d Street and Eighth Avenue.
BANKS Closed.
PARKING Sunday rules in effect.
SANITATION No pickups or street cleanings.
SCHOOLS Closed today and tomorrow.
FINANCIAL MARKETS Closed.
TRANSPORTATION Buses and subways on weekend schedule, some extra service.
Long Island Rail Road on weekend schedule.
Metro-North on holiday schedule, some extra service.
NEW JERSEY
GOVERNMENT OFFICES Closed; state and local offices closed tomorrow.
POST OFFICES Express Mail and special delivery only.
BANKS Closed.
SCHOOLS Closed today and tomorrow.
TRANSPORTATION N.J. Transit on Sunday schedule.  CONNECTICUT
GOVERNMENT OFFICES Closed.
POST OFFICES Express Mail and special delivery only.
BANKS Closed.
SCHOOLS Closed today and tomorrow.
TRANSPORTATION Metro-North on holiday schedule with some extra service.


No Headline
Race baiters and rabble-rousers do not understand our lives.
Because every day and every night, on subways and buses, at work stations and in offices, at lunch counters and in libraries, in our parks and in our movie houses, New Yorkers live and work and learn and play, side by side and shoulder to shoulder. -- MAYOR DAVID N. DINKINS  [ B3:1. ]


Robert M. Doty, 58, A Museum Director And Former Curator
Robert M. Doty, a museum director and former curator at the Whitney Museum of American Art in New York City in the late 1960's and early 70's, died on Tuesday at Elliot Hospital in Manchester, N.H.
He was 58 years old and lived in Manchester.
Mr.
Doty, who was hospitalized two weeks ago with an infection, died of respiratory problems, said his wife, Joan.


The Art Market
Matisse Extension
It's not over till the paintings are off the walls.
And if the Museum of Modern Art has its way, the blockbuster Matisse retrospective will be extended one week, until Jan. 19.
Letters have been sent to the show's more than 100 donors, asking them to give the museum permission to keep the works seven days longer than the original agreements specified.
"So far the response has been very positive," said James Snyder, the museum's deputy director for planning and programming, who said on Wednesday that about 90 percent of the lenders had already agreed to let their paintings stay at the Modern an extra week.


Abroad at Home; Closing Our Eyes?
President Bush's offer to send a substantial military force to Somalia is twice blessed.
It offers hope to the starving there.
And it raises the possibility that Mr.
Bush will at last take firm action on that other human and political disaster, Bosnia.
Over the last eight months Serbian aggressors have killed thousands of Bosnians, and driven hundreds of thousands from their homes, solely because of their religion.
They are Muslims, and on that ground the Serbs have treated them as sub-human:
Untermenschen
, in Nazi parlance.


A Series of Quartets
The Arditti Quartet is to open the Great Performers "Four by Four" series on Sunday at 3 P.M. at Alice Tully Hall.
The program includes Beethoven's Grosse Fugue, Gyorgy Kurtag's "Officium Breve," Janacek's Quartet No. 1 ("Kreutzer") and the premiere of Roger Reynolds's "Visions," commissioned by Lincoln Center.
The series features four Sunday afternoon string-quartet programs at Alice Tully Hall.
The other quartets to appear are the Cleveland Quartet (Jan. 24); the Juilliard Quartet and the violist Michael Tree (March 21), and the Emerson Quartet (May 9).
Individual tickets are $22; a series subscription is $70.
Information: (212) 721-6500.


Cleaning Up Environmental Policy
Management of the nation's environmental policy is a mess.
The Interior and Agriculture Departments oversee natural resources like fish and wildlife, national parks and forests.
The Environmental Protection Agency worries about air and water pollution and toxic wastes.
The Commerce Department concerns itself with the weather.
President-elect Clinton isn't likely to squander political capital in a bruising fight to create one big environmental agency.
But a recent report from the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace offers a more achievable proposal that would strengthen environmental management.
The proposal calls for elevating the E.P.A. to cabinet status and moving other agencies into it.


Nets Seem to Use Feud As Fuel to Beat Lakers
The first time Derrick Coleman went to the bench during the Nets-Lakers game here Wednesday night, he had a choice between two empty seats.
One was next to Jack Nicholson, the other next to his teammate Tate George, who might have wanted to pull the chair out from under him.
Coleman plopped down next to George.
George sat as still as a mannequin.
Two seats away, forward Jayson Williams extended Coleman a hand.


De Klerk Plans Vote in '94; A.N.C. Is Unhappy
President F. W. de Klerk, responding to repeated calls to set a timetable for the end of white-minority rule, today announced his goal of conducting the country's first universal elections within 16 months.
At a news conference in Pretoria, Mr. de Klerk presented the Government's "target" schedule for completing the transition to full democracy, ending in the first elections with black participation in April 1994.


Moon Is Blamed for Blips in a Particle Accelerator
For more than a year, physicists at the largest particle accelerator in the world, Europe's LEP, have been puzzling over small but troublesome fluctuations in the beams of electrons and positrons that whip around the accelerator's 17-mile ring.
Now, at last, they have identified the culprit: the moon.
"We had assumed that something in our hardware was causing these fluctuations -- a power supply, or something," said Dr.
Lyn Evans, the Welsh physicist in charge of LEP.
"But after Dr. Gerhard E. Fischer at the Stanford Linear Accelerator Center in California suggested that lunar tidal effects might be responsible, we conducted experiments that proved beyond doubt that he was right."


Convicted 13 Years Ago, Man Maintains Innocence
Vincent James Landano, who has been fighting a murder conviction for 15 years, has asked the New Jersey Supreme Court to review his case and free him, if not from the conviction at least from the state court system.
The request that Mr.
Landano made earlier this month is only the latest twist in a convoluted case that began in August 1976, when a Newark police officer was killed during an armed robbery in Kearny.
Mr.
Landano, then a 37-year-old Staten Island man, was convicted in the killing and sentenced to life in prison.


Knee Surgery for Craig
ROGER CRAIG, the Minnesota Vikings' No. 2 rusher and No. 4 receiver, underwent arthroscopic knee surgery Wednesday and will miss Sunday's game against the Los Angeles Rams.


QW to Cease Publication
Chafin Communications Inc. says it is halting publication of QW, a gay and lesbian weekly magazine, because it has run out of money.
The New York-based magazine, which covers gay and lesbian news, politics, the arts and AIDS, was started in October 1991 with the name NYQ, but earlier this year it changed its name to QW.
The Nov. 29 issue is the last one, Chafin Communications said.


Why Single Out One Hospital for Operating-Room Deaths?; Problem Is Wider
To the Editor:
Re the failure of a monitoring device during an operation at Roosevelt Hospital ("When Medicine Errs," Nov. 12): It is easy to say that the broken capnographer represents the standard of care in New York State, that it might have saved the patient's life and that the doctor should not have proceeded without it.
However, I have practiced anesthesiology for six years in a large academic hospital in New York City, and I know it is not that simple.
The equipment we use in the operating room is extraordinarily expensive and fragile, subject to theft and breakage.
It is virtually impossible to hire and hold adequate personnel to repair and deploy that equipment.
At the same time, operating-room administrators strongly discourage canceling cases because of the financial consequences for the hospital.


A Fund-Shifting System That's Open All Night
The Global Settlement Fund may sound like a common money market fund, but behind that bland title is a novel 24-hour money transfer system that might some day be used by all kinds of businesses for sending payments to one another.
While securities and currencies are traded 24 hours a day in London, New York and Tokyo, there has not been any way for traders to send or receive payments outside of business hours in their local market.


Markets Closed For Holiday
Because of the Thanksgiving Day holiday, all financial and commodities markets in the United States were closed yesterday.
Most foreign markets were open; an article about overseas trading appears on page D12.


Art in Review
Juan Usle
John Good Gallery  532 Broadway (near Spring Street)  SoHo  Through Dec. 19
Even though these paintings by Juan Usle are not always successful, they leave no doubt that he remains a gifted young abstractionist.
Having exhibited elegant, but somewhat precious, paintings a few years ago that were notable for their atmospheric veils of color and textured surfaces, he has since considerably expanded his visual vocabulary, and in this show he seems to be trying out one idea after another.


More Cuts Expected Soon at Digital
The Digital Equipment Corporation is preparing to accelerate its layoffs before the end of the year, as the company attempts to rebound from billions of dollars in losses.
While a Digital spokeswoman would not confirm the exact number of layoffs that are planned, people inside Digital said this week that by Dec. 7, at least 7,500 and perhaps closer to 8,800 more employees would be laid off worldwide, with a significant percentage of those being cut in Massachusetts and New Hampshire where more than half of the company's American employees live and work.


Subway Token Clerk Killed in Robbery


Once Again, Smith Is Cowboys' Ace in the Hole
In training camp, Emmitt Smith talked about a 2,000-yard rushing season.
When he did, no one flinched.
But last week, after he was held to under 100 yards for a third consecutive game, the talk stopped.
Suddenly, opposing defenses had discovered a way to slow the Dallas Cowboys running back.


Faulk May See Action
MARSHALL FAULK participated in 8 to 10 plays in practice yesterday, and San Diego State Coach AL LUGINBILL said he would wait until the warm-ups tomorrow to decide whether the running back would play against Miami.


In Wake of 5th Concussion, Toon Opts to Retire
Al Toon, troubled for almost three weeks by post-concussion syndrome, will retire from pro football today, ending an eight-year career in which he became the second-leading pass-catcher in Jets history.
The Jets have called a news conference this afternoon at their training facility at Hofstra University, where Toon, who is 29 years old, will officially call it quits.


Finding Meager Help in a Sex-Complaint System
It began, Barbara Gerrish recalls, with a Christmastime job sorting letters.
It made her feel somehow patriotic.
She was serving her country.
She liked the flexible hours.
She saw a good career ahead in the United States Postal Service.
And, in fact, she won promotions to executive positions.
But she says she didn't expect the ordeal that followed.
Not only was Ms.
Gerrish propositioned by one superior and drawn into a sexual relationship by a second, as investigators concluded, but she says she was also blocked from filing a grievance and rebuffed in efforts to press a Federal sex discrimination lawsuit.


Accounts
*
Hershey Chocolate U.S.A., Hershey, Pa., to Ogilvy &amp; Mather New York, to handle advertising for Hershey's Cookies 'n' Mint, a new variety of the company's familiar chocolate bar.
A television campaign by Ogilvy, which already handles other Hershey brands, is to begin in January.
Billings were not disclosed.


W. J. Campbell, 62, Meteorologist Who Was an Expert on Polar Ice
Dr.
William J. Campbell, a ranking meteorologist for the United States Geological Survey and an internationally known expert on polar ice, died last Friday.
He was 62 years old and lived in Gig Harbor, Wash.
The agency, which reported the death late Wednesday, said he had suffered a heart attack.


United in Love for Homemade Songs
SO you're a respected research chemist who lives with precise equations and predictable reactions.
And your daughter Caroline, the graduate student, comes home one day with a blue-jeaned fellow carrying a guitar and a weathered look like those country singers who've clearly lived a full life, maybe two, before 40.
Turns out this guy is an itinerant folk singer who's temporarily unemployed. (Aren't they all?)
Daddy, says your beloved daughter, I'd like you to meet Sandy Paton, my husband.


New York Seen Through the Lens of Another Era
He took what many consider the most celebrated photograph in sports history.
Not an action shot, just a back view of a dying old ballplayer, leaning on his bat, saying goodbye to his fans.
But that back! That number: 3! As in Babe Ruth.


METRO DIGEST
METRO DIGEST  MAKING SHOPPING MALLS SAFER HAVENS
Following several recent and well-publicized crimes at shopping malls, many centers in the New York metropolitan region, like many across the nation, are increasing their uniformed security forces and developing elaborate surveillance systems in an effort to restore peace of mind among an increasingly skittish public.
Tactics include using undercover officers as decoys to trap potential carjackers and robbers, increasing the number of mobile patrols cruising parking lots and installing hidden video cameras that can zoom in on license plates in the farthest reaches of the lot.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY  PIONEER SPIRIT REVISITED
"From struggle, we have something here, and aren't living in the street," said Rosa Campbell.
"We give thanks for where we live." Mrs.
Campbell and her husband share a five-story, brown-brick building in the South Bronx with 21 other families, urban homesteaders who have moved from building to building, pushed on by evictions by the city or fires.
Each time, they started over in what others would regard as disaster areas, buildings full of garbage without windows or working plumbing, buildings like those that litter the stricken neighborhood.
A1.
PACKING THE CARS TO CLEAR THE HIGHWAYS
In a bid to ease traffic congestion for Staten Island commuters, the Dinkins administration plans to call for eliminating the toll for vehicles carrying three or more occupants on the Verrazano-Narrows Bridge.
B3.
PERKY!
SPIRITED!
POMPOMS, TOO!
Marching in the 66th annual Macy's Thanksgiving Day Parade were 504 National Cheerleading Association's All-American Cheerleaders, a high point in their visit to New York.
Between rehearsals, the cheerleaders made the usual tourist rounds.
But the real highlights included the thrill of high-speed taxi rides, the purchase of low-cost wrist watches, and the once-in-a-lifetime chance to have their pictures taken with New York City sanitation workers.
B3.
DINKINS'S ELUSIVE QUARRY: PEACE
Mayor David N. Dinkins's televised speech on Crown Heights was not only a broad plea for civic harmony but an unusually impassioned personal appeal for understanding, acceptance and political peace -- commodities that have often eluded him in his three years as New York City's first black mayor.
Political memo, B4.
Brooklyn man arrested in beating death of his 82-year-old father.
B8.
REGION  CONVICT ASKS FOR NEW REVIEW
Vincent James Landano, who has been fighting a murder conviction for 15 years, has asked the New Jersey Supreme Court to review his case and free him, if not from the conviction, at least from the state court system.
B6.
DRIVER, 74, WARDS OFF THIEVES, POLICE SAY
A 74-year-old Queens woman driving alone to a Thanksgiving Dinner fought off two would-be carjackers who made five separate attempts to halt and commandeer her car, the Nassau County police reported.
B4.
KEEPING DIFFICULT STUDENTS IN SCHOOL
From suburban Hyde Park, rural Amenia or urban Poughkeepsie, some of Dutchess County's most difficult teen-agers land at a special school, Dutchess Alternative, bringing with them their anger and frustration, their family problems and their addictions.
B6.
FUGITIVE IN GRAVESIDE SUICIDE ATTEMPT
For more than 13 years, Joseph Florczak lived on the run, a fugitive wanted in the 1978 stabbing death of his former wife.
The authorities waged a nationwide manhunt but were unable to find Mr.
Florczak until last week, when he showed up at the Connecticut grave of his former wife and shot himself in the chest.
B12.
TAKING THE BITTER WITH THE SWEET
Members of the Empire State Honey Producers met at a conference in Syracuse, and the focus was on how the honey industry is facing some of the toughest challenges in recent memory.
Beekeepers in New York, New Jersey and Connecticut are battling insects, black bears, diseases, honey exports from China and other problems.
B14.
Our Towns by Andrew H. Malcolm B6  Chronicle B16


HIGH SCHOOL FOOTBALL: At Elizabeth High School; It's a Matter of Getting From Here to There
The sounds and rhythms change at Elizabeth High School as the squeaky slap of leather on hardwood replaces the meaty thud of colliding bodies.
The football season ended yesterday and practice begins for the girls' and boys' basketball teams today.
But for the coaches, the purpose of all this noise and sweat remains the same: keep the 4,300 students of New Jersey's largest high school interested and involved until they are prepared to escape this tough port city of 110,000, to college or to meaningful work.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
Productivity has grown sharply in the last 18 months, a sign that the recovery is likely to endure.
The average American worker now turns out more than $28 in goods and services an hour, the highest ever and nearly a dollar above the amount in the spring of 1991, when the recession hit bottom.  [ Page D9. ]
Hesitancy over the economy is the dominant mood in Reading, Pa., which was surveyed for the eighth time since the onset of the recession in 1990 as representative of the Northeast economy.
Although the election of Bill Clinton brought a temporary surge in consumer activity, Reading's business community is unsure whether a true economic rebound will occur.  [ D9. ]


Top Ranger Line Gets Points and Some Relief
Tony Amonte was beginning to feel as if he would never finish a scoring opportunity.
Mark Messier had become frustrated and unhappy with his personal performance, though he kept it to himself.
Ever cheerful, ever happy, Adam Graves was smiling less and less.
To gauge how low the Rangers had fallen these past few weeks, one needed only to look at the top line.
A line loaded with talent -- Messier, Graves and Amonte had a combined 235 points last season -- was not only not scoring, but was also frequently on the ice when goals were allowed.





Innovative Program in California Aids Those With Outdated Skills
For almost four years, Mark H. Johnson was a chemical technician for a microfilm company, doing skilled work that paid him a good salary of $30,000 a year.
But the company's three shifts were cut to two, and he was on the third.
Soon he landed another skilled job paying $27,000, as a high-speed packaging mechanic.
But a year and a half later production was cut, and with it Mr.
Johnson.
So about five years ago, Mr.
Johnson joined the ranks of the underemployed, settling for a series of low-wage jobs because his talents were no longer valued enough to assure him a secure and well-paid position.


Pop/Jazz; Jelly Roll's Stories, Told With Voice And Fingers
Three favorite Jelly Roll Morton stories that Vernel Bagneris relates at Michael's Pub, in his cabaret tribute to that seminal jazz pianist and composer, he calls "the suit story," "the Coca-Cola story" and "the voodoo story."
In the suit story, Mr.
Bagneris, who impersonates Morton, recalls how when traveling in the South, he would impress the women in small towns by parading in elegant suits, which he would change three or four times a day.
Eventually he persuaded the women to arrange card parties with their male companions.
A professional gambler as well as a musician, Morton would then proceed to win all their money and leave town.


The Spoken Word
AMERICAN INDIAN LECTURES, Museum of the City of New York, Fifth Avenue at 103d Street.
Oren Lyons, the chief of the Onondaga Nation and a professor of American studies at the State University at Buffalo, is to discuss American Indian philosophy, art and environmental issues.
Sunday at 2 P.M.
Free with museum admission: $5; $3 for students, the elderly and children under 12.
Information: (212) 534-1672.
POETRY READINGS, Nuyorican Poets Cafe, 236 East Third Street, East Village.
Readings by Reggie Lewis, Andrew Dahlke, Steve Cannon, Edwin Torres and Carolyn Peyser.
Tonight at 10.
Admission: $5.
Information: (212) 505-8183.


For Injured Swimmer, The Healing Continues
Autumn's first snowflakes, thick and soft, brought their inevitable reminders.
The blue and gold swimming parkas that have reappeared on the Notre Dame campus, the ones that were lined up for funerals here and in Missouri almost 10 months ago, now carry memories, too.
For the fortunate ones, the reminders are everywhere of the night last January when a bus carrying the women's team home from a meet skidded off a snowy toll road, and two lives were lost, and the rest were changed forever.


Corrections
An obituary yesterday about Ellen Furman, a founding member and a past president of the New York City chapter of the Juvenile Diabetes Foundation, misstated her age.
She was 52 years old.


For Disruptive Students, a Chance to Succeed
The yearbook of the Dutchess Alternative Middle/High School has the usual class superlatives: Most Likely to Succeed.
Best Looking.
Class Clown.
Only one category has been modified: "Most Annoying (Ha! Ha!)."
No one would want to see a serious competition for the title, for this is a school for some of Dutchess County's most annoying teen-agers.
These are the boys and girls who, by cutting classes or disrupting them, overwhelm an assistant principal's day.


Art in Review
Leonardo Drew
Thread Waxing Space  476 Broadway (near Broome Street)  SoHo  Through Dec. 19
This is the first one-man exhibition in New York City for Leonardo Drew (he has been included recently in group shows around town), and it is for the most part a strong debut.
Mr.
Drew has constructed, through sometimes extraodinarily elaborate procedures, several large-scale works.
They consist of materials like wood, rope, rusted nails, canvas and cotton.
These are combined in ways that can immediately bring to mind Eva Hesse and a range of other Post-Minimalist sculptors: Mr.
Drew stacks and hangs his works, like Hesse, and also like Hesse he creates expressionistic works based on grids, series and multiples.


Bridge
Two young experts led by a record margin into the final two sessions of the Blue Ribbon Pair Championship at the American Contract Bridge League's Fall Nationals here this afternoon.
At the end of yesterday's semifinal play, Ravindra Murthy and Brad Moss of Berkeley, Calif., were nearly four boards ahead of their nearest rivals, which is believed to be a record in the 30-year history of the event.
However, their lead will be reduced to about a board and half for the final.
The standings were: in first place, Murthy and Moss with 1817 match points; in second, Tony Forrester of England and Ron Andersen of Chicago with 1634; in third, John Onstott of New Orleans and Fred Woodruff of Metairie, La., with 1621; in fourth, Kit Woolsey of Kensington, Calif., and Ed Manfield of Hyattsville, Md., with 1,614; in fifth, Beth Palmer of Silver Spring, Md., and Lynn Deas of Schenectady, N.Y., with 1589.


India Isn't Exceptional for Corruption
To the Editor:
Your Nov. 10 article about corruption in India suffers from exaggeration.
Numerous sociological studies have found that corruption in India is less than in the rest of the third world.
In "The Control of Bureaucratic Corruption: Case Studies in Asia," the British scholar Leslie Palmier of the University of Bath observes that Indians recognize corruption as a malaise; whereas in other countries it is accepted as a way of life.
"The smoke grows, with little fire."
While salaries of lower-level Government servants were low in colonial days, in the last four decades, thanks to strong, often militant trade unionism, the salaries of lower-level Government servants have risen at a rate much higher than that of inflation.
The criticism now heard is Government servants are paid too much, considering their low productivity.


A Faux Company to Update a Faded Brand
ACCORDING to a wave of new print advertisements, a filtered version of venerable Chesterfield cigarettes is being brought out by a heretofore unknown outfit called the Chesterfield Cigarette Company in Durham, N.C.
"We take the time and trouble to do things right," the ads assert in a folksy fashion reminiscent of nostalgic appeals for Jack Daniel's whisky.
The ads go on to say that Chesterfield shuns "cheap filler tobacco" and removes "coarse stems," even though "other companies chop 'em up and put 'em back in."


Lewis Says Foreman And Not Bowe Is Next
It looks as though the No. 1 contender, LENNOX LEWIS, will fight GEORGE FOREMAN next spring instead of the world heavyweight champion, RIDDICK BOWE.
Lewis and his manager, FRANK MALONEY, said yesterday that because of a breakdown in negotiations between representatives of the Lewis and Bowe camps, Bowe appears ready to give up the World Boxing Council version of the title and allow Lewis to become the W.B.C. champion by default.
Bowe would retain his World Boxing Association and International Boxing Federation titles while the two fighters go their own ways.
Lewis would fight Foreman before meeting Bowe in a unification fight in 1994.


At Curbside: Kin Cheer Cheerleader Parading By
At 7 A.M. yesterday, Debbie and Dolores Oxner of Beebe, Ark., were already curbside in Times Square, waiting in a steady rain for the 11 o'clock appearance of their daughter and granddaughter, one of the 504 National Cheerleading Association's All-American Cheerleaders who marched in the 66th annual Macy's Thanksgiving Day Parade.
Their enthusiasm suggested that perkiness may be genetic.


Uncertainty and Hope on Main Street
For George S. Reppert, general manager of Kachel Ford near here, the election of Bill Clinton three weeks ago removed one uncertainty and replaced it with another.
Even if not everyone in Berks County, which George Bush narrowly carried, is pleased with the election's outcome, "at last we have somebody," Mr.
Reppert said.


QUADRIPLEGIC AIMS TO BECOME DOCTOR
James B. Post 4th wants to be a doctor.
Mr.
Post, who is 22 years old, believes that he would make an especially gifted rehabilitation specialist or psychiatrist because he knows what it is like to survive loss and disability.
"I'd have a special perspective," he said.
"I'd be on the same level as that guy. I'd know what he was feeling."


Ireland Apparently Turns Down Freer Abortion Law
Ireland has apparently voted against a constitutional amendment that would have broadened the grounds for legal abortion in this predominantly Roman Catholic country, early results of the balloting indicated today.
The partial results, announced by party and election officials and reported by national radio and television, showed that while one abortion amendment had been defeated, two others had been approved, one guaranteeing access to abortion information and another making it legal for women to travel abroad for abortion.
Previously a ban against traveling abroad for abortions could not usually be enforced.


Sell Photos, Not Satellites
Open skies . . .
Spies in the sky . . .
Needle-in-a-haystack accuracy: Cold war lore brims with stories about the astounding high-resolution photographs taken by American reconnaissance satellites from high in the heavens.
It's no wonder that smaller countries perk up at the idea that, in this new world order, they might buy such satellites for themselves.
The U.S.
Government is weighing bids from the United Arab Emirates, Spain and South Korea to buy American spy satellites.
The right answer is a fast, firm no.


INSIDE
Productivity Is Surging
American productivity has been growing strongly over the last year and a half, providing a compelling sign that the economic recovery is likely to endure.
Page D9.
Irish Vote on Abortion
Ireland has apparently voted against a constitutional amendment that would have broadened the grounds for legal abortion.
Page A3.
Arrest in German Attack
The police have arrested a 25-year-old man in connection with an attack that killed three Turkish citizens in a westers German town town.
Page A3.


Immigration Reform Holds Key to Economy
To the Editor:
There is a striking omission in "How to Lift the Poor" (news analysis, Nov. 10), your overview of the Clinton Administration's agenda to aid those in need: immigration reform.
Over the last decade, the United States has received the largest number of immigrants in our history -- close to 10 million people.
In the recessionary year 1991, more than 1.8 million people were granted permanent resident status -- also the highest number in our history.
More than one-third of the annual growth in the labor force comes from this collective source (that is, legal immigrants, illegal immigrants, refugees, asylum seekers and foreign nationals who are legally permitted to be employed as nonimmigrant workers).
The preponderance of the immigrant flow has been into urban areas, especially to central cities.


Sounds Around Town
Lucia Mendez
Lucia Mendez, Roseland, 52d Street between Eighth Avenue and Broadway, (212) 315-5252.
Ms.
Mendez, a Mexican soap opera star and singer, will be bringing a full production with her, including dancers; the best dancing will be on the floor, to the Colombian salsa singer Moncho Santana, a new merengue group, Cocoa Band, and a Cuban son group, Grupo Oriza.
Tickets tomorrow night are $40; the show starts at 9 and dancing goes on until 4 A.M.
Arthur Blythe
Arthur Blythe, Bradley's, 70 University Place, at 10th Street, Greenwich Village, (212) 228-6440.
The 1970's produced few great alto saxophonists, but Mr.
Blythe is one of them.
He works with a gorgeous tone, and he has written some of the best compositions of the 1970's and 80's; with Kirk Lightsey on piano and Santi Debriano on bass, it's a perfect setting.
Shows through tomorrow are at 10 P.M., midnight and 2 A.M.; there is a $15 cover charge.
Bill Lee
Bill Lee, Birdland, 2745 Broadway, at 105th Street, (212) 749-2228.
Mr.
Lee, a bassist, has pulled together an exceptional group featuring two of the city's best tenor saxophonists, Donald Harrison and Javon Jackson.
Greg Hutchinson, a swinging young drummer, is to complete the rhythm section.
Shows through tomorrow are at 9 P.M., 10:30 P.M. and midnight; there is a $10 cover and a $5 minimum at the tables, and a $5 cover at the bar.


About SportsFriday And Business Day
To accommodate holiday weekend news and advertising, SportsFriday starts on page D1 today.
Business Day begins on page D9.


A Museum That Children Can Conquer
IT'S another New York City holiday weekend, and you're desperately seeking that New York parents' grail, something new to do with the kids.
Of course it should be intellectually stimulating, or why are you living in the city instead of providing your children with backyards and wholesomeness in suburbia?
Your jaded ones have already cowered before the bears in the American Museum of Natural History, failed to appreciate art at the Metropolitan Museum, and hogged all the plastic vegetables in their shopping baskets at the Children's Museum of Manhattan.
So why not escort them to yet another worthwhile educational activity, the Brooklyn Children's Museum?


Review/Art; Remnants of an Ancient Melting Pot
Possibly the single most important art object visiting New York at the moment is in the exhibition called "The Royal City of Susa," at the Metropolitan Museum of Art.
The great limestone "Victory Stele of Naram-Sin," created in the third millennium B.C. near present-day Baghdad, depicts a king crushing the bodies of his enemies underfoot as he strides up a mountain beneath wheel-shaped stars.
The image is one of the oldest known of a conquering monarch, and its naturalistic carving, monumental size and fine state of preservation make it virtually unique.
It is only 1 of 200 pieces of ancient Near Eastern art on first-time loan to New York from the Louvre during that museum's extensive gallery renovations. (A smaller sampling appeared at the Arthur M. Sackler Gallery at the Smithsonian Institution in Washington last spring.) The Louvre's holdings in this area are among the finest in the West, thanks to the pioneering efforts of 19th-century French archeological teams.
They were the first to excavate the great Mesopotamian civilizations of Sumer, Akkad and Babylon, as well as the state of Elam to the east, whose culture was the very first recorded in the country now called Iran.


The Reviews Are In: Thumbs Up for Rookie
In the warmth of the Giants' locker room today, Kent Graham finally paused for some self-analysis.
He had spent the afternoon dodging tacklers, ducking under a frenzied rush, trying somehow to make his first day as the Giants' starting quarterback a memorable one.
All he had was a sense that he had done the right things, but that they still weren't enough.


No Headline
We don't have drug addicts.
We don't have thieves.
We are poor, but we have work.
We are working.
The little that we have, for this we are celebrating. -- AMADO CAMPBELL, at Thanksgiving dinner in the South Bronx.  [ B3:4. ]


Diner's Journal
The Changing Scene
NEW MENUS: The Four Seasons, at 99 East 52d Street, Manhattan, (212) 754-9494, is trying to lure budget-conscious diners to its Grill Room from 6 to 10:30 P.M.
Mondays through Saturdays.
Three-course meals are available for $26.50 to $37.50.
In addition, more than two dozen wines at $30 or less are offered. . . .
Banana Cafe, the tropical-theme restaurant at 111 East 22d Street, Manhattan, (212) 995-8500, specializing in Brazilian food, now serves feijoada, the Brazilian national dish, on Saturdays from noon to 5 P.M.
Feijoada is a stew prepared with various cuts of smoked beef and pork, black beans and spices.
The feijoada is part of Banana Cafe's $19.50 Saturday buffet. . . .
City Cafe, 1481 York Avenue, near 78th Street, Manhattan, (212) 570-9810, has extended its $19.92 Sunday evening dinner, which features spirited American fare by Marc Salonsky, through the end of the year.
NEW CHEFS: Mimosa, the Mediterranean restaurant at 1354 First Avenue, at 73d Street, Manhattan, (212) 988-0002, has a new chef, Allyson Hinds.
The former chef, Marylin Frobuccino, left to work in the corporate food field. . . .
And there is a new chef at Le Pactole, the French restaurant at 2 World Financial Center (225 Liberty Street, at West Street); (212) 945-9444.
He is Alain Querin, the former chef at Raoul's on Prince Street.
He replaces Bernard Malet-DuPont, who has not announced his plans.


Sports of The Times; An Evening With Roses And Thorns
BY midnight Wednesday, most of the spectators who had come to watch basketball at Madison Square Garden had left the arena.
They saw what they had come for: a great college doubleheader, with Seton Hall defeating U.C.L.A. after Indiana had defeated Florida State in overtime.
Tonight, fans will return to watch Indiana and Seton Hall meet in the preseason National Invitation Tournament championship game.
Considering the time of year, both games had been well-played.
Each had been marked by the sort of individual performances that can make college athletics such a unique level of competition.


GATT Pact Is Sought By Year-End
After being deadlocked for almost a year by disagreements over agriculture, world trade negotiations resumed today in Geneva, with representatives of 108 nations aiming to conclude a new trade liberalization package before the end of this year.
The way was opened for an early conclusion of the global trade accord when the United States and the European Community settled their longstanding dispute over farming subsidies last week.
France has denounced the deal but could not block resumption of the global talks.


Review/Photography; Gullah Culture Casts Its Spell
IN "Sea Islands," a terrific new show at the P.P.O.W.
Gallery in SoHo, Carrie Mae Weems deploys a wide range of stylistic devices to tell the story of Gullah, the distinctive culture of blacks living on the Sea Islands off South Carolina and Georgia.
Combining more or less straightforward documentary photographs, staged photographic narratives, black folk tales and fragments of her own writing, Ms.
Weems manages to weave a broad, exhilarating fabric of suggestion and meaning.
Ms.
Weems has incorporated black folklore into her work before, and her interest in Gullah is not surprising.
The life and language of the region have long fascinated ethnologists and linguists with their remarkable blend of African and American Colonial influences.
In a simple but effective device, Ms.
Weems presents a panel that traces the etymological derivation of the name Gullah from that of the Gola tribe of West Africa.
Nurtured by the relative isolation of the Sea Islands, Gullah has developed over the centuries into a singular culture.


Hatzeva Journal; Loud 'No' to Voice in the Wilderness
When evening settles over the desolate Arava valley, Yaacov Ravitz savors the lingering sunset as it casts a rosy glow over the desert.
The last thing he wants is a forest of radio antennas looming over the silent wilderness.
"I don't need a giant monster spewing radiation near my house," said Mr.
Ravitz, who grows fruits and vegetables in this moshav, an agricultural collective, in the Negev.


Folk Benefit for Camp
The annual Killooleet folk-music sing, a benefit for the scholarship fund of Camp Killooleet in Hancock, Vt., is to be held tomorrow at 3 P.M. at the Ethical Culture Society Hall, 2 West 64th Street, Manhattan.
The performers are to include Tony Seeger, the head of Folkways Records; Judy Seeger; Beth Shepard; Kate Seeger; Bill and Sarah Smith; Laurie Berkner; George Ward, and Dean Spencer.
Tickets at the door are $15; $10 for students and the elderly; $30 for a family group.
Information: (203) 354-5728.


Mitterrand's Sojourn in Israel Goes Well, but . . .
A big question in Israel this week is whether President Francois Mitterrand of France is good for the Jews, and the unqualified response today from Israeli leaders was yes.
Not everyone here is so sure.
Mr.
Mitterrand, who is on an official visit to improve France's relations with Israel and to increase its influence in the Middle East, raised passions among some Jews earlier this month by having a wreath laid in his name at the tomb of Marshal Philippe Petain.


Clerk in a Token Booth Is Fatally Shot in Robbery
A subway token clerk who had opened the door of his booth to let a co-worker in was fatally shot during a robbery at a Brooklyn subway station, the transit police said yesterday.
The clerk, Andres Barreto, 40 years old, was shot Wednesday night as two men tried to rob his token booth at the Euclid Avenue station in East New York, a desolate stop on the A line surrounded by empty lots and decaying tenements.
Mr.
Barreto died at Brookdale Hospital shortly after midnight yesterday, said Albert O'Leary, a transit police spokesman.
There were no other injuries, and no one has been arrested.


Help the U.N. Arm for Peace
When warring clans cause starvation in Somalia or Serbia invades Bosnia and threatens Kosovo, the American impulse is to call in the United Nations, not send in the Marines.
But the U.N. has no military forces -- except those its members are willing to provide ad hoc.
And it has no standing capacity to transport or pay them.
The U.N.'s ability to promote peace needs to be strengthened by placing standing forces, and funds, at its disposal.
And it needs a capacity to act before wars break out, through preventive deployments.


Dinkins, Stung, Repeats a Message
Mayor David N. Dinkins's televised speech on Crown Heights was not only a broad plea for civic harmony but an unusually impassioned personal appeal for understanding, acceptance and political peace -- commodities that have often eluded him in his three years as New York City's first black mayor.
In making the speech, Mr.
Dinkins fell back on an approach he has used half a dozen times before, often to address the very same issue of racial tolerance and understanding.
It is an issue that Mr.
Dinkins made his own in winning office, but as Mayor, it has become a battle he seems destined to fight and fight again.


A Pianist's Debut
The pianist Petras Geniusas, the first-place winner of the 1992 Palm Beach International Piano Competition, is to make his New York debut tomorrow at 8 P.M. at Alice Tully Hall.
The program includes works by Berio, ,Brahms, Clementi, Liszt and Prokofiev.
Tickets are $10.
Information: (212) 875-5050.


At the Bar; At Columbia Law School, an uncommon ebullience and evangelism at the top.
For as long as anyone can remember, Columbia Law School has been regarded as a very prestigious, very dull and very unpleasant place to be.
Students are happy to get in, happy to get out and say they went there and unhappy about almost everything in between.
Then the school named Lance Liebman as dean.
Mr.
Liebman, 51 years old, has been at Columbia's helm for barely a year, hardly enough time to change an institution's personality.
Indeed, maybe no law school can ever be fun, least of all one in New York to which people often repair only after rejections from Cambridge, New Haven or Palo Alto, sites of what are generally rated as the nation's three top schools.


Brooklyn Man, 44, Is Charged In Beating Death of His Father
A 44-year-old Brooklyn man has been arrested for beating his 82-year-old father to death after an argument, a police spokesman, Sergeant Anthony Barlanti, said yesterday.
The son, John Lahtinen, of 4015 Seventh Avenue in Brooklyn, was charged with second-degree manslaughter in the death of his father, Ray, 10 days ago, Sergeant Barlanti said.


TV Weekend; A Sure Hand For a Series On the Police
Heading the list of television genres due for a comeback is the police drama, the kind of precinct yarn that had its last burst of energy with "Hill Street Blues." It could happen, especially with Joseph Wambaugh deciding to try.
A former Los Angeles cop, Mr.
Wambaugh began putting his 1960's street experiences to creative use back in the 70's as a writer ("The New Centurions," "The Blue Knight") and as a television consultant, most notably for the NBC anthology series "Police Story," which ran from 1973 to 1977.
Mr.
Wambaugh is now back on NBC, this Sunday at 9 P.M., with the pilot for a possible series of police movies, much like the network's occasional "In the Line of Duty" drama specials.
"From the Files of Joseph Wambaugh" is described as having been inspired by the writer's experiences on the beat.
But inasmuch as the pilot takes place some time after the Persian Gulf conflict, his files are apparently bulging with contemporary clippings.


Bruce Admissions Cited
EARLE BRUCE, dismissed Monday as Colorado State football coach, has admitted violating National Collegiate Athletic Association rules and punching players, an article in The Coloradoan newspaper in Fort Collins said yesterday.
Bruce was quoted as saying that he violated rules involving days off for players and offseason coaching.
The school cited rules violations as a reason for his dismissal.


Books of The Times; A Daunting Father, A Brother's Shadow
J. F. K. Reckless Youth By Nigel Hamilton Illustrated. 898 pages. Random House. $30.
The outline of John Fitzgerald Kennedy's early years is well known to most Americans: the love-hate relationship with his domineering father, Joseph P. Kennedy; the privileged childhood in Boston and New York; the years of academic promise at Harvard; the harrowing survival of the sinking of PT 109 during World War II, and the successful run for Congress in 1946.


Their Chance to Shine, and It Rained


Transactions
Baseball  American League
SEATTLE MARINERS -- Named Lee Elia bench coach.
Sent Brent Knackert, pitcher, and Jim Campanis and Chris Howard, catchers, outright to Calgary of the Pacific Coast League.
Basketball


Lodging Plan For Homeless Is Postponed
A Dinkins administration plan to move 100 homeless families into two Upper West Side hotels next Tuesday has been postponed for a week amid confusion over many of its details and growing signs of opposition from the community, local elected leaders and the operator of the hotels.
There were also hints yesterday that the plan might be scuttled if the hotels' management withdraws its cooperation, as it has said it may do.
Under laws barring discrimination, the hotels could be forced to accept the homeless, but because the families would need special on-site services, opposition by the management would probably make the plan impractical, city officials said.


Restaurants
When the rustically handsome Spanish restaurant Alcala opened four years ago on the Upper West Side of Manhattan, it sparked renewed interest in tapas, the Iberian tidbits that are traditionally served at the bar.
But ultimately the enchantment faded, as it has many times before.
Why?
For one, tapas are fundamentally ill-suited to the American life style.
Spaniards dine at 11 P.M. or later, so they get through the evening by snacking on tapas.
New Yorkers more often dine around 8 P.M., so they don't need extended gastronomic preliminaries.
More important, Alcala's quality has been uneven at best.


Wave of Arson Puts Seattle Residents on Guard
For two months, Joe Biddle, a 48-year-old retired truck driver, has walked his quiet neighborhood late at night, armed with a high-powered flashlight.
He searches nearly every foot of his home turf, shining the light between buildings, under storage sheds, behind carports.
In the shoreline district where he lives, Mr.
Biddle organized a neighborhood patrol, one of dozens in the Seattle region that are trying to stem a wave of arson that has afflicted the area in recent months.
Since early August, 107 fires, a record, have been set in the city as well as dozens more in the northern suburbs.
The authorities suspect that 85 of those fires in and around the city are the work of one person.


For Children
In the second annual Family Theater Festival, which opened this week and is to run through Jan. 31, 14 performing-arts groups in New York City are presenting 24 productions for children.
During the festival, tickets to all the shows are sold at a discount; for a schedule and information, call (212) 769-4143 or (718) 522-2858.
Here are brief descriptions of the productions being staged this weekend.


Blockaded Iraqi Kurds Face Fearsome Winter
Soft, wet snow has begun to fall over northern Iraq, laying a mantle over the desolate steppe and signaling the start what may well be one of the most difficult periods for the Iraqi Kurds since they were freed from the grip of Saddam Hussein's Government 18 months ago.
The Kurds, crippled by a 15-month-old blockade by Baghdad that has left them bereft of kerosene for heating, food and basic supplies, will depend on the $200 million in relief assistance, including $43 million from the United States Agency for International Development and $20 million from the European Community, that is just beginning to be trucked into the north.


Midwood Continues Hold On Offense of John Jay
P.S.A.L.
HORNETS' DEFENSE SWARMS: For the fourth consecutive year, MIDWOOD (3-5-2) shut out JOHN JAY (3-6), 28-0, in a series that began in 1953.
The Hornets hold a 15-9-2 advantage over John Jay and haven't lost to the Indians since 1976, when they were defeated, 20-0.
Linebacker Rosnel Dorsainvil and defensive end Maurice Wheatle each had eight tackles and were instrumental in limiting John Jay's offense to 40 total yards.
Quarterback Tremaine Darby (10 carries for 105 yards, 1 touchdown) and tailback Akeel Taylor (16 carries for 107 yards, 2 touchdowns) led the offensive charge, which totaled 338 yards.
C.H.S.F.L.
BIG DAY FOR MAYO: Chris Mayo rushed 20 times for 170 yards and 2 touchdowns to lead the C.H.S.F.L. champion, MOUNT ST.
MICHAEL (10-1), over its traditional Thanksgiving Day rival, CARDINAL HAYES (4-6), 21-8.
The Mounties have won the last 12 contests and hold a 28-17-5 edge in the matchup, which started in 1943.
Mayo, who had scoring runs of 59 yards and 26 yards, finished the season with 1,415 yards and a league-best 20 touchdowns.
Quarterback Kyle McIntosh (8 carries for 93 yards, 1 touchdown) led a Mount rushing attack, which totaled 297 yards on the day.
Hayes scored its only touchdown when quarterback Robert Hernandez was intercepted in the end zone by Mount's Sheldon Hall, who ran 2 yards and fumbled.
Hayes's wideout, Sean Hepson, picked up the ball and returned it for the Cardinal score.


Quiet Thanksgiving for President and Wife
On a foggy, rainy day, President Bush spent a quiet Thanksgiving with his wife, Barbara, at their vacation home here.
Despite a steady drizzle and a temperature in the 40's, Mr.
Bush played two hours of golf on a soggy Cape Arundel course near his home with Ken Raynor, a professional golfer, while Mrs.
Bush played with Mrs.
Raynor.


Arrest in Shooting Over Price of Cheese
A 32-year-old man was charged with assault yesterday in a shooting Wednesday night in a Harlem grocery store that the police said was prompted by a dispute over the price of cheese.
Five people, including a police officer, were wounded.
The argument spilled out of C-Town Grocery, at 136 Broadway, near West 149th Street, about 8:40 P.M, said Sgt.
Anthony Barlanti, a police spokesman.


Bond Sales From 'The Far Side'
A cat with its paws gnawed off -- it mistook a piranha for a goldfish.
A similarly hapless frog -- its tongue stuck to a jumbo jet it thought was a big fly.
A hungry spider spinning its web -- across the bottom of a schoolyard slide.
It would be hard to dream up a more unlikely band of "hidden persuaders," as Vance Packard termed the seductive images of advertising.
Yet Britain has imported the quirky, ghoulish characters of Gary Larson's cartoon strip, "The Far Side," in its effort to persuade British citizens to buy more Government savings bonds.


Malls Stress Visible Security to Counter Fears
After several recent and well-publicized crimes at shopping malls, many centers in the New York metropolitan region are increasing their uniformed security forces and developing elaborate surveillance systems in an effort to restore peace of mind among an increasingly skittish public.
"We're definitely seeing more of an effort on security across the country," said Keith J. Foxe, a spokesman for the International Council of Shopping Centers, an industry association in Manhattan.
"Mall executives are looking at more and more sophisticated ways of countering crime."


Review/Art; A Neglected Finnish Modernist Is Rediscovered
In messiness lies truth.
As time passes, the story of early modernism only gets bigger and more complicated, more like the real thing.
Among the most recent rediscoveries are William H. Johnson, the black American painter whose work was seen in double museum shows in New York City last summer, and Hilma af Klint, a Swedish abstractionist who was the subject of an exhibition at the P.S. 1 Museum in Long Island City in 1989.
Now it's Helene Schjerfbeck's turn.
This Finnish modernist, revered in her homeland but virtually unknown abroad, is the subject of a revelatory, bittersweet exhibition at the National Academy of Design.


On Stage, and Off
Shortening 'Remembrance'
There was a little too much to remember in "Remembrance," in the estimation of its producer, David G. Richenthal.
So a few weeks ago, a month after the play opened at the John Houseman Theater, he insisted that the playwright, Graham Reid, cut nearly 20 minutes out of it.
"I didn't use these words," Mr.
Richenthal said, "but I let him know I would close the play if he didn't cut it."


Lord, Dentsu Gets Chock Full Account
Lord, Dentsu &amp; Partners has been awarded the Chock Full o' Nuts Corporation's account, which had been at TBWA Advertising in New York for seven years.
Billings, estimated at $2 million, could rise to $4 million or more.


Selecting Restaurants by the Dish
AS a restaurant writer who is illuminated all day long by friends and colleagues who tell me (a) where they dined yesterday, (b) where they are thinking of dining tomorrow, (c) how they can't decide where to take out-of-town guests, (d) the indignities suffered at the hands of maladroit restaurant staffs, and much more, it has become clear that every diner has different criteria when it comes to choosing restaurants.
Price, of course, is one.
So, too, is geography.
Then there are ethnicity, comfort, service, noise level, the view, even the wine list.
Perhaps one of the more imaginative ways to zero in on the best that New York City restaurants have to offer is to focus on specific dishes.


Bloom FCA's Task: Reviving 70's Snacks
Three products bearing names that sound more like 1960's rock bands than snack foods -- Poppycock, Fiddle Faddle and Screaming Yellow Zonkers -- have hired an agency to handle their revival for the 1990's.
Lincoln Foods in Stamford, Conn., which bought rights to the popcorn-based snacks in August, named Bloom FCA in New York to restage the once-popular products for a new generation of consumers.
Billings were not disclosed, though in their heyday in the 60's and 70's, $10 million to $15 million was spent on the brands annually.


Immigration Reform Holds Key to Economy; Easy to Get In
To the Editor:
It is deeply alarming.
Hordes of illegal immigrants are flooding New York City.
The Immigration and Naturalization Service may even be collaborating, for a man from Java boasted to me that upon arriving at Kennedy Airport an official simply told him to "keep moving." A Mexican youth also informed me that he had come all the way from Mexico City by train without a ticket and was never once challenged by either a conductor or border guards.
The quiescence of unions is also extraordinary.
Several months ago The Atlantic published a fine article on the impact of illegal immigration upon Los Angeles, "Black vs. Brown." The writer reported that the black hospital workers' union had been smashed, with the former employees replaced by Mexican illegals.


Nomura Plans to Reimburse $200 Million of Client Losses
In a rare public admission of irregular sales practices, the Nomura Securities Company said today that it would pay nearly $200 million to compensate customers for losses they suffered on bonds that Nomura's brokers had promised would never fall in value.
Nomura, the world's largest brokerage house, said that in 1989 and 1990 its brokers had sold $390 million of complex real estate bonds, the value of which was linked to two office buildings in the United States.


Art in Review
Helen Frankenthaler
Knoedler &amp; Company  19 East 70th Street  Manhattan  Through Dec. 17
The strong suit of Helen Frankenthaler's abstract work over the last 40 years has been its sense of spontaneity.
Her stained surfaces have always looked lightly touched by gesture, as if the paint itself was making the expressive decisions.
Her colors have been imaginative without being problematic or unpretty.
Because Ms.
Frankenthaler works on a heroic scale, the work has tended to look "important," though in fact it got by largely on elegance and seemingly effortless charm.


F.C.C. Torn Over Howard Stern Case
Torn between moral indignation and a conviction that broadcasters ought to be allowed to make a profit, the Federal Communications Commission is agonizing over what to do about the raunchy remarks of Howard Stern, the New York disk jockey.
Mr.
Stern and his employer, the Infinity Broadcasting Corporation, based in New York, are in an escalating struggle with the F.C.C. over its rules governing "indecent" programming.
The commission has already fined Infinity $6,000 for a Stern program in 1988, and it has announced its intention to fine a Los Angeles radio station $105,000 for carrying a series of Mr.
Stern's programs last year.


Bit of the Future Lives
This struggling city, the largest in New Jersey, is accustomed to indignity, and the last year brought more.
The sole remaining department store, Macy's, closed in August, mocking once again the persistent hope of public officials that a commercial renaissance was at hand.
And a core of young thieves who have turned Newark into the car-theft capital of the country led to a police response that has come under investigation for its harshness.
But nothing in recent years seemed to hit vulnerable community leaders as hard as the realization last fall that the YMYWCA -- its budget, endowment and membership depleted almost beyond salvation -- would file for bankruptcy and abandon the city it had served for 112 years.


RESULTS PLUS
HOCKEY  Nordiques Prevail
Owen Nolan ruined John Cullen's coming-out party with the Toronto Maple Leafs last night.
Just over two minutes after Cullen finished keying a three-goal third-period spurt, Nolan scored his second goal of the night and then scored the winner in overtime as the Quebec Nordiques beat the Maple Leafs by 5-4 in Toronto.
The Maple Leafs acquired Cullen from Hartford on Tuesday for his offensive punch.
Cullen, scored twice in his Toronto debut and assisted on another goal. (AP)


Proposal Ends Carpool Tolls At S.I. Bridge
In a bid to ease traffic congestion for Staten Island commuters, the Dinkins administration plans to call for eliminating the toll for vehicles using the carpool lane on the Verrazano-Narrows Bridge.
Eliminating the toll would encourage more people to carpool, reducing rush-hour congestion on the bridge from Staten Island to Brooklyn, said Janette Sadik-Khan, director of the Mayor's Office of Transportation.
Of the 64 million vehicles that crossed the bridge in 1991, she said, fewer than one million used the lane, which is open to vehicles with three or more occupants.


Ex-Japanese Premier Denies Mob Deal in Scandal
Former Prime Minister Noboru Takeshita, trying to end a scandal that is threatening his career and Japan's governing party, broke a long silence today and denied that he had struck a deal with organized crime figures to become Prime Minister in 1987.
In two hours of testimony in Parliament today, Mr.
Takeshita, a canny veteran of Japanese politics, conceded that he had sought to silence rightists who were cruising the streets of Tokyo in sound trucks, blaring mocking praise of him.
But he said he had never sought, directly or indirectly, the intervention of one of Japan's leading mobsters to get the trucks off the streets.


Somalia Aid Workers Split on Troops
With the popping of gunfire a daily occurrence, Mogadishu is always a jumpy city, but the disquiet was aggravated this afternoon by reports that United States troops might be coming and by fears of the effects of such intervention.
Aid workers were clearly divided over whether military intervention would help relief shipments reach starving Somalis, or ignite further chaos and bloodshed in a country plundered by clan warfare and withered by famine.


A Killer's Tale -- A special report.; A Serbian Fighter's Path of Brutality
What Borislav Herak remembers most vividly about the sunny morning in late June when he and two companions gunned down 10 members of a Muslim family is the small girl, about 10 years old, who tried to hide behind her grandmother as the three Serbian nationalist soldiers opened fire from a distance of about 10 paces.
"We told them not to be afraid, we wouldn't do anything to them, they should just stand in front of the wall," said Mr.
Herak, who is 21 years old.


Art in Review
'The Naturalist Gathers'
Steingladstone Gallery  99 Wooster Street (near Spring Street)  SoHo  Through Dec. 19
This show, organized by Douglas Blau, consists of more than 800 postcards, film stills, magazine and newspaper clippings, photographic reproductions of works of art, and color photocopies that Mr.
Blau has collected, each one of the images mounted in a simple black frame.
They are stacked along the walls, more or less according to subject, with one subject blending into the next like passages of music; in fact, there's a supple, mesmeric rhythm to the whole installation.


Sounds Around Town
Lucia Mendez
Lucia Mendez, Roseland, 52d Street between Eighth Avenue and Broadway, (212) 315-5252.
Ms.
Mendez, a Mexican soap opera star and singer, will be bringing a full production with her, including dancers; the best dancing will be on the floor, to the Colombian salsa singer Moncho Santana, a new merengue group, Cocoa Band, and a Cuban son group, Grupo Oriza.
Tickets tomorrow night are $40; the show starts at 9 and dancing goes on until 4 A.M.
Arthur Blythe
Arthur Blythe, Bradley's, 70 University Place, at 10th Street, Greenwich Village, (212) 228-6440.
The 1970's produced few great alto saxophonists, but Mr.
Blythe is one of them.
He works with a gorgeous tone, and he has written some of the best compositions of the 1970's and 80's; with Kirk Lightsey on piano and Santi Debriano on bass, it's a perfect setting.
Shows through tomorrow are at 10 P.M., midnight and 2 A.M.; there is a $15 cover charge.
Bill Lee
Bill Lee, Birdland, 2745 Broadway, at 105th Street, (212) 749-2228.
Mr.
Lee, a bassist, has pulled together an exceptional group featuring two of the city's best tenor saxophonists, Donald Harrison and Javon Jackson.
Greg Hutchinson, a swinging young drummer, is to complete the rhythm section.
Shows through tomorrow are at 9 P.M., 10:30 P.M. and midnight; there is a $10 cover and a $5 minimum at the tables, and a $5 cover at the bar.


Mideast Peace Talks Must Not Be Derailed
To the Editor:
William Safire is partly correct when he asserts in "Eight Rounds to Go" (column, Nov. 19) that time is not on the Arab side and that President Hafez al-Assad of Syria will "never get back on the Golan if he loses Rabin." However, this is more than a political power game.
The people of Syria, Israel and the entire Middle East will lose if the peace negotiations should fail.
The Middle East is the land of missed opportunities for peace, and all of us have paid a painful price.
Peace itself is the best kind of security, if it is based on security arrangements, open borders and full normalization.
Mr.
Safire writes that "this is the moment to discover whether direct negotiation between Arabs and Jews has a future." Direct negotiations between Israel and its Arab neighbors are the best and most natural way to achieve peace, but if direct negotiations do not succeed, the stakes are too high to allow the process to fail.


Corrections
A brief article by Bloomberg Business News in Business Day on Tuesday about a possible offer for Imagine Films Entertainment Inc. described the action incorrectly.
The company's board formally asked its two chief executives, Ron Howard and Brian Grazer, who control more than 54 percent of the stock, to offer to acquire the rest of the company for at least $9 a share.


On My Mind; A Lonelier President
Americans like to think of their President as the leader of the free world -- a thought that hugely annoys a sizable number of other presidents, prime ministers and the people who happened to vote them into office.
"A" leader, certainly.
"Important" leader, without doubt.
But around the globe there are millions crude and ungrateful enough to believe that their own leaders also are exercising some kind of role and have some use in the world.


Knicks Recover In Time For Bulls
John Starks, Anthony Mason and Greg Anthony have regained their places in Pat Riley's rotation.
The Knicks have regained their equilibrium.
And with the Chicago Bulls headed to Madison Square Garden for a showdown tomorrow afternoon, the Knicks have regained momentum at an opportune time.
This will be the first Bulls-Knicks meeting since their memorable seven-game playoff bout last May, which the Bulls won, four games to three, on the way to defending their National Basketball Association title.


Yeltsin Rejects Foes' Demands for Major Changes
President Boris N. Yeltsin and the leader of his Government, Yegor T. Gaidar, today rebuffed opposition demands for major policy or personnel changes, drawing the political battle lines four days before the start of an anxiously awaited session of the full Russian Parliament.
For days reports had circulated in Moscow that Mr.
Yeltsin had struck a compromise with Civic Union, the major centrist opposition coalition, that included adopting portions of its economic program and a change of several key Cabinet members.


As He Enters Retirement, Arazi Leaves Mystery in Wake of His Fall
Light snow covered the fields in northern Missouri this week just in time to lend a seasonal tone to Jimmy Jones's 86th birthday and 86th Thanksgiving Day.
And the onetime master trainer for Calumet Farm, the home of the Triple Crown champions Whirlaway and Citation and seven other winners of the Kentucky Derby, was nudged from his holiday mood when the telephone rang and directed his thoughts to one horse and one mystery.
Now that Arazi is history, he was asked, what will history say?
Are we to think he was the toast of two continents when he was 2 years old but an international puzzle when he was 3?
Was he overrated or an underachiever?


Hall of Fame Finds a Home
The American Advertising Federation has finally found a home for its Advertising Hall of Fame exhibit, 43 years after it was established.
The collection will be housed at the G. D. Crain Jr.
Advertising Center of the Museum of Broadcast Communications in the Cultural Center in Chicago.
The exhibit, which opens to the public on Thursday, honors 118 people from the ranks of advertisers, agencies, academia and the media.


Alabama Era Blossoms As Auburn's Dye Departs
A decade ago this week, Paul (Bear) Bryant walked off Legion Field for the final time, but his legendary coaching record has been haunting Alabama football ever since.
Unable to return the Crimson Tide to the top of college football, his first two successors never shook Bryant's ominous shadow.
But Alabama's UnBearable Decade seemed to reach a symbolic conclusion today with a 17-0 victory against archrival Auburn.
The victory gave the Crimson Tide, No. 2 in The Associated Press poll and The New York Times computer ranking, an 11-0 record for the first time since the Bryant era and keeps them on track for a national championship showdown with No. 1 Miami in the Sugar Bowl, if they can defeat Florida next week in the first Southeastern Conference championship game.


CHRONICLE
The rapper MARKY MARK faces criminal charges if he does not negotiate a settlement within two weeks with a man whose jaw was broken in a fight.
The rapper, whose real name is MARK WAHLBERG, and a bodyguard were accused of kicking and punching ROBERT D. CREHAN, 20 years old, in an August brawl, The Associated Press reported.


Pilgrims' Progress: In Bronx, Plucky Settlers Give Thanks
They crossed seas seeking a fresh start in a strange but abundant land.
There were people there already, to be sure, sometimes hostile natives with their own customs and language.
But much of the land seemed fallow, so the newcomers settled in lonely spaces and scratched out homes, sharing their tools and toil, lugging in fresh water and foraging to meet as many of their needs as they could.
Much of the Sheetrock, however, was donated.
And the televisions, of course, they bought.


Cowboys Dish Out More Than the Giants Can Digest
Yes, the Giants lost.
The Cowboys whipped them today, 30-3, the way division leaders are supposed to whip struggling teams.
The 27-point beating was the worst for the Giants since the San Diego Chargers routed them by 44-7 in 1980.
But at least the Giants hung in, and the Cowboys led by only 9-3 on Lin Elliott's three field goals until midway through the third quarter.
Then the Giants got too much of Emmitt Smith.


Group Plans New Effort to Defy Ban on Cuban Aid
It has been less than a week since a confrontation at the Mexican border between American officials and a religious group trying to defy United States laws by sending humanitarian aid through Mexico to Cuba.
In the last week, spokesmen for the Minneapolis-based group, Pastors for Peace, said medical supplies and other goods that were eventually permitted to cross the border at Laredo, Tex., had arrived in Tampico, Mexico, and had been loaded on a Cuban freighter.
And supporters of the group said plans were under way to organize another effort.


Pentagon's Cuts Are Forcing Big Contractors to Consolidate
Faced with declining Pentagon spending, the United States weapons industry has entered a phase of consolidation.
Events like the announcement on Wednesday that the Army had canceled a $594 million "Star Wars" contract with the McDonnell Douglas Corporation are forcing military contractors to consider abandoning markets in which they are marginal participants and to acquire businesses in areas they can dominate.


Germans Hold Suspect in Firebombing That Killed 3 Turks
The police have arrested a 25-year-old man in connection with the firebombing that killed three Turkish citizens in the western German town of Molln on Monday.
The man, identified as Michael Peters, is a resident of Gudow, a town about six miles from Molln.
The police said they arrested him on Wednesday night.


Maybe Wright Is Keeping His Promise
For several weeks, Seton Hall Coach P. J. Carlesimo had been predicting that it was only a matter of time before Luther Wright would come into his own.
Since becoming eligible last season after conquering academic problems, the Pirates' 7-foot-2-inch center has struggled, first with his weight, then conditioning, then coordination, in a sometimes hurried attempt to fulfill predictions about the dominator he was supposed to be and the kind of player Seton Hall desperately needs.


Little Rock Hopes Clinton Presidency Will Put Its Dogpatch Image to Rest
This is naturally a modest city.
On cool mornings, the two buildings that are the high points on the skyline, the Excelsior Hotel and the headquarters of TCBY Yogurt, are obscured by the thick white fog that rises from the brown water of the Arkansas River as it courses through flat, swampy land.
Downtown, which once stretched for 25 bustling blocks along Main Street, has been badly malled in recent years.
Some businesses remain -- a few inexpensive restaurants, a combined newsstand and liquor store, a handful of small clothing stores, some banks and lawyers' offices.
But the department stores, the more popular restaurants and the cinemas are in the western part of the city, along with the Gap and Victoria's Secret, at Park Plaza Mall.


Review/Music; Thibaudet Plays Ravel Piano Works
Ravel's compact body of solo piano music fits neatly on a pair of compact disks, and is sufficiently varied to stand alone in the concert hall.
Jean-Yves Thibaudet, a 31-year-old French pianist, is currently campaigning for Ravel on both fronts.
His recordings of the composer's solo piano canon were recently released by London Records, and on Sunday afternoon he played the first of two Ravel concerts at the 92d Street Y, 1495 Lexington Avenue.
The conclusion is scheduled for Dec. 6.
Mr.
Thibaudet's recital confirmed what his recordings suggest: that he is a first-class Ravelian, though not a conventional one.
The most immediately striking attribute of his playing is that he avoids the overpedaling that pianists often use to evoke the sensuality and hazy Impressionism of Ravel's chromatic washes.
Instead, he shines a bright light into the music's textures, revealing its inner workings without stripping it of its mystery.
He makes the distinction between sentimentality and emotion, and although his readings often clash with a listener's expectations, their logic ultimately prevails.


Angry Commuters Snarl Virginia's Car-Pool Plan
Efforts to reduce rush-hour traffic have produced conflicts in many cities but none quite like the squabbling in the Washington area.
The dispute centers on car-pool lanes that the Virginia Department of Transportation established on a local toll road in the hope of encouraging ride-sharing and thus reducing congestion and pollution.


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows, performances and art exhibitions in the New York metropolitan region that are to close soon:
Closing This Weekend
"MAD FOREST," Manhattan Theater Club Stage I at City Center, 131 West 55th Street.
A drama by Caryl Churchill about the effects of the revolution on two Romanian families; directed by Mark Wing-Davey.
Through Sunday.
Performances: today at 8 P.M.; tomorrow at 2:30 and 8 P.M.; Sunday at 2:30 and 7 P.M.
Tickets: $35.
Information: (212) 581-1212.


Critic's Choice; Tradition And Nature In Tandem
Abdel R. Salaam is a choreographer with a special mission.
He founded his company, Forces of Nature, to explore the history, myths and accomplishments of the African Diaspora, in such a way as to draw in audiences of all ages and races.
A storyteller first and foremost, Mr.
Salaam is a thoughtful multi-culturalist.
His tales, which draw on African and American Indian traditions, are told in theater-dance that is an imaginative blend of jazz, ethnic and modern-dance forms.
This weekend, Forces of Nature celebrates its 10th anniversary with performances at Davis Hall at City College.
Tonight's program offers an overview of the company's full repertory, from "Rhythm Tree," a relatively abstract piece to music by Steve Reich, to "Ebony Magic," a look at the life and legend of Marie Laveau, the New Orleans voodoo priestess, and "Mud Below," an examination of the primal beginnings of magic, religion and culture as seen through traditional African and American Indian processes of divination.
Tomorrow, the company is to present the full-evening "Coming Forth by Day," Mr.
Salaam's interpretation of the ritual of resurrection depicted in the Egyptian Book of the Dead.


WASHINGTON SEEKS CONDITIONS ON PLAN FOR SOMALIA FORCE
Setting conditions on its offer to send troops to Somalia, the Bush Administration said today that the United States must retain command over them if it is to lead a United Nations mission to feed the starving country.
President Bush told his top advisers on Wednesday that the failure of a small United Nations contingent to insure the delivery of adequate supplies to starving people in Somalia left the United States with no recourse but to respond more aggressively to prevent more deaths.


Nagle's Problem, and Jets': Getting Into Game
In the confusion of a National Football League game, nothing unsettles an inexperienced quarterback as much as those first moments on the field.
Browning Nagle won't have to worry about them Sunday.
"I definitely tend to perform well after the first few series," the young quarterback said after being told he would be starting on the sideline Sunday, when the Jets (3-8) will play the Kansas City Chiefs (7-4) at Giants Stadium.
"It's a question of experience and knowing the teams and the schemes. As the game goes on, I do better."


U.S. Output Per Worker Is Growing
The nation's productivity has seen a much-needed growth spurt over the last 18 months, a compelling sign that the economic recovery is likely to endure.
After slipping for two years, productivity of American workers has been rising at a solid 2.6 percent annual rate.
Indeed, since the economy is believed to have grown during the summer at a faster rate than previously thought, productivity probably surged more than 3.5 percent in the third quarter.


Curtis Sliwa's Confession
Some people recognized Curtis Sliwa as a fraud from the beginning.
Why, then, did so many New Yorkers, normally savvy enough to spot publicity seekers, get taken in?
The answer, in a word, is fear.
By now admitting that he cynically exploited that fear, Mr.
Sliwa forfeits any further claims he may make on the public's respect.
Mr.
Sliwa's Guardian Angels, sporting red berets and tough attitudes, have swaggered through subway trains and along sidewalks for more than a decade.
The group enjoyed broad public support from its earliest days.


Why Single Out One Hospital for Operating-Room Deaths?
To the Editor:
Re "When Medicine Errs," your Nov. 12 special report on three deaths in Manhattan's Roosevelt Hospital:
You note that the New York State Department of Health investigated 36 cases of anesthesia-related deaths through mid-October, of more than one million times anesthesia was administered.
Of those 36 cases, you chose 3 that occurred at St.
Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital Center to focus on -- though "state officials stress they have no evidence that mistakes happen more often at this hospital . . . than at other city hospitals."


To Practice for 1994, A U.S. Cup Next June
When soccer officials soon announce the schedule for the ambitious United States Cup tournament in June, they will be unveiling a unique dress rehearsal for the World Cup, which will be coming to this country in 1994.
To test security, the national teams of England and Germany, with their sometimes troublesome supporters, have been invited.
To test the concept of indoor soccer, the Pontiac Silverdome has been selected as a host site for one match.


Woman, 74, Outdrives Carjackers, Police Say
A 74-year-old Queens woman driving alone to a Thanksgiving Dinner yesterday fought off two would-be carjackers who made five separate attempts to halt and commandeer her car, the Nassau County police reported.
The woman, Anne Stern of Forest Hills, told the police that the ordeal lasted about 20 minutes and included a wild car chase through the front lawns of a dozen suburban homes in Valley Stream, L.I.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-19  U.S.
FORCES FOR SOMALIA The Bush Administration said the United States must retain command over its ground troops if it is to lead a United Nations mission to feed starving people in Somalia.
A1  U.N.
CONSIDERING ACTION  The Secretary General will ask the Security Council next week to authorize the use of military force in Somalia to break the grip of feuding factions on the flow of aid.
A14  AIR OF DISQUIET IN SOMALIA  Aid workers were divided over whether military intervention would help aid shipments or further ignite chaos and bloodshed.
A14  CHRONICLE OF SAVAGERY IN BOSNIA  Three Serbian nationalist soldiers gave a chronicle of six months of the savage violence that has charaterized the Bosnian war.
A1  MACEDONIA TO GET AN OIL LINK  Bulgaria, closing its Black Sea ports to all oil shipments through Yugoslavia, agreed to allow delivery of oil by rail to Macedonia.
A12  YELTSIN DRAWS BATTLE LINES  President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia rebuffed opposition demands for major changes on policy and personnel, drawing political battle lines.
A13  QUEEN TO PAY TAXES  Breaking with tradition, Queen Elizabeth II will voluntarily pay tax on her private income and absorb more of the royal family's expenses.
A1  IRISH VOTE ON ABORTION  Ireland has apparently voted against a constitutional amendment that would have broadened the grounds for legal abortion, according to early returns.
A3  ARREST IN GERMAN FIREBOMBING  The police have arrested a 25-year-old man in connection with the firebombing that killed three Turkish citizens on Monday.
A3  DE KLERK SETS GOAL FOR VOTE  President F. W. de Klerk of South Africa announced his goal of conducting the country's first universal elections within 16 months.
A9  Angolan leaders and Unita agreed to honor the 1991 peace accords.
A8  Mitterrand speaks softly on visit to Israel.A5  Hatzeva Journal: In the Negev, a relay station is opposed.
A4  National A21-29, D17  RETOOLING THE WORK FORCE  A California program to retrain workers with outdated skills has helped 150,000 people and may serve as a model for nationwide plans to provide the type of workers experts say the nation needs in order to stand up to international competition.
A1  DOGPATCH U.S.A.
NO MORE  Arkansans are hoping the Clinton Presidency earns a measure of respect for their state, often dismissed as Dogpatch, U.S.A, the home of rubes and rednecks and not much else.
A20  PULLED FROM THE ABYSS  "There were several times when I just gave in to the fact that I was going to die," said one of the men whose helicopter crashed into the crater of a fuming volcano in Hawaii but survived to tell their story.
A20  PARAPLEGIC'S FIGHT  Ten medical schools have rejected James B. Post 4th in spite of his 3.922 grade point average, a strong record of extracurricular activities and glowing letters of recommendation.
Mr.
Post, a paraplegic, says he will not give up.
A21  ACCELERATOR FEELS MOON'S TUG  Small but troublesome fluctuations in the beams of electrons and positrons in the world's largest particle accelerator have been attributed to the moon's tidal pull.
A23  FIRES PUT SEATTLE ON GUARD  Seattle residents have organized neighborhood patrols in an effort to protect themselves and their property from a wave of arson that has caused 107 fires since August.
A25  A work tested the limits of a campus art show.
A27  A group planned a new effort to defy the ban on aid to Cuba.
A26  Residents of an island off Portland, Me., have seceded.
A28  Creating car-pool lanes on a Virginia toll road caused an uproar.
A29  Day-care center owners were convicted of sex abuse.
A24  Arizona and an Indian tribe reached an agreement over gambling.
A24  Law Page D18  The troubling sexual harassment case of a Postal Service employee.
At the Bar  Metro Digest B1  HARDSHIPS AND GRATITUDE  Given the cooking, football and other diversions that have become Thanksgiving traditions, gratitude can sometimes be an afterthought.
But for a group of immigrant families who have wrested homes from an abandoned building in the Bronx, gratitude was about the only thing not in short supply.
A1  KEEPING THE MALL SAFE  After several recent well-publicized crimes at shopping malls, many malls in the metropolitan region are increasing their uniformed security forces and developing elaborate surveillance systems.
A1  Business Digest D9  Weekend C1-33  A museum for children.
C1  Finding a favorite dish.
C1  Stories of Jelly Roll Morton.
C3  New York through the lens of a  Speed Graphic.
C8  For Children C27  Theater: On Stage, and Off C2  Music: Ravel piano works.
C10  Restaurants C18  Art: Gullah culture in pictures.
C1  "The Royal City of Susa," at the Met.
C3  Art in Review C23  A neglected modernist.
C27  The Art Market C32  Word and Image: "J. F. K.: Reckless Youth," by Nigel Hamilton.
C24  TV Weekend C32  Sports D1-8  Basketball: Knicks on feet for Bulls.
D2  Nets use feud for fuel against Lakers.
D2  Seton Hall's Wright emerging as force.
D2  Columns: Rhoden on college basketball.
D1  Lipsyte on Elizabeth High School.
D5  On Horse Racing D6  Football: Cowboys dismantle Giants.
D1  Toon calls it quits.
D1  Alabama wins as Auburn's Dye departs.
D3  Graham, a rookie, shows poise.
D4  Oilers beat Lions.
D4  Hockey: Rangers' top line erupts.
D5  Soccer: U.S. tournament scheduled before World Cup.
D6  Swimming: Epilogue of Notre Dame bus crash.
D1  Sports People D2  Obituaries D19  Dr.
William J. Campbell, meteorologist.
Editorials/Op-Ed A32-33  Editorials  Sell photos, not satellites.
Help the U.N. arm for peace.
Curtis Sliwa's confession.
Cleaning up environmental policy.
Letters  A. M. Rosenthal: A lonelier President.
Anthony Lewis: Closing our eyes?
Ileana Llosa: Profiles of Peru.


When Rights of Victims and Accused Collide
To the Editor:
"Victims' Rights Amendments Pass in 5 States" (news article, Nov. 8) fails to state the most serious reasons that passage of state constitutional amendments to create bills of rights for crime victims may threaten the criminal justice system.
To begin, the presentation of the victim to the court creates the risk that the victim's mere eloquence or social standing will unduly influence the jury or the judge.
It is entirely likely that the victim may be motivated by revenge or by the potential for financial gain, either in the criminal action or in a subsequent civil suit.


Sounds Around Town
Pat Metheny
Pat Metheny, Beacon Theater, 2124 Broadway, at 74th Street, (212) 496-7070.
The 37-year-old guitarist and composer's New York engagement is part of his "Secret Story" tour, in which he and his band perform selections from his new, sprawlingly ambitious album of the same name.
The record, produced by Geffen, is a global musical journey with a jazz-guitar base, sweetened with Hollywood orchestration and spiced with an array of musical colors that include Cambodian, Indian, Argentine, Japanese and Brazilian instrumentation.
Like all of Mr.
Metheny's work, the music is sunny and impressionistic but broken with wistfully romantic passages.
Shows are tonight and tomorrow night at 8; tickets are $25 and $30.
Arlo Guthrie
Arlo Guthrie, Carnegie Hall, (212) 247-7800.
Instead of Arlo Guthrie's usual Thanksgiving season concerts at Carnegie Hall, the folk singer will be joined this weekend, in the second half of his shows, by his brother and sister, their children and various other relatives.
Together they will perform Woody Guthrie's playful "Grow Big" songs for children.
Those songs, which include the verbally nonsensical "Howdy Doo" and the comic "Don't You Push Me Down," were originally written and recorded 40 years ago by Guthrie for his three children.
They were recently rerecorded to allow the family to sing along.
Shows are tonight and tomorrow night at 8; tickets are $15 to $22.


Cameramen Tell of Struggle and Fear in Volcano
Trapped in the crater of a volcano, choking on its noxious fumes, Chris Duddy and Michael Benson recall listening to the lava gurgle below them and resigning themselves to a gruesome death.
"There were several times when I just gave in to the fact that I was going to die," said Mr.
Duddy, a 31-year-old film technician who was filming the Pu'u 'O'o (pronounced POOH-ooh-Oh-oh) vent of the Kilauea Volcano from a helicopter when it crashed into the crater on Saturday morning.
"Emotionally I didn't think I could handle it." He managed to climb to safety the next day.


In Switch From Tradition, Queen Will Pay Taxes
Breaking with legal and royal tradition, Queen Elizabeth II will voluntarily pay tax on her private income and personally absorb a larger share of the public cost of the royal family's expenses, the Government declared today.
In what appeared to be a well-timed public relations initiative to defuse festering resentment over the royal wealth and life style among Britain's recession-weary public, Prime Minister John Major disclosed the Queen's proposals in a surprise statement this afternoon before the House of Commons.


Art in Review
'Fragile Ecologies'
Queens Museum of Art  Flushing Meadows-Corona Park  Through Jan. 10
"Fragile Ecologies" -- which inaugurates new and handsome galleries that are part of an ongoing three-year, $13.5 million renovation of the Queens Museum of Art -- is an honorable and serious event that ultimately resembles a science fair more than an art show.
It brings together material documenting the work of a dozen ecology-minded artists, or artist groups.
The work involves recycling projects, parks and toxic-cleanup sites.


In Swank Shops, Lebanon Seeks the Gougers
Lebanese involved in business were shaken this week after Government inspectors backed by police escorts raided and closed a number of exclusive stores in the capital, accusing them of defrauding the public.
The raids were videotaped and shown on television.
Stunned shopkeepers with their jaws dropping and their eyes staring in surprise were reprimanded by police officers for failing to show proper invoices for their merchandise and for overpricing.


CHRONICLE
With the persistence of an archeologist, a George Gershwin scholar has dug up rare old player piano rolls of Gershwin arrangements during a lengthy worldwide search.
And now, there are plans to make the rare works available on compact disk by next year.
"There were literally hundreds of collectors I called," said ARTIS WODEHOUSE, the Gershwin scholar.
"It's very serendipitous to find things like this."


Beekeepers Face a Myriad Of Challenges
Members of the Empire State Honey Producers wanted to sweeten their morning oatmeal during a recent conference here.
So Fred Thompson dashed out the restaurant door and returned with a jar of honey.
If the beekeepers in New York, New Jersey and Connecticut could only solve the rest of their problems with such ease.
Experts and beekeepers at the conference said the industry is facing some of the toughest challenges in recent memory.


People
*
William P. Hogue was named to the new position of vice president and director of promotion and communications at Magazine Publishers of America, New York.
Mr.
Hogue had been corporate promotion director at Gruner &amp; Jahr U.S.A.
Publishing, New York. *
Nicholas H. Niles was named president of The Sporting News Publishing Co. and publisher of The Sporting News, New York, succeeding Thomas G. Osenton, who will work on special projects for parent Times Mirror Magazines.
Mr.
Niles was previously executive vice president of Springhouse Publishing, Springhouse, Pa.


Art in Review
Annie Leibovitz
James Danziger Gallery  415 West Broadway (near Spring Street)  SoHo  Through Dec. 5
Annie Leibovitz is somewhat of a stylistic chameleon.
In her celebrity portraits for Vanity Fair, recent examples of which are presented here, she eschews the sort of signature style based on lighting or composition that Hollywood portraitists relied on in the 1930's and 40's.
Instead, she employs her own considerable imagination, often with suggestions from her sitters, to stage pictures using distinctive props and intriguing poses.


Market Place; A Bright Outlook For Reinsurers
WITH hurricanes, a typhoon and a riot, this has not been a great year for the insurance industry.
So, as the claims stemming from all these troubles weigh down insurers and reinsurers, who would pick now to take one of these companies public?
Try Kohlberg, Kravis, Roberts &amp; Company, the New York buyout firm that purchased the American Re Corporation two months ago in a $1.4 billion buyout.
The timing of the offering of 24 percent of the reinsurance company, which essentially acts as an insurer for insurance companies, is not as irrational as it might appear.
Indeed, Kohlberg, Kravis may be muttering thanks for the natural disasters, because they seem to have improved the prospects for higher profits.


Art in Review
Markus Raetz
Brooke Alexander Gallery  59 Wooster Street, near Broome Street  SoHo  Through Dec. 30
Markus Raetz's art takes the form of a perceptual sleight of hand.
A bit of bent copper wire attached to the wall becomes the outline of a man's profile when reflected in the angled mirror hung beside it.
Two squat beaker-shaped forms drawn on a sheet of cast plaster are transformed into the image of a wine glass and bottle as the viewer changes position within the gallery.


In Curriculum Fight, an Unlikely Catalyst
Her supporters describe her as deeply committed and devoutly religious, a dynamic woman who has taken a stand against New York City's Board of Education and what she calls "Sodom on the Hudson" to protect wholesome, traditional values for the schoolchildren of Queens.
Her critics call her deluded and homophobic, an intransigent conservative demagogue who has foisted her religious views on others, fomented hostility and disrupted the educational process at a time when it already faces enormous burdens.


Letter: On the Baltics; Minority Rights and Dreams of Empire
To the Editor:
"How to Protect Baltic Minorities" (editorial, Nov. 17) states that all three Baltic states "have enacted laws and language requirements that infringe on minority rights," and suggests that these could be rolled back to induce withdrawal of the Russian troops still stationed in these countries.


Islanders Lose Timidly To the Bruising Flyers
In a long game made up of many short moments, two instances of intimidation underscored why the Flyers beat the Islanders, 6-3, at the Spectrum this afternoon.
In the first incident, late in the second period, Claude Boivin of the Flyers bowled over Glenn Healy, who had replaced Mark Fitzpatrick as the Islanders' goaltender early in the first period.
In hockey, the act of plowing a defenseless goalie is a little like a knockdown pitch in baseball or roughing a quarterback in football.
It is sometimes done to see how an opponent will react.
In hockey's old days, the appropriate response might have been a bench-clearing brawl.


Corrections
The Personal Health column on Nov. 18 about lead poisoning in children referred incorrectly to Beverly Mielke.
Although she was exposed to lead in 1984, when she was 3 years old, she suffered no permanent damage.
Her exposure was discovered early and the source of the lead, a sandbox, was decontaminated.


Classical Music in Review
'Homage to Robert Casadesus' Florence Gould Hall


Checking Bills Carefully To Catch Costly Errors
ARTHUR J. DRECHSLER, senior vice president of the Segal Company, an employee benefits consulting firm based in New York, remembers a maternity case from last year.
"The patient got a bill with just a code on it," he said.
"We checked the code and it was for total obstetric care with a charge of $4,225. But the doctor only gave pre-delivery care that costs $98."


Q &amp; A
Higher Guaranteed Interest
Q Now that returns on many certificates of deposit have fallen to the 3 percent level, where can investors get a better rate of interest but still get a guaranteed return of their money?
WILL BRIDGER, HILTON HEAD, S.C.
Treasury bills are short-term Government securities that often yield as much as or more than most short-term certificates of deposit.
William K. Joseph, a senior vice president of Shearson Lehman Brothers, said: "They are safer than any bank C.D.'s and free from state and local taxes. But if you sell a bill before maturity, there is the potential for either gain or loss."


Jeeves? Bertie's Father? Nothing but Rot
To the Editor:
In "Jeeves Unmasked. Finally. Maybe" (Op-Ed, Nov. 14), Charles Rembar is wrong about Bertie Wooster's parentage.
Apparently, Mr.
Rembar bases his conclusion solely on the Jeeves novels, where Bertie is clearly an orphan.
However, Bertie's family history is amplified somewhat in the short stories.


Hawley Earns 6,000th Career Victory
SANDY HAWLEY reached 6,000 career victories on Thursday when he guided Sivankey and Summer Commander to victories in the first two races at Greenwood in Toronto.
"I really wanted to get 6,000 at home," the 43-year-old native of Oshawa, Ontario, said afterward.
"I was in the United States when I hit 5,000 and I made a note then that if I got this close to 6,000 I was going to be in Toronto when I did it."


Elderly Couple Die in Attack With Ice Pick
An elderly couple, expected for Thanksgiving dinner with their family in Manhattan, were found stabbed to death Thursday night in their West Orange, N.J., home, law-enforcement officials said.
Michael Krieger, 81 years old, and his wife, Betty, 78, were found dead, each stabbed several times in the chest with an ice pick, when West Orange police went to their home at 14 Mallon Avenue about 6:30 P.M. on Thursday, the acting Essex County Prosecutor, James F. Mulvihill, said last night.


Artist of the Possible; Brenda Bacon, in Trenton Vortex
Like everyone else involved in restructuring New Jersey's health care system for the uninsured, Brenda Bacon, who as Chief of Management and Planning for the State of New Jersey was one of its chief architects, is not happy with the new plan, which goes to a vote in the Legislature on Monday.
"This is the best package that can be accomplished, given all the circumstances," she said in an interview in the cabinet room just off the Governor's office this week.
"We had to deal with the Federal court decision, we had to deal with a Legislature that is totally tax averse and we had to deal with a crisis in how health care is delivered in this state and this country. We can all sit down and design a perfect system on paper, but it isn't going to be reality."


Women in Irish Parliament Vow a Fight Over Abortions
Two days after an election and a national referendum on abortion, women elected to the new Irish Parliament said today that they would press the legislature to reconsider liberalization of the nation's abortion law.
In the voting on Wednesday, two proposals to relax abortion laws were approved but a third was defeated, leaving this predominantly Roman Catholic country divided on the issue.


Russian Parliament Calls for Economic Shift
The Russian legislature today called on Acting Prime Minister Yegor T. Gaidar to amend his latest economic program, thus delivering a last-minute rebuke to the Government as it prepares for next week's gathering of the Congress of People's Deputies.
The Parliament's overwhelming vote, 135 to 14, reflected dissatisfaction with a report given by Mr.
Gaidar on Thursday, which some members of the centrist opposition saw as a betrayal of a joint effort to coordinate economic policies on the eve of the Congress.


Dinkins Campaign Finds New Sources of Financial Support on Wall Street
When Mayor David N. Dinkins is host of a fund-raising dinner for his re-election campaign on Monday, several Wall Street business leaders who have not been big supporters of the Mayor in the past will be at the forefront of the finance drive, campaign officials said.
The Dinkins campaign says that is because the Mayor has improved his relations with the business community, but a top aide of one of Mr.
Dinkins's likely opponents maintains that most of the contributors are bond underwriters who do business with the city.


Jeweler Decapitated And Son Is Arrested
A 40-year-old jeweler was slain, mutilated and decapitated in his apartment in Manhattan's diamond district yesterday, and the police later charged his son in the killing.
A cat, a parakeet and several animal statues in the apartment were also found decapitated.
The victim, Mahmoud Bayat, who owned a booth at National Jewelry Exchange, at 8 West 47th Street, was found dead in his 12th-floor apartment at 55 West 47th Street at 8:56 A.M. by a doorman who saw the son, Hamid Raza Bayat, 19, drop bloody knives and a razor in the lobby as he left.


William Gunn, 31, Police Officer Shot in 1989 Hunt for a Gunman
William T. Gunn, a New York City police officer who had been in a coma since he was shot pursuing a murder suspect almost four years ago, died yesterday at the Skilled Nursing Facility of Franklin Hospital Medical Center in Valley Stream, L.I.
He was 31 years old.
Officer Gunn, who had joined the Police Department in 1982, was shot on Jan. 20, 1989, as he and two other plainclothes officers tried to capture a suspect wanted for questioning in two homicides.


For Handley, Leftovers From Thursday's Loss
If his time is slowly running out, Coach Ray Handley says he does not think about it.
But four weeks from the end of a Giants season that is crumbling, there might be little else left to do except consider the future.
Many of the Giants conceded Thursday night that their playoff hopes were essentially gone, and Handley, their beleaguered coach, said today that he was not likely to invoke any discussion about the post-season in coming days.
So what's left?


Somali Aid Plan Is Called Most Ambitious Option
In offering to send American military forces to Somalia to help deliver food and other aid, President Bush chose the most ambitious of three options presented to him, senior officials said today.
The decision, which marks a potential turning point in American policy toward the famine-stricken country, followed three weeks of intense deliberations within the Bush Administration over the growing difficulty of delivering relief supplies that culminated in a critical National Security Council meeting at the White House on Wednesday.


Clinton Chats With Reagan, Then Heads Out to the Mall
In a gesture of good manners that was also good politics, President-elect Bill Clinton came here today to drink coffee and chat with a man he spent the last year depicting as the founding father of just about everything wrong with America.
Mr.
Clinton's visit with former President Ronald Reagan opened a four-day vacation trip to Southern California by the President-elect, his wife, Hillary, and their daughter, Chelsea, who will all spend the weekend at the Summerland house of the television producers Harry Thomason and Linda Bloodworth-Thomason.
But it also set the tone for a day that Mr.
Clinton's aides described as devoted to courtesy calls but that doubled as state-of-the-Presidential-art politicking.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
7.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
4.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.37
4.60
4.87
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.23
3.22
4.36
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.45
3.42
4.40
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.57
6.47
6.94
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.59
7.53
7.93
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.60
8.50
8.94
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.40
6.40
6.90
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


No Headline
When customers aren't feeling good about things, they'll pick an item up and throw it down so that by the end of the day, the store looks like a cyclone hit it.
The stores I've been in today didn't get so wrecked.
It'll be an easy recovery job tonight. -- THOMAS SHEA, a Kmart district manager.  [ 44:2. ]


CHRONICLE
Is there no end to the number of things that can go wrong for QUEEN ELIZABETH II?
At a luncheon Tuesday to celebrate the 40th anniversary of her reign, she described 1992 as a horrible year.
Now a tribute titled "Happy and Glorious" that was to be presented on Monday at the Haymarket Theater in London has been canceled because of the death of its producer, Martin Tickner.
The show, featuring John Gielgud, Anthony Hopkins, Joan Plowright and others doing material by Noel Coward, Shakespeare and others, was to be a lighthearted look at the last four decades.


INSIDE
Venezuela Rebels Repulsed
Rebellious units of Venezuela's Air Force, supported by leftist groups, tried to overthrow the Government but were repulsed by armed forces loyal to the President.
Page 3.
Personal Income Surges
Americans' personal income grew at its fastest clip in 10 months during October, and consumer spending posted a healthy gain.
Page 33.
Japan to Store Plutonium
The Japanese Government said it would be forced to store more than a ton of plutonium it will receive in a sea shipment from Europe.
Page 3.


Revise, Revise: Manuscript Tells It All
A powerful lesson for readers, writers and editors leaps off the pages of the precious manuscripts in "The One Bright Book of Life: Novels in Manuscript," the Berg Collection's new exhibition at the New York Public Library.
From Nathaniel Hawthorne and Charles Dickens to Virginia Woolf and Saul Bellow, the lesson goes: writing is rewriting, leaving out more than putting in, always trying to simplify and clarify.
As the visitor moves from one glass case to the next, viewing some of the greatest works of fiction in American and British literature in manuscript and galley form, the single unifying link is revision.
Nearly all the novels are from the days of pen and ink and paper, with an occasional typescript, but never, never an impersonal computer printout.


Drinking Might Have Prompted Sexual Advances, Senator Says
In the wake of reports that he made unwanted sexual advances toward several women, Senator Bob Packwood of Oregon issued a statement today saying he had come to the understanding that he needs professional advice to see if the incidents were related to his use of alcohol.
Mr.
Packwood, one of the Senate's most senior Republicans, won re-election only days before The Washington Post reported that at least 10 women were willing to give specific accounts of sexual misconduct by the Senator.


COMPANY BRIEFS
DAWSON INTERNATIONAL, London, bought the specialist knitwear company Edina Ronay for an undisclosed sum.
ETHYL CORP., Richmond, plans to buy Mitsubishi Kasei Corp.'s petroleum additive business to expand its marketing activities in Japan.


CHRONICLE
H.
PETER KRIENDLER, a former owner of the "21" Club, and his wife, Jeannette, owned dachshunds almost from the day they were wed 58 years ago.
So when Mr.
Kriendler, widely known as Pete, decided he wanted to do something to honor the memory of his wife, who died last December, he chose to install a fountain in Central Park that would, he said "be good for humans and for doggies."
Next Sunday, after attending a memorial service at Temple Emanu-El, Mr.
Kriendler and 30 or so friends and relatives will go to Central Park at Fifth Avenue and 90th Street to unveil what he calls the "Friedel fountain." Friedel was the name of each of the five dachshunds the Kriendlers owned over the years.


This Tie Was a Steal For Rangers
The Rangers knew they were lucky.
They admitted it.
Two nights after blowing out the league-leading Penguins, the Rangers struggled to a 4-4 tie against the Minnesota North Stars.
The game belonged to the North Stars.
And if any Ranger didn't know how Minnesota Coach Bob Gainey felt about the result, all they had to do was listen to him screaming in the hallway outside the officials' room.
With the North Stars leading by 4-3 midway through the third period, Derian Hatcher was called for a major high-sticking penalty against Joe Kocur that gave the Rangers a five-minute power play.
Twenty-seven seconds later, Tony Amonte scored his second goal to tie the game and eventually send it into overtime.


It's Easy, Rudolph. Just Take a Right at the Empire State Building.


Japan Says Technical Problems Will Force Storage of Plutonium
The Japanese Government, conceding that technical problems are compounding the political headaches triggered by its sea shipment of more than a ton of plutonium from Europe, said today that despite its pledges not to stockpile plutonium, it would be forced to store it for at least three years.
For the last year, the Government has told critics of its multibillion-dollar breeder reactor program that it would only keep as much plutonium on hand as it could burn.
Because the plutonium can be used to fabricate crude nuclear weapons, opposition groups have complained that a stockpile of plutonium would pose both an environmental risk and a temptation.


U.N. Weighs Terms by U.S. For Sending Somalia Force
The United States has given the United Nations Secretary General a difficult decision to make by saying its offer to contribute a substantial military force for a new relief operation in Somalia also requires that Washington take command of the exercise.
While the American presence in Somalia would be justified by a new Security Council resolution authorizing the use of force and inviting other countries to contribute troops as well, it is clear that the Bush Administration envisions an essentially American-run military operation to insure that food reaches starving people and is no longer looted by factions fighting for control of the famine-ravaged country.


Caracas Derails Coup by Air Force Units
Rebellious units of Venezuela's Air Force, supported by leftist groups, tried to overthrow the Government of President Carlos Andres Perez today but were repulsed by armed forces loyal to the President.
After a morning of rebel air attacks on his office complex in the center of the capital, President Perez said at mid-afternoon that the situation was "under control."


Japanese Officially Reaffirm Support of Rice Import Ban
Japan's Government said today that the nation would fight to maintain its ban on the import of rice, a stance that may threaten to disrupt world trade talks.
But after the official position was stated, Japan's Foreign Minister seemed to leave the door open for a compromise, sending a subtle signal to the country's rice farmers that protectionism that could harm Japan's trading relationships may not be sustainable.


Observer; Time To Refit
Sullen, yes.
I can look sullen.
What I cannot look is sultry sullen.
That's how the male clothes horses look: sultry sullen.
It is the fashionable way for men to look this year.
The male-fashion ads insist.
The sultriness of the sullenness of these fashion-ad men defeats me.
It's because I lack fat lips.
These male models have richly fleshy lips perfect for sultry pouting.
With lean lips, looking sultry is out of the question.


Fit and 57, So Piggott Will Ride Again
LESTER PIGGOTT says he is ready to ride again.
The 57-year-old jockey survived a serious fall at the Breeders' Cup last month at Gulfstream Park.
"I feel fine and I could ride next week, but there are no horses for me, and it's a bit cold," Piggott said yesterday in London.
"I haven't actually fixed a time when I will return. It just depends when I am made some offers to ride horses."


Booking Hotel Rooms: Guests Find It's a Buyer's Market
Like sticker prices on cars, posted hotel rates (called "rack rates") bear only a passing relationship to reality.
To get any of the widely available discounts, prospective guests must ask the right questions before they book a room.
The first thing the customer should know is that a recent study by D. K. Shifflet &amp; Associates, a marketing consulting and research group in McLean, Va., found that consumers now expect lodging discounts of at least 25 percent.
The next thing to know is that they usually get them.


Corrections
The Art Market column in Weekend yesterday misstated the day of a service at the Museum of Modern Art to show concern about AIDS in connection with Day Without Art, which is Tuesday.
The service will be at 6:30 P.M. on Monday in the Garden Hall at the museum.


Classical Music in Review
John Holloway and Davitt Moroney Violinist and harpsichordist Frick Collection


The Top 10 in the Popular Growth Family
A growth fund, which normally invests in a diversified group of companies whose earnings are expected to outpace average profits, is often thought of as the quintessential mutual fund.
Certainly growth funds are the most popular.
There are 346 funds in the group, more than in any other equity group, and they have 30 percent of all equity fund assets.


Washington's New Wimp Factor
TV Guide faxed me a query last week.
The question: Please tell us what baby Maggie Simpson's first words will be.
I faxed back: "Hail Hillary!" Whether or not the enfant terrible of "The Simpsons" is as excited as I am about the prospect of the new First Lady remains to be seen.
But after reading hundreds of newspaper inches fretting about Hillary Clinton's arrival in Washington and listening to numerous TV pundits stew over her wifely influence, I was beginning to feel like a bird without feathers.
Then I realized that most of the wailing was coming from men.
Still, I don't understand why Robert Novak, John McLaughlin and others act like troglodytes on the subject of Mrs.
Clinton, blustering about her ominous "political agenda." Did these men honestly feel more secure with Dan Quayle a heartbeat away from the Presidency than with Hillary Clinton living in the White House?


Review/Pop; 5-Band Colombian Party Works Too Well
Not long after 1 A.M., the Fire Department pulled the plug because of overcrowding, but until then, the Colombian party last Saturday night at Roseland was doing just fine.
Featuring five Colombian bands playing everything from salsa to cumbia, and meant to go from 9 at night to 5 the next morning, the concert was a way for Colombians in New York to have a party.
Dressed with Saturday night in mind, the audience, ranging in age from the 20's to the 60's, packed tables stocked with the standard bottle of Scotch; they were clearly reproducing something they had left behind.
Dancing was the point, but the rituals were radically different from those of an American dance concert: the music was secondary, there just to support the dancing.


Chivalry in Blue
To the Editor:
These troubled times, we mostly hear of police brutality in New York City.
However, the following happened Oct. 31, a Saturday.
Another woman and I were returning home from the theater on West 43d Street when a young police officer approached us and asked where we were going.
"To take the Queens express bus on Sixth Avenue and 42d Street," we told him.
He said, "Then I will escort you." He walked with us to within a block of the bus.
Who says chivalry is dead?
ALICE CHODOSH Flushing, Queens, Nov. 13, 1992


Seton Hall Falls Short In the N.I.T.
Perhaps the greatest challenge facing the Indiana and Seton Hall basketball players in the weeks ahead will be coming down from their tournament-like clash at Madison Square Garden last night.
In a game marked by early-season flaws but played with late-season intensity, Indiana outlasted Seton Hall, 78-74, to win the championship of the seventh preseason National Invitation Tournament.


Knicks Hoping to Be Matinee Matadors
Only five current Knicks played in last year's memorable seven-game playoff series against the Chicago Bulls.
And in the aftermath of the sweeping changes the Knicks have made since then, it remains to be seen how well this year's team matches up against the N.B.A.'s two-time defending champions.
On Saturday afternoon, in front of a sellout crowd at Madison Square Garden, the new-look Knicks will get their first test against the team they want to dethrone.
How will Rolando Blackman fare against Michael Jordan?
How much will the Knicks miss Xavier McDaniel's physical play against Scottie Pippen?
The season is very young, but the answer to these questions will begin to take shape.


Some Gift-Wrapped Presidential Advice


Why a Single Court for Patents Isn't Enough
To the Editor:
In "Rich in the 90's on Ideas Hatched in the 50's" (front page, Nov. 13), you report on Jerome H. Lemelson, who might be termed a patent terrorist: armed with patents he has never exploited, he takes multinationals hostage by threatening to sue them if they do not ransom his patent claims.
But you overlook the two real sources of this "problem."


Political Memo; Glancing Over His Shoulder, Clinton Watches Perot Tide
Just as Ross Perot managed to reshape the 1992 Presidential campaign merely by hovering around its edges, his shadow is now influencing the emerging strategy of the Clinton Administration.
Mr.
Perot is back in Texas, quiet for the moment, and the potential power of his backers, who are reorganizing themselves, is still uncertain.
But aides to President-elect Bill Clinton are acutely aware that one in five voters chose Mr.
Perot, whose backers have already warned that they intend to lobby the Clinton White House for their programs.


News Summary
International 3-6  HOPEFUL SIGN IN SOMALIA
In a rare conciliatory gesture, the leader of one of the principal factions in the fighting in Somalia said he welcomed an American initiative to protect relief convoys.  1  TOUGH CALL FOR THE U.N.
The United States decision on Somalia has given the United Nations Secretary General a difficult decision by requiring that Washington take command of the exercise.  6  BUSH SAID TO HAVE OPTIONS
Senior United States officials said President Bush chose the most ambitious of three options presented to him in offering to send American military forces to Somalia.  6  GERMANY BANS NEO-NAZI GROUP
Responding to the outcry against anti-foreigner violence, Germany announced it is banning a neo-Nazi group, the first such ban since the country was unified.  1  MISSILES FIRED BY MISTAKE
An American aircraft carrier fired two missiles at a Turkish destroyer last month when American soldiers, awakened late at night, mistook a drill for an actual attack.  1  THE ABORTION ISSUE IN IRELAND
Two days after an election and a national referendum on abortion, women elected to the new Irish Parliament said they would seek liberalization of the abortion law.  4  COUP ATTEMPT IN VENEZUELA
Rebellious units of Venezuela's Air Force, supported by leftist groups, tried to overthrow the Government but were repulsed by loyal forces.  3  BALKAN REFUGEES AT HOME
Serbia has taken in over 600,000 of the more than two million refugees the Balkan civil war has created and has lodged some 96 percent of them with families in their private homes.  4  REBUKE TO RUSSIAN LEADERS
The Russian legislature called on the Acting Prime Minister to amend his economic program.  3  Vienna Journal: Fears of social and economic turbulence.  4  National 7-9  PEROT'S LONG SHADOW
Political Memo: Just as Ross Perot managed to reshape the 1992 Presidential campaign merely by hovering around its edges, so his shadow is now influencing emerging strategy of the Clinton Administration.  1  THE ONCE AND FUTURE PRESIDENTS
Opening a four-day vacation visit to Southern California, the President-elect chatted amiably with former President Reagan, the man he had spent the last year denouncing as the founding father of much that was wrong with America.  7 HOLIDAY SHOPPERS ARE IN NO RUSH
On the busiest shopping day of the year, consumers across the country were out in force.
But many were just looking.  1  THE ALASKAN HEALTH CRISIS
Any number of Alaskan villages have all the conveniences of modern American life except one: toilets.
And that lack is the reason for one of the nation's most poignant public health problems.  1  PACKWOOD CITES USE OF ALCOHOL
Senator Packwood, accused of making repeated sexual advances against women, said he would seek professional help to determine whether those incidents were related to his drinking.
He also said he would ask the Senate Ethics Committee to investigate the case and would cooperate fully.  9  RESPONSE TO AN EPIDEMIC
Salvador Gamberella is only 28 years old, and his crime will cost him 20 years in prison at most.
But in reality that punishment will likely prove to be a life sentence.
Mr.
Gamberella is the first person convicted under a Louisiana law that makes it a felony to knowingly transmit the AIDS virus.  7  Beliefs: Governor Fordice and Thanksgiving's diversity.  8  The Government abandoned a fight over cryptography books.  8  A long-haired Texas boy won the right to sue his school district.  8  Metro Digest 21  NEW LANGUAGE DEBATE IN SCHOOLS
In a debate that could shape the future of thousands of immigrant children, educators are deliberating over whether Jamaican, Guyanese and other Caribbean students should be entitled to schooling in English as a second language, or English as a second dialect.  1  Business Digest 33  Obituaries 10  Sir Hugh Walter Kingwell Wontner, a British hotelier.
William T. Gunn, a New York City police officer.
Maybe?
Haitian refugees: Don't panic.
A sterner test for tests.
Letters  Russell Baker: Time to refit.
Stephen E. Ambrose: Revive Roosevelt's C.C.C.
Zachary Margulis: Blood and ink in Mexico.
Kitty Kelley: Washington's new wimp factor.
Howard Altstein: Rescuing Romania's orphans.


CHRONICLE
PRINCESS STEPHANIE of Monaco gave birth to a son Thursday at 10:10 P.M. in Princess Grace Hospital in Monte Carlo, the Associated Press reported yesterday.
The infant weighed 6 pounds 8 ounces and was named Louis, after his great-great-grandfather.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
Consumers thronged to stores and malls on the first day of the crucial shopping season between Thanksgiving and Christmas.
But despite the large crowds, there was a sense that people were not rushing to buy gifts.
And many of those who did buy were doing business at discount stores or picking up items on sale.  [ Page 1. ]
Americans' personal income grew 1 percent in October, the fastest rise in 10 months, and consumer spending posted a healthy gain of 0.7 percent.
Analysts cautioned, however, that the figures overstated the rise because of a number of one-time factors.  [ 33. ] Markets
Investors poured money into stock mutual funds in November, and the industry's net cash inflow in 1992 is likely to be its highest ever.
Figures show that October was reasonably good for stock funds but the worst month in nearly two years for bond funds.  [ 33. ]
Stock prices moved higher, as Wall Street ended a week of solid gains.
The Dow Jones industrial average rose 15.94 points, to 3,282.20, a gain of 54.84 for the week.
A number of indexes that measure the broader market hit record highs.  [ 33. ]
Treasury bond prices fell in reaction to the unexpectedly strong rises in personal income and spending.
But analysts cautioned that the thinness of post-holiday trading made for volatile prices, which may not indicate long-term market trends.  [ 41. ]
The dollar ended firmer in a quiet session, helped by both technical factors and fresh signs of economic strength.  [ 42. ]
Copper futures prices bounded higher.
The value of copper often moves up with improvements in the economy. [ 42. ] International
Japan's Government said it would not relax its ban on rice imports.
But then it sent a subtle signal to its rice farmers that protectionism that could harm the nation's trading relationships may not be sustainable.
Japan's ban on rice imports could become an obstacle to a new global trading treaty.  [ 33. ]
OPEC reached a new production accord that provides for a cut in total output of perhaps 400,000 barrels daily, or about 2 percent.
Oil prices are expected to inch a bit higher.
The deal reflects the production of 12 members, as Ecuador withdrew from OPEC.  [ 34. ] Companies
British Airways was given clearance by the European Community executive commission for its proposed purchase of a 49.9 percent stake in the small French regional carrier TAT.
The British carrier agreed to conditions meant to assure that competition is not reduced by the linkup.  [ 35. ]
A former investment banker was acquitted of conspiracy and fraud charges arising out of the marathon Guinness fraud trial.
The case against Lord Spens was one of several stemming from the 1986 takeover of a Scotch whisky company, Distillers, by the brewing giant Guinness.  [ 35. ]
The Dabah family filed petitions under Chapter 11 of the Federal Bankruptcy Code.
The family is the largest shareholder in Gitano, although the clothing company itself was not involved in the bankruptcy filings.  [ 35. ]
The civil war in Yugoslavia has forced an end to production of the humble Yugo automobile, costing tens of thousands of jobs.
Now the factory makes little more than rifles and pistols.  [ 35. ] Your Money
Certain prosperous couples should use life insurance to insure that their heirs will have enough liquidity to pay estate taxes.
This approach is particularly recommended for couples with estates in the range of $2 million to $3 million.  [ 31. ]
Monthly brokerage statements usually lack numbers that let an investor see instantly whether each security is a winner or a loser or that show the total cost of maintaining the account.  [ 31. ]
Medical bills should be scrutinized carefully.
One report said that as many as 95 percent of hospital bills contained errors.  [ 32. ]


Robert N. Gilmore Jr., Lawyer, 79
Robert N. Gilmore Jr., senior vice president for legal affairs and general counsel for the American Insurance Association, died yesterday at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in New York.
He was 79 and lived in West Islip, L.I.
He died of cancer, said his son Robert N. Gilmore 3d.


Few Shoppers Say 3% Tax Lures Them to New Jersey
John Nicholson, a psychiatrist from the Bronx who now lives in Saratoga Springs, N.Y., was standing in the parking lot of the Ikea home furnishings store, tying two bookcases to the roof of his car.
"As I was driving here I heard about it," said Dr.
Nicholson, who like many out-of-state shoppers had come to the New York-New Jersey metropolitan area for the Thanksgiving holiday.
"If I was still living in Riverdale, I'd be out here all the time."


Teaching Compassion In Theater Of Death
"HOW many of you have never yet had to tell people that a relative has died?" asked Dr.
Edgar Lichstein, the chairman of the department of medicine at the Maimonides Medical Center in Brooklyn.
All of the 60 interns and residents indicated that they had.
"Well, it never gets easy; you never get good at it," Dr.
Lichstein said, introducing a program he had established to help new doctors communicate more effectively and compassionately with patients and their families.


Sports of The Times; The N.F.L.'s Quiet Career Killer
PRO football players seldom retire during the season.
They usually decide after it's over or when training camp is about to begin.
But yesterday the other Jets were downstairs in their locker room after practicing for tomorrow's game with the Kansas City Chiefs when Al Toon walked up behind the microphone in the second-floor auditorium of Weeb Ewbank Hall.
"I didn't expect to be here so soon," he said with that soft smile.


Down the Field, Up the Court: Ward Is a Leader for 2 Teams
Last fall, when Charlie Ward was still something of a secret, the quarterback coach at Florida State searched for the words to sum up his expectations for Ward.
After some prodding and suggestions, the coach, Mark Richt, found the proper frame of reference and concluded, "He's like Jim Kelly with feet."


Income, Spending Up Sharply
Americans' personal income grew at its fastest clip in 10 months during October, and consumer spending posted a healthy gain, the Government reported yesterday.
The Commerce Department said incomes grew 1 percent, to a seasonally adjusted $5.13 trillion, in October, the biggest gain since December 1991, when incomes rose 1.2 percent.
The gain last month followed a half-point increase during September.


Critic's Notebook; A Different Drummer Retreats From the Beat
After the second performance of Philip Glass's "Low" Symphony at the Brooklyn Academy of Music, the composer spoke to the audience about building the symphony on themes from a rock album, David Bowie's "Low." He said that when he heard Mr.
Bowie's album, he thought: "I can do something with this. I can take it a step further."
That's a musician's reflex, shared by hip-hoppers who grab a favorite riff and by classical composers who think they can enhance the ephemeral products of popular culture.
Centuries ago, when medieval church composers used folk tunes as the foundations for Masses, the compositions not only stood on their own merits but also helped preserve unwritten melodies.
In the era of recording, however, brutal comparisons are possible between not-so-naive popular works and supposedly sophisticated classical spinoffs.
With the "Low" Symphony, the comparison is not in Mr.
Glass's favor.


Why a Single Court for Patents Isn't Enough; Excluding, Not Making
To the Editor:
You lend credence to a serious misconception in "There's Cash in Mining the Courts," your Nov. 9 Patents column.
"It used to be that people obtained patents for the purpose of enjoying an exclusive right to make or sell their inventions," you state.
This is not true.
Furthermore, it has never been true.


What Governor Said and Meant on the Crown Heights Verdict
To the Editor:
Even if one shares the undisguised political bias about the criminal justice system of William M. Kunstler and Ronald L. Kuby, it would be impossible to find truth or logic in their misplaced criticism of Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo's statements regarding the case of Yankel Rosenbaum's murder.
In "Not the King Case" (letter, Nov. 14), they repeatedly and falsely state that the Governor both impugned the jury's verdict and inappropriately compared it to the verdict in the Rodney King beating case.


Bridge
Two players who had never before played a deal as partners captured the prestigious Blue Ribbon Pairs title at the American Contract Bridge League's Fall Nationals here Thursday night.
Adam Wildavsky of Jackson Heights, Queens, a 32-year-old computer consultant, and Haig Tchamitch of Thornhill, Ontario, a 41-year-old who came from Lebanon to Canada 16 years ago to study public health, won by slightly more than one board after scoring almost 68 percent in the final session.
In second place were two junior players, Brad Moss and Ravindra Murthy of Berkeley, Calif., who had led almost throughout the event.
Moss, at 21, is believed to be the youngest player to finish first or second in the 30-year history of the event.


Shoppers Fill Stores, but Many Are Just Looking
Glenda Harry arrived at the A &amp; S Plaza in Manhattan yesterday at 8:30 A.M.
But she hadn't come to do her Christmas shopping; she came to sign up for a contest to win $1,000, sponsored by the mall's operator, the Simon Management Company.
On the day after Thanksgiving, the busiest shopping day of the year, consumers thronged shopping areas from Herald Square in New York to State Street in Chicago to Union Square in San Francisco.
Although many were just looking, strolling through stores, checking prices and searching for gift ideas and good deals, retailers were delighted and relieved by the turnout.


Of Antoine Busnoys
Pomerium Musices, an early-music choir, is to perform in the Music Before 1800 series tomorrow at 4 P.M. at Corpus Christi Church, 529 West 121st Street, Morningside Heights.
The program, titled "The Music of Antoine Busnoys, Composer to Charles the Bold, Duke of Burgundy" and observing the 500th anniversary of Busnoys's death, is to feature Missa O Crux Lignum Triumphale and other sacred works.
Two motets by Johannes Ockeghem, a colleague of Busnoys's, is to complete the program.
Tickets are $15; $12 for students and the elderly.
Information: (212) 666-0675.


Caribbean Pupils' English Seems Barrier, Not Bridge
When Raquel Church enrolled last September at Prospect Heights High School -- a school in Brooklyn with a student body larger than the population of her hometown in Grenada -- she read at about a third-grade level.
Because she spoke a language halfway between Creole and standard English, her teachers sometimes asked her to speak up or repeat herself.
And she screwed up her face to understand some of them, too.
"I need to get accustom to all the different word sound," she said.
"I need to build up more."


Beliefs
Religiously, Thanksgiving is the most peaceable of holidays, a lull before the season of lights and glad tidings and strained feeling over creches and menorahs and other hallowed symbols in public places.
Thanksgiving has kept its religious overtones since the Pilgrims celebrated.
At the request of the first Congress under the new Constitution, Washington proclaimed Nov. 26, 1789, a "Day of public Thanksgiving and Prayer, to be devoted by the People of these States to the Service of that great and glorious Being, who is the beneficent Author of all the good that was, that is, or that will be." In 1863, Lincoln made Thanksgiving a permanent national holiday.


It's Time to Create Financial Options
Early this evening, as a national cable-television audience watches, Marshall Faulk, the gifted running back from San Diego State, might or might not be able to push his sprained knee in a meeting with Miami and a transcontinental Heisman challenge against Hurricane quarterback Gino Torretta.
Faulk might or might not become the first sophomore to win a Heisman Trophy, and he might or might not eventually leave school unnecessarily early for the financial security professional football can bring.


Plans to Alter School Board Gain Support
New York City mayors have long been trying to persuade the state Legislature to give them more control over the Board of Education, and for more than 20 years lawmakers here have resisted.
But there are strong signs that Mayor David N. Dinkins may have better luck this time around.
Of course, Mayor Dinkins already faces an uphill fight as he tries to forge a broad consensus in New York City for revamping the board, which critics say has become mired in infighting and ineffective.
But at least some major players in the fight are predicting that the coming session of the Legislature, whose approval is required to overhaul the board, may produce a fundamental restructuring of the body, which in decades past has had as many as 100 members and as few as 5 before a 1970 state law locked in its current 7-member makeup.
Concern Over Current Board
Some lawmakers here, as well as leaders of unions and private advocacy groups, say they believe a change will arise in part from general frustration over the fighting on the current board, crystallized in the long-running battle over AIDS education and condom distribution in the schools.
And they say it could also be spurred by fears that Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez may step down if the seven-member board insists on what he calls "micromanaging" of the schools.


In Retreat, U.S. Spy Agency Shrugs at Found Secret Data
The National Security Agency, the nation's secretive electronic spy agency, has abruptly retreated from a confrontation with an independent researcher over secret technical manuals he found in a public library several weeks ago.
The manuals were written by a founder of the security agency and make up two volumes of a book on military code-breaking.
The agency had demanded that the researcher turn over the manuals to the Government.
But on Tuesday it said that the manuals were no longer secret and that the researcher could keep them.


Light Trading For Markets
Most American financial and commodities markets were open yesterday, though trading was ended early because of the Thanksgiving holiday weekend.


'Most Ruthless Mafia Leader Left; Leader on the Lam Runs the Lucchese Family, Agents Say
As a teen-ager on the South Brooklyn waterfront, Anthony Salvatore Casso shot pigeons from rooftops and became a ferocious brawler with a street gang known as the Tigers.
As an adult, the authorities say, he capitalized on violence to spring to the top of the Lucchese crime family, quickly amass a fortune and become a symbol of a new breed of gangsters who are filling power vacuums in the New York area's five Mafia gangs.
Although Mr.
Casso (pronounced CASE-o) has been a fugitive from racketeering charges since May 1990, Federal agents believe he is running the Lucchese family from underground, issuing orders for murders and other crimes through an elaborate telephone and messenger system and periodically slipping into the city for meetings with underlings. 'Hit List of 49 People'
Earlier this month, the Federal Bureau of Investigation intensified its search for the 52-year-old Mr.
Casso after he was indicted on new charges that since 1988 he has ordered the murders of 11 Lucchese members and has conspired to kill three others.


U.N. Weighs Terms by U.S. For Sending Somalia Force; Europeans Cautious
While acknowledging deep frustration over efforts to distribute aid to starving Somalis, European governments and international relief agencies reacted cautiously today to reports that the Bush Administration wants to send United States troops to safeguard famine relief inside war-torn Somalia.
Officials in Paris and London said they had not yet been formally consulted by Washington about the proposal, nor have they been asked to draw up contingency plans of their own to contribute troops to a larger multinational force as proposed by President Bush.


A Struggling Band Whose Name Gained Fame Before Its Music
Amy Sataje always liked the name of her band, Catwalk.
It had an edge, some attitude.
"When we thought of it, it sounded cool," she said.
"A catwalk has this sense of danger. It became our identity."
For five years, the Branford-based rock musicians built up a name they thought was uniquely theirs.
That was until February, when they heard about a syndicated television show about to go into production.
It was the story of Catwalk, a struggling band based in a fictional Eastern city.


Fire Destroys 4 Businesses In Queens
The first fire that struck the squat brick shopping center in Queens last May caused more fear than damage in the vegetarian restaurant Abhay Mehta and his family opened two years ago.
The second fire, early yesterday morning, devastated it.
The fire, which began at 4:20 A.M. and quickly went to four alarms, tore through the small shopping center on Broadway at 43d Avenue in Elmhurst, destroying four businesses, , including Mr.
Mehta's restaurant, Jhupdi, and a vacant storefront.
Fire officials said the blaze, which broke out two doors away from Mr.
Mehta's restaurant, was suspicious because it began in the same place as the fire in May.


A Surge Into Stock Mutual Funds
Mutual fund investors are again chasing rising prices, with funds that specialize in small stocks taking in large amounts of money, mutual fund officials said yesterday as the industry nears the end of what is almost certain to be its best year ever.
"This was our best month since July in terms of stock fund sales, and that was primarily due to surging interest in small stocks," said Steve Norwitz, a spokesman for the T. Rowe Price group of funds.


Vienna Journal; Once More, Turbulence for Austrians
The resplendent capital of an empire that collapsed three generations ago, Vienna since the end of Communism in Eastern Europe is again a city in fear of being sucked into social and economic turbulence in its former imperial possessions.
For Chancellor Franz Vranitzky, now in his seventh year in office, the solution still lies in Austrian membership in the European Community, which now has 12 members.


In Isolated Bronx Park, Death Visits Frequently
David Kozlow is a smart and steely police officer, but he was not sure what to think when, on a routine patrol, he saw two men emerge from the woods in Pelham Bay Park with their hands bathed in blood.
In this case, what seemed likely was true: out of sight, a third man lay on the frozen earth, shot 7 times in the head and stabbed 19 times in the chest.
But Officer Kozlow's first question to the men on that January day was this: "Am I going to find any dead animals in there?"


Transactions
Baseball  American League
BOSTON RED SOX -- Agreed to terms with Billy Hatcher, outfielder, to a two-year contract.
TORONTO BLUE JAYS -- Agreed to terms with Darnell Coles, infielder-outfielder, on a two-year contract.


Pittsburgh Names Sunseri Interim Coach
A Pittsburgh assistant coach, SAL SUNSERI, was named yesterday as interim head football coach at the school.
Sunseri, also the inside linebackers coach, will serve until a successor for PAUL HACKETT is appointed, said Athletic Director OVAL JAYNES.
A game next Saturday at Hawaii will end Pitt's (3-8) worst season in 20 years.


Leafs' Gilmour Suspended for Eight Days
Toronto's DOUG GILMOUR was suspended for eight days without pay yesterday for slashing TOMAS SANDSTROM of the Los Angeles Kings and breaking his arm.
Gilmour swung his stick with both hands and a broke a bone in Sandstrom's forearm during a game last Saturday.


Haitian Refugees: Don't Panic. Plan.
Bill Clinton's promise to ease the Bush Administration's punitive policies toward Haitian refugees has raised excessive expectations in Haiti and excessive fears here.
All the President-elect proposes is to return to traditional interpretations of international practice and U.S. law, assuring Haitians who claim political persecution a fair hearing.
That's only decency, not reckless generosity.
The new Administration is not about to open America's doors to every Haitian seeking a better life.
It merely intends to abandon the Bush policy of turning back Haitian boats on the high seas without giving their occupants a chance to demonstrate legitimate claims to asylum.


Review/Pop; Highlighting the Versatility Of Trinidadian Steel Drums
The Merrytones, based in Green Hill Village near Trinidad's capital, Port of Spain, brought steel-band bliss to Symphony Space on Sunday night.
It was the second of two concerts, co-produced by the World Music Institute, that also included a virtuosic steel-drum soloist, Len (Boogsie) Sharpe, and a calypso singer, Chalkdust.
Like most steel orchestras, the Merrytones took pride in their versatility.
Their set included swing ("In the Mood"), jazz (Wes Montgomery's "Memories") and a Caribbean hybrid called "Soca Salsa." In "Memories," the conductorless group showed off its dynamics, from purr to shimmer to chime.


Corrections
A listing in The Spoken Word in Weekend yesterday misstated the place, admission price and information number for a lecture tomorrow at 2 P.M. by Oren Lyons, the chief of the Onondaga Nation and a professor of American studies at the State University at Buffalo.
The lecture is to be at the Queens Museum of Art, Flushing Meadows-Corona Park, not at the Museum of the City of New York.
Admission is by contribution.
The information number is (718) 592-5555.


A Sterner Test for Tests
New York City's Board of Education plans to introduce new math tests that measure students' reasoning skills, not just their ability to pick the right multiple-choice answer.
It's an important step in the right direction.
The education reform movement and the educational goals endorsed by President Bush and state governors have brought a new emphasis on testing.
By the year 2000, Mr.
Bush and the governors want students to reach considerably higher levels in, for instance, geography, history and English.
Another goal is for American students to be first in the world in science and math.


Executive Changes
CANADIAN IMPERIAL BANK OF COMMERCE, Toronto, appointed James A. Singer managing director of its financial advisory services group.
CHASE MANHATTAN BANK, New York, appointed Kevin G. Byrnes region executive for its Long Island division, succeeding William H. Hoefling, who was named chairman and chief executive of Chase Lincoln First Bank in Rochester.


Leg Surgery For Dixie Brass
Dixie Brass, the 3-year-old colt who dazzled New York racing by winning the Withers and Metropolitan miles in identical times of 1:333/5 last May, will undergo surgery next week for two fractured ankle bones and will race no more.
The horse broke down on Thanksgiving Day after running half a mile as the 8-5 favorite in the Sport Page Handicap at Aqueduct.
His trainer, Dennis Brida, reported yesterday that X-rays disclosed compound fractures of both sesamoid bones in the right foreleg.


22 Educated Feet Take Davidson to Quarterfinals
The Davidson College soccer team is a short kick away from matching the school's high academic standards and the career accomplishments of its alumni.
Founded in 1837 by ministers of the Presbyterian Church, the North Carolina college has 1,500 students and about 16,000 alumni.
Of its alumni, 1,600 are medical doctors or dentists, 1,400 are lawyers and 730 are ministers.


Serbia Copes With Its Own Refugees
In the sad and ever growing annals of refugee experience, the scene was somewhat unusual.
Six Serbians -- a bank employee, a lawyer, a businessman and their wives -- expelled by invading Croats from the southern Bosnian city of Mostar, sat in the living room of a small but warm apartment here the other evening watching TV and drinking tea.


The Hard Fact of Life Of a School's Closing
The sermon was appropriate for the season: try to find something to be thankful for.
But as the upper school students at St.
Hilda's and St.
Hugh's School filed out of their daily chapel service on a gray Manhattan day, few of them could identify that something.


Ethan Allen Tries to Shed Its Colonial Past
Mark and Lori Richards of Manhattan are not the typical customers of Ethan Allen Inc., which since its 1932 founding has championed the traditional and the classic in home interiors: furniture lines with grandiose names like Old World Treasures, Circa 1776 and Canterbury Oak intended more for a middle-aged set.
The couple had recently moved out of university housing after Mr.
Richards graduated from law school.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY
DIALECT CONFLICT IN SCHOOL DEBATE
Students from English-speaking Caribbean countries make up 21 percent of the new immigrants enrolled in New York City schools.
Many move seamlessly into regular classes, even into honors programs, but others flounder.
In a debate that could shape the future of thousands of immigrant children, educators are deliberating over whether Jamaican, Guyanese and other Caribbean students should be entitled to schooling in English as a second language.
Page 1.
DINKINS GATHERS NEW SUPPORT
At a fund-raising dinner for Mayor Dinkins's re-election campaign on Monday, several Wall Street business leaders will be at the forefront of the finance drive, campaign officials said -- support from the business establishment that was was largely missing three years ago.
Page 23.


Classical Music in Review
Continuum Alice Tully Hall


Your Money
After Job Loss: Clouds, and Silver Lining
Donna Halvorsen turned her buyout into time with her son and money to offset the loss of income.
Page 32.


Drill Mistaken for Actual Attack Led to U.S. Firing on Turkish Ship
A Navy investigation has found that American sailors, awakened late at night, mistook a drill for an actual attack last month when their aircraft carrier fired two missiles at a Turkish destroyer.
The Navy investigation faults senior commanders on the American carrier, the Saratoga, which fired two Sea Sparrow surface-to-air missiles, killing five Turkish sailors aboard the destroyer Muavenet and wounding 15, during a NATO exercise in the Aegean Sea on Oct. 1, according to military officials.
Reprimands Are Expected
They said the investigation found that the Saratoga's commanders decided to take advantage of the proximity of the NATO warships to rehearse the response to a simulated attack.
But the awakened crew was left with the impression that they were under an actual attack and fired their missiles, the officials said.


U.S. PLAN TO GUARD CONVOYS IS BACKED BY SOMALI GENERAL
In an uncharacteristically conciliatory gesture, the leader of one of the principal factions in the fighting in Somalia said today that he welcomed an American initiative to send thousands of troops to protect food convoys for the starving.
The faction leader, Gen.
Mohammed Farah Aidid, who in the last year has sent his fighters across central and southern Somalia and who had threatened to send United Nations troops home in body bags, said at a news conference here that he viewed the American move as "constructive."


Kashmiris Must Have Say in Their Future; Governed by the People
To the Editor:
"Undermining the Right to Vote" (editorial, Nov. 3), which denounces the concept of term limits for Congress, combined with the overwhelming support for this idea in all 14 states where it was on the ballot, proves once again how fortunate we are to live in a country governed by the people and not by editorial writers.
HERBERT G. RAMMRATH Newport, R.I., Nov. 5, 1992


Mrs. Halvorsen Finds Lasting Benefits in an Unexpected Job Loss
Donna Halvorsen, a 42-year-old systems analysts, had worked for I.B.M. for 22 years when the company closed its Franklin Lakes, N.J. office and eliminated her job.
She was offered a buyout or a job in Connecticut.
Rather than uproot her family -- her husband, Drew, and 3-year-old son Jason -- she chose the buyout.
Her main concern was the loss of benefits, because her husband, an oil-refinery pipe designer, is self-employed.
After careful study of the 49-page buyout summary, which offered a variety of options, she came away with a generous severance package, including long-term insurance and a substantial sum of money to offset the loss of income.


RESULTS PLUS
COLLEGE FOOTBALL  Cornhuskers Rout the Sooners, 33-9  Calvin Jones revived Nebraska's slumbering offense, running for 137 yards and 2 touchdowns in Norman, Okla., yesterday as the Nebraska Cornhuskers beat Oklahoma, 33-9, to end the Sooners' worst season in 27 years.
The victory kept alive Nebraska's shot at a Big Eight title.
The Cornhuskers (8-2 over all and 5-1 in the Big Eight) will go to the Orange Bowl as conference champions if they beat Kansas State next weekend in Japan.
Otherwise, Colorado will go to the Orange Bowl.
Oklahoma (5-4-2, 3-2-2) dominated the game early, then was run over by the Cornhuskers and closed out its worst season since going 3-7 in 1965.
Jones scored on fourth-quarter runs of 14 and 2 yards. (AP) Arkansas Beats L.S.U.: Barry Lunney Jr. threw a 39-yard touchdown pass to Ron Dickerson Jr. and E. D. Jackson scored two and a half minutes later to break the game open as Arkansas ended its season with a 30-6 victory over Louisiana State in Fayetteville yesterday.
Dickerson -- with his father, Ron Sr., the new Temple coach, in the stands -- scored with 10:29 left in the third quarter to put Arkansas on top, 16-0.
Arkansas (3-7-1 over all and 3-4-1 in the Southeastern Conference) won inside the state's borders for the first time in six games.
L.S.U. finished its season 2-9 and 1-7. (AP) TENNIS  Jarryd and Fitzgerald Advance Easily  The defending champions, Anders Jarryd and John Fitzgerald, cruised into the semifinals of the ATP Tour world doubles championships yesterday with a 6-2, 6-3 victory over Steve DeVries and Dave MacPherson in Johannesburg.
Wally Masur and Mark Kratzmann of Australia also secured a semifinal berth, upsetting the second-seeded Americans, Jim Grabb and Richey Reneberg, 4-6, 7-6 (7-5), 6-4.
In another upset, the Americans Kelly Jones and Rick Leach beat seventh-seeded Emilio Sanchez and Sergio Casal of Spain, 6-3, 7-6 (7-3).
But Sanchez and Casal made the semis anyway by having won their first two matches in the round-robin portion of the tournament; Jones and Leach (1-2) were eliminated.
The other semifinalists will be top-seeded Todd Woodbridge and Mark Woodforde of Australia, who defeated Cyril Suk of Czechoslovakia and Tom Nijssen of the Netherlands, 6-4, 3-6, 6-1. (AP) COLLEGE BASKETBALL  Victory for Alabama-Birmingham  Robert Shannon had 20 points and Clarence Thrash added 18 and 13 rebounds to lead Alabama-Birmingham to an 80-67 victory over Dayton yesterday in second-round action at the Great Alaska Shootout in Anchorage.
Corey Jackson added 18 points for U.A.B., while Alex Robertson led the Flyers with 24, all but 3 of those in the second half, and Chip Hare added 15.
U.A.B. broke the game open in the first half with a 20-8 run and Dayton, which lost to Illinois in overtime Wednesday, could never catch up.
The Blazers used their superior quickness to work the ball inside for easy points or around the perimeter for open jumpers, while their aggressive defense created several steals for breakaway buckets.
Today, they will play against the winner of last night's game between Tennessee-Chattanooga and Alaska-Anchorage. (AP)


Kashmiris Must Have Say in Their Future
To the Editor:
Asia Watch and Physicians for Human Rights report abuses by India in Kashmir (news article, Nov. 8).
India wants the world to believe it is not committing these abuses.
But when independent human rights groups visit Kashmir and witness India's carnage, the facts speak for themselves.


Corrections
An article in Business Day last Saturday about problems in the Canadian real estate market misstated the status of Bramalea Ltd.
Although a small subsidiary of that real estate developer has sought court protection from its creditors, the parent company is still working with its lenders on a restructuring plan outside the courts.


Classical Music in Review
The Mannes Orchestra Alice Tully Hall


Women in Combat: Maybe? Yes?
Female astronauts, firefighters, police -- and the 35,000 women who served in the Persian Gulf war -- have taught America a valuable lesson.
Courage and competence have no gender.
Congress acknowledged that lesson last year with legislation permitting women to fly combat missions.
It was, as one sponsor put it, "pinpointed laser surgery." Major surgery would come later, pending the report of a commission on expanding roles for women in the military.


Review/Music; From Masur, an 1881 Program, Sort Of
It is probably natural that the New York Philharmonic, busily celebrating its history, should offer an occasional antiquarian glance at programs from its past.
For the subscription series that began on Wednesday evening at Avery Fisher Hall, Kurt Masur and his musicians presented a nearly complete re-creation of a concert from the Philharmonic's 40th season.
The program is to be repeated tonight and Tuesday.
The original concert was conducted by Theodore Thomas on Nov. 12, 1881, and was the opening of the six-concert season that the Philharmonic Society presented at the Academy of Music, on 14th Street, its home from 1856 to 1886.
Given the spirit of commemoration implied by reproducing an old program, not to mention the historical nature of the 150th anniversary season, one might have expected the Philharmonic to commission a program note that looked back at the orchestra and its milieu in 1881.


Marlins Owner Is Added to Lawsuit
The Florida Marlins' owner, H. WAYNE HUIZENGA, is accused of working "behind the scenes" to help keep the Giants in San Francisco and out of Florida, a lawsuit filed in St.
Petersburg contends.


With Sadness in His Eyes, Toon Bids Farewell
Coach Bruce Coslet of the Jets called it a sad occasion and a happy occasion.
So did Jane Toon, the wife of Al Toon, the Jets' wide receiver, who retired from pro football today at the age of 29.
The force behind Toon's decision stemmed from the concussion he received after being hit by Broncos linebacker Michael Brooks in the Jets' loss in Denver almost three weeks ago.
What clinched the decision was the consensus among a half-dozen doctors, after a battery of tests, that Toon, who has had five concussions in the last six seasons, should not risk another blow to the head.


Brokerage Statements: What They Don't Tell
QUICK, what was the rate of return in your brokerage account over the last year?
Over the last month?
Over any period of time you can think of?
Chances are you haven't the foggiest idea, which puts you in good company.
A number of brokerage houses go to great lengths to keep you from knowing how you're doing.


Some Legal Experts See Intolerance as H.I.V. and Sex Are Linked to Crime
The prospect of dying in a Louisiana prison made Salvadore Gamberella's hands shake and his voice tremble.
He is only 28 years old, and at most his crime will cost him 20 years in jail.
But it will likely be a life sentence nonetheless.
Mr.
Gamberella has H.I.V., the virus that causes AIDS, and is not expected to live out the term.
Last week Mr.
Gamberella, an unemployed shipyard welder with a troubled past, became the first person to be prosecuted and convicted under Louisiana's five-year-old criminal AIDS law.


Without Plumbing, Villages In Alaska Face Health Crisis
This tiny fishing village on the Bering Sea offers most of the conveniences of modern American life.
People here can get the Disney Channel on cable television, dial out on touch-tone phones, and rent "Wayne's World" at a local store.
But the one technology they lack is creating one of the nation's most poignant public health problems.


GERMANY OUTLAWS A NEO-NAZI GROUP
The German Government announced today that it was officially banning a neo-Nazi group, responding to the outcry against anti-foreigner violence.
In the first such ban since the country was unified two years ago, Interior Minister Rudolf Seiters said he was outlawing the organization, the Nationalist Front, which he described as "an active fighting group whose goal is to destroy the democratic order."


With a Big Claim, a Tiny Tribe Seeks Aid
In the beginning there were rocks and rivers, forests and meadows, cornfields and leaping deer.
Now there is downtown Bridgeport, and the Golden Hill Paugussetts, an Indian tribe based here, want it back.
In a class-action suit filed earlier this month in Federal District Court, the 100-member tribe asserted its ownership of 88 acres that include much of this city's core, encompassing City Hall, the main post office and the Hi-Ho shopping mall.
Citing violations of agreements made in the 18th century, first with the British and then with the Americans, tribal leaders have proposed a settlement that includes $750 million, 80 acres of land, support for the tribe's efforts to become recognized by the Federal Government as an official tribe and state permission to operate a casino.


Hugh Walter Kingwell Wontner, Head of Savoy Hotels, Dies at 84
Sir Hugh Walter Kingwell Wontner, a British hotelier at some of London's most famous lodgings, died on Wednesday in London.
He was 84 years old.
Prominent in the international hotel scene, for many years he was chairman and managing director of the Savoy Group, which includes Claridge's and the Berkeley Hotel.
Two years ago, he became president of Savoy.


The Joy and Ease of a Gliding Pocket Door
POCKET doors operate virtually without flaw, seldom need adjustment and are easy to install in new or existing walls.
Because remodeling procedures can vary when installing a door in an existing wall, only new-wall installation is described.
Pocket-door kits have metal frame parts, hardware and instructions.
Doors are sold separately, and any door can be a pocket door, if it can be trimmed to fit the frame.


No Headline
Taking his first vacation since winning an exhausting one-year race for the Presidency, Bill Clinton spent most of a sunny and warm Southern California day resting at a multimillion-dollar oceanside estate leased for his use by friends.
Mr.
Clinton, who has scarcely gone a day since the election without doing something that put him in the public eye and who spent his first day of vacation campaigning in the Los Angeles area, seemed determined to relax today.


Wrapped in Art
During the Edo period (1615-1868), Japan was isolated from the rest of the world but developed a flourishing culture.
One of its most exquisite products was the elaborately dyed and embroidered
kosode,
or short-sleeved robe, similar to the modern-day kimono.
WHEN ART BECAME FASHION: Kosode in Edo-Period Japan (Weatherhill, 421 Madison Ave., New York, N.Y. 10017, $60), with pages of color photos of
kosode,
is a companion book to an exhibit of some 150 of these garments at the Los Angeles County Museum of Art; it was written by two of the museum's curators, Dale Carolyn Gluckman and Sharon Sadako Takeda, with additional contributions by seven scholars.
The Edo Japanese expressed their individual style not in the cut of their clothing, as in the West, but through their choice of surface decoration.
Sumptuary laws, meant to regulate extravagant dress, in fact encouraged alternative design and dyeing techniques for
kosode,
making it the designer clothing of the age.
Because the Japanese made no distinction between fine art and decorative art, the great artists of the day used
kosode
as their painting surfaces, creating robes that became supreme status symbols.
Wordplay, Chinese pictograph characters and even poetry were incorporated into
kosode
design as well, creating what Ms.
Takeda calls "a cloak of language that announced the sensibilities, desires and values of the owner." Perhaps this is the precedent for the often inscrutable English one sees on T-shirts, jackets and shopping bags in today's Japan.


NOV. 22-27: Runoff in Georgia; The Republicans Win A Senate Seat
The victory of a Republican, Paul D. Coverdell, over a one-term Democratic incumbent, Senator Wyche Fowler Jr., in a runoff election in Georgia last week was freighted with great political significance by Republicans while Democrats scorned it as a triumph of mudslinging.
Georgians were also left to ponder the vagaries of the runoff system itself.


Carolyn Weiss, C. L. Clayton
Carolyn Whitman Weiss, a daughter of Ronald W. Weiss and Nancy S. Nelson, both of New York, was married last evening to Christopher Laurence Clayton, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
William L. Clayton of Short Hills, N.J.
Rabbi Charles Lippman officiated at the Unitarian Church of All Souls in New York.
Msgr.
Harrold Murray took part in the ceremony.
Mrs.
Clayton, 26 years old, is a human-resources assistant at Lehman Brothers, the securities brokerage, in New York.
She and her husband graduated from Lehigh University.
They received master's degrees from New York University, she in applied psychology and he in real estate.


Treating Lymphedema, Swelling After Surgery
EIGHT months after breast surgery Jane Frith noticed a swelling in the upper arm.
When the swelling began to travel to the wrist and she lost sensation in the arm, the diagnosis was lymphedema, the swelling of the soft tissues as a result of the accumulation of high-protein lymph fluid.
After trying a compression sleeve and a compression pump, both recommended by her oncologist, her symptoms worsened, she said.
Last month Ms.
Frith, of Bridgehampton, began lymphedema therapy to reduce the severe swelling in the extremities and to drain the fluid.


Emily Saltzman, David S. Hoffner
Emily Saltzman, a daughter of Herb and Joan Saltzman of New York, was married last evening to David Scott Hoffner, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Burton Hoffner of Woodmere, L.I.
Rabbi Cliff Culwin officiated at the Sephardic Temple in Cedarhurst, L.I.
Ms.
Saltzman, 29 years old, is keeping her name.
She is the assistant for ethnic affairs to Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo in New York.
She graduated cum laude from Dartmouth College and received a master's degree in public administration from Columbia University.
Her father is a broadcast marketing consultant to WINS radio in New York.
Her mother is a financial consultant to Ribolow Staffing, a New York employment agency.


New York Report
RALPH LAUREN CALLS HIS LOOK "bohemian." Perry Ellis's designer, Marc Jacobs, has been influenced by the disheveled "grunge" look fancied by hot Seattle rock groups.
The rest of New York's garment industry seems universally smitten by a desire to loosen up.
As a result, next season's marketplace is flooded with soft, romantic, revealing and often quite unrealistic clothes.
These breezy, ultrafeminine new fashions imply a radical change in the way women will dress for workaday life.
Yet the intensity with which this new fashion attitude has taken hold -- even in such a tough economic climate -- shows that manufacturers think customers are ready for change.
But are they?
Most likely, women will ease a few of these softer pieces into their existing wardrobes.
Still, when change is in the air, politically and socially, fashion reflects it.


Miriam Judlowe, Lorin Reisner
Mr. and Mrs.
Stephen B. Judlowe of Murray Hill, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Miriam S. Judlowe to Lorin L. Reisner, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Ira A. Reisner of Suffern, N.Y.
A February wedding is planned.
Ms.
Judlowe, 30 years old, is an account executive in the New York office of Esprit de Corp, the clothing manufacturer.
She graduated from Lehigh University and received a law degree from the University of Pennsylvania.
Her father is a partner in the New York law firm of Hopgood, Calimafde, Kalil, Blaustein &amp; Judlowe.


When Time's Money, Organizing Pays Off
THE workplace is divided into two camps: those who have a place for everything and the rest of us, who waste time -- up to six weeks a year -- looking for files, letters and other detritus.
In a recent survey of 200 executives of 1,000 of the nation's largest companies, respondents were asked: "What percent of time do executives waste because they or their assistants can't find things?" The median response was 4.3 hours a week, based on a 40-hour week.


Someplace Like Home
THE instructions for navigating the bucolic byways around Perugia were fairly complex but the last part was simple: when we got to the end of the strada bianca (dirt road), we were there.
Friends had decided to simply uproot from England -- jobs, children, schools, language, whole ways of being -- and transplant themselves to rural Italy.
We were paying a first weekend visit, armed with champagne for the reunion, salami for the picnics and sleeping bags for the not-quite-complete conversion of their old and idyllic stone farmhouse into home.
And, as we drove north from Rome, the questions were as intriguing as the route was tangled.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: November 29, 1992
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
4
HIDEAWAY, by Dean Koontz. (Berkley, $5.99.) A man miraculously resuscitated after he has technically died is haunted by visions of evil.
2
2
THE DOOMSDAY CONSPIRACY, by Sidney Sheldon. (Warner, $5.99.) An American probes a mysterious balloon accident in the Alps.
3
5
A RIVER RUNS THROUGH IT, by Norman Maclean. (Pocket, $4.99.) Three tales of the outdoors in western Montana.
4
44
THE FIRM, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $5.99.) A young lawyer learns that his firm is engaged in secret, possibly illegal activities.
5
33
A TIME TO KILL, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $5.99.) Racial tensions surface during the trial of a man charged with murder in rural Mississippi.
6
2
RECKLESS, by Amanda Quick. (Bantam, $5.99.) A Sussex maiden in distress finds help and romance during a midnight encounter.
7
6
PRIVATE EYES, by Jonathan Kellerman. (Bantam, $6.50.) The psychologist-detective Alex Delaware goes to the rescue of an actress.
8
6
MIDNIGHT WHISPERS, by V. C. Andrews. (Pocket, $5.99.) The travails of Christie Longchamp, haunted by her relatives' passions.
9
1
ANGEL, by Johanna Lindsey. (Avon, $5.99.) A young woman enjoys a torrid romance while visiting a Texas ranch in the late 19th century.
10
4
A RIVER RUNS THROUGH IT, by Norman Maclean. (University of Chicago, $9.95.) Three tales of the outdoors in western Montana.
11
5
REMEMBER, by Barbara Taylor Bradford. (Ballantine, $5.99.) A television correspondent seeks the truth about her fiance's suicide.
12
1
NIGHTSHADE, by Laurell K. Hamilton. (Pocket, $5.50.) A team from "Star Trek" 's U.S.S.
Enterprise negotiates peace on a planet suffering from 200 years of civil war.
13
8
SCARLETT, by Alexandra Ripley. (Warner, $6.99.) The sequel to "Gone With the Wind."
14
1
ALL THE WEYRS OF PERN, by Anne McCaffrey. (Del Rey/Ballantine, $5.99.) The 11th volume in the science fiction series "The Dragonriders of Pern."
15 *
10
A THOUSAND ACRES, by Jane Smiley. (Fawcett, $12.) The fortunes of a family that operates a large industrialized farm in the Midwest.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
2
13
UNITED WE STAND, by Ross Perot. (Hyperion, $4.95.) The Texas billionaire's suggestions for "rebuilding America."
3
8
PUTTING PEOPLE FIRST, by Bill Clinton and Al Gore. (Times Books/Random House, $7.99.) The next Administration's program for "changing America."
4 *
1
DIANA: Her True Story, by Andrew Morton. (Pocket, $5.99.) An updated biography of the Princess of Wales.
5
7
BACKLASH, by Susan Faludi. (Anchor/ Doubleday, $12.50.) A journalist contends that the media and political groups are staging a war against women's rights.
6 *
473
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Inspiration. (LP)
7
4
WHEN YOU LOOK LIKE YOUR PASSPORT PHOTO, IT'S TIME TO GO HOME, by Erma Bombeck. (Harper Paperbacks, $5.99.) The tribulations of travel suffered around the world.
8
80
YOU JUST DON'T UNDERSTAND, by Deborah Tannen. (Ballantine, $10.) The different languages men and women speak.
9
4
MOLLY IVINS CAN'T SAY THAT, CAN SHE? by Molly Ivins. (Vintage, $11.) Essays about the recent political and cultural scene.
10
5
SEX, ART, AND AMERICAN CULTURE, by Camille Paglia. (Vintage, $13.) Twenty-one essays on contemporary subjects, ranging from Madonna to Anita Hill to date rape.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
10
THE INDISPENSABLE CALVIN AND HOBBES, by Bill Watterson. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $12.95.) A collection of previously published cartoons.
2
68
LIFE'S LITTLE INSTRUCTION BOOK, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $5.95.) Some 500 tips for achieving a self-fulfilling life.
3
3
COWS OF OUR PLANET, by Gary Larson. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $8.95.) "Far Side" cartoons.
4
97
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $9.95.) Principles for success.
5
116
THE T-FACTOR FAT GRAM COUNTER, by Jamie Pope-Cordle and Martin Katahn. (Norton, $2.50.) How to reduce fat in one's diet.
6 *
3
MRS. FIELDS COOKIE BOOK, by Debbi Fields. (Time-Life, $12.95.) One hundred recipes.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,000 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 38,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.


Tracey Priestley, Bradford Schaaf
Tracey Priestley, a freelance writer in New York, was married on Thursday to Bradford Perkins Schaaf, a business executive.
Septimus Rhudd, the registrar of St.
John's, Antigua, officiated at the Jumby Bay Resort in Antigua.


'The Speed of Darkness' Is Revived in Croton Falls
CREDIT the new Logodaedaly Company at the Schoolhouse here with resurrecting a deserving, demanding play.
"The Speed of Darkness" by Steve Tesich was dismissed on Broadway last year after a mere month's run even though it is crammed with the excesses of a playwright's fertile imagination.
Mr.
Tesich is better known for his screenplays ("Breaking Away," "The World According to Garp") than his stage plays ("Baba Goya," "Square One"), but this play has boldness, an original point of view and a powerful payoff.
The reach of Mr.
Tesich runs the risk of pretentiousness, but the playwright comes off valiantly.
These are unflinchingly big-time accomplishments: the shaking up of a family's ordered life, sowing the seeds of tragedy upon a domestic scene and finally -- actually -- building successfully to a cathartic release.


Rembrandt Peale: Predestined To Be a Painter
How could he not have been a painter?
The son of a painter, he was christened Rembrandt.
His brothers were christened Raphael, Titian and Rubens.
His sisters were named after three eminent women painters -- Angelica Kauffmann, Sofonisba Anguisciola and Rosalba Carriera.
He named his own son Michael Angelo.
Beyond all doubt, Rembrandt Peale was set up to be a painter.
He did not resent it, either.
He might never be the equal of Rembrandt himself, but Rembrandt Peale was going to give it his best shot.


In Gear


How Brokers Make Do In the Sluggish Market
CHARLES DARWIN called it natural selection.
For Herbert Spencer, it was the survival of the fittest.
But whatever one terms it, it's what has been happening in recent years to brokers and sales agents as the downturn in the real estate market has both diminished their numbers and required those who have remained to adopt different strategies, or variations of old ones, to stay alive.
Many companies, large and small, have gone out of business; those that remain have cut back dramatically on spending for advertising and promotion.
Emphasis has been placed more and more on specialization, on the international market, on relocations and foreclosures, on referrals and on doing everything possible to increase contact with those who might provide them.


Coyotes Blamed for Rabies Outbreak in Texas
As frustrated state and local health officials in southern Texas struggle to contain the nation's first sustained outbreak of rabies among coyotes, ranchers in at least one county are being encouraged to shoot the animals on sight.
The outbreak, which began four years ago along the border with Mexico, is the first in which coyotes have been found to harbor the fatal disease persistently.


Doing Without


SURFACING
CLOTHES --
Men's evening ties:
Too fancy for work, a sales clerk said, but just right for dinner.
"Day into evening" goes pan-gender.
RETAIL --
Greenpeace stores:
Environmentally correct shopping in San Francisco; Provincetown, Mass.; Key West, Fla., and, next month, Los Angeles.
COFFEE: --
Macchiato:
The most recent coffee-milk permutation, not to be confused with caffe latte, cappuccino or caffe americano.
It's an espresso topped by just a touch of foamed milk.


Data Update
*4*BUILDING PERMITS ISSUED (Housing units)
Sept. 92
Aug. 92
Sept. 91
New York
2,596
2,673
2,491
New Jersey
1,396
1,140
1,364
Connecticut
668
690
609
*4*Source: Census Bureau, U.S. Department of Commerce
*4*MORTGAGE INTEREST RATES (Averages)
Last Week
Previous Week
Year Ago
New York
Conventional (30-yr)
8.58
8.62
8.86
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.52
5.49
6.51
New Jersey
Conventional (30-yr)
8.40
8.41
8.75
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.25
5.18
6.40
Connecticut
Conventional (30-yr)
8.46
8.49
8.72
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.20
5.10
6.44
Co-ops (N.Y.)
Conventional (30-yr)
8.55
8.62
8.99
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.90
5.97
7.03
*4*Indexes for Adjustable-Rate Mortgages*
1-yr. Treasury security
3.73
3.64
4.82
National Mortgage Contract Rate
7.44
7.44
8.78
*Rates on most adjustable mortgages are set 1 to 3 percentage points above these indexes.  (Source: HSH Associates)


An Icon in an Armchair Makes a Gracious Exit
American television's best-known gent retires this evening in characteristically urbane fashion.
Following the third and final episode of "The Secret Agent," Alistair Cooke tells viewers of "Masterpiece Theater," "I don't have many more miles to go, but I do have promises to keep before I sleep and one or two ambitions, among them an insane desire to shave a stroke or two off my golf handicap." He offers "a very grateful thank you" to those viewers who have made their opinions known to him down through the years, and ends politely with "So good night and goodbye."
In a medium hardly known for its resistance to vulgarity and lowest common denominators, Mr.
Cooke has been unique in his continuing association with, all things being relative, upscale programming.
Before becoming host of public television's "Masterpiece Theater" in 1971, a stint that was supposed to last 13 weeks, he was host, from 1952 to 1961, of commercial television's "Omnibus" (which appeared on all three major networks over the years), a legendary magazine of the arts.
Given the tony contexts, pronounced traces of an authoritative British accent were hardly an impediment.


Corrections
An article in today's Real Estate section about how residential brokers are coping with the sluggish market misstates the number of licensed real estate people in Connecticut in 1986.
According to the National Association of Real Estate License Law Officials, the number of licensed brokers and sales people on July 1, 1986, was 33,765; by July 15, 1992, it had dropped to 24,654.


Jennifer Coleman, John H. Thieroff
Jennifer Ashe Coleman, a daughter of John J. Coleman of Dumont, N.J., and Mary Ellen Coleman of Jackson Heights, Queens, was married yesterday to John Henry Thieroff, a son of Michael and Jean Thieroff of Lambertville, Mich.
The Rev.
Fred Hoseli officiated at St.
Vincent Ferrer Roman Catholic Church in New York.


Bowler-Hatted Men, Raining From the Sky
RENE MAGRITTE
Catalogue Raisonne.
Volume One: Oil Paintings, 1916-1930.
By David Sylvester and Sarah Whitfield.
Edited by David Sylvester.
Illustrated. 388 pp.
New York: The Menil Foundation/Philip Wilson Publishers/ Rizzoli International Publications. $180.
MAGRITTE
The Silence of the World.
By David Sylvester.
Illustrated. 352 pp.
New York: The Menil Foundation/Harry N. Abrams. $75.


Ordained Women Gaining Acceptance
WHEN the Church of England voted earlier this month to admit women into the priesthood, the religious debate that preceded the vote struck a familiar chord with a couple in Danbury who recalled a morning 15 years ago that changed their lives and their church.
Ann and Michael Coburn remember well when they knelt before Mr.
Coburn's father in St.
James Episcopal Church in Danbury, as he asked them in a resounding voice, with tears glistening on his cheeks: "My sister and brother, do you believe that you are truly called by God and His church to this priesthood?"


NOTES
Amy Pagnozzi, who wrote extensively about the Amy Fisher case in her column in The New York Post, is working as a consultant on the ABC television movie "Beyond Control: The Amy Fisher Story," which started shooting last week.
"I would never have gotten involved with the other two companies that are doing movies and paid the families for their stories," she said.
Ms.
Pagnozzi has also been written in as a character in the film.
She it to be played by Harley Jane Kozak.


Tourists Continue To Visit Egypt, Despite Violence
A recent spate of politically motivated attacks on tourists in Egypt has so far resulted in some cancellations by prospective visitors, but not an overwhelming response, according to tourist officials.
Companies that run tours to the country report a 10 to 15 percent cancellation rate.
Abercrombie &amp; Kent, which offers dozens of itineraries in Egypt, has had 30 cancellations since Oct. 21, when, in the most violent of the attacks, a British woman was killed in Dairut, about 170 miles south of Cairo.
According to Helga Westell, a vice president at Abercrombie &amp; Kent, the cancellations are "noteworthy, but not yet considered alarming." She adds that the company has been receiving bookings for January tours at the usual rate.


Feeding Birds and the Uninvited Squirrels
GARDENERS can be thankful for the birds that will hang around during the next few months.
The birds are not only delightful and colorful to see but also continue to eat insect grubs and eggs, or any morsels they can find.
Gardeners who place feeders near the windows find these feathered friends a pleasure to watch, especially at breakfast.
Activity at feeders is busy at this time of year, with the birds following an established pecking order.
It is a fascinating ritual: each species has its turn, with the local population determining the line of action.
The feeders may beckon evening grosbeaks, cardinals, nuthatches, titmice, chickadees, juncoes and white-throated sparrows.


Correction
Because of an editing error, the Stamps column on Nov. 15, about postmarks from towns with names similar to those of Presidents and Vice Presidents, included an outdated reference.
The post office in Quail, N.Y., was closed in 1986, and consolidated into the post office in Fort Orange, N.Y.


Bhutto Tries to Regain Her Office


Time for Optimism to Be Abroad in the Land?
LAST week's economic reports -- consumer confidence, durable goods and gross domestic product -- suggested that a recovery worthy of the name might finally be gathering strength.
Time for a more optimistic stock-buying strategy as well?
In the last 17 years, the most robust economic recoveries, in 1976 and 1983, saw value stocks enjoy their greatest margins over growth stocks.
This can be seen from value and growth indices compiled from the Standard &amp; Poor's 500 by S.&amp;P. and Barra, a market analysis firm.
They ranked stocks by ratios of price to book value, the growth category having the higher ratio.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
Top Delivery for 27 Years
AFTER 27 years of delivering mail to Great Neck lanes named Byron, Shelley, Keats and Whitman, a touch of the poet has rubbed off on Christ (Chris) Millisys.
Asked to describe his customers, the mailman said, "Well, they are well read and well bred."


How to Tickle Male Chauvinist Pigs to Death
"A . . . MY NAME IS ALICE" WAS hardly the sharpest-toothed revue on the block when it opened eight years ago in the bowels of the American Place Theater.
But it proved a bright and personable collection of songs and sketches with a firm, feminist slant and a cast you would have described as "a honey," if that weren't courting obvious trouble.
The same can be happily said of "A . . . My Name Is Still Alice," the sequel that turned up recently at the Second Stage Theater, where it should do quite nicely for itself, and thank you for asking.


Encore in Italian Family-Style Dining
WHEN La Viola of Cedarhurst was visited earlier this year, it proved to be the most outstanding Italian family-style restaurant on Long Island.
La Viola has now opened a second front in Syosset.
The newcomer takes over the premises that once housed Ultimo.
Despite its casual format, modest prices and slim storefront location, La Viola looks opulent and upscale.
Much of Ultimo remains, including its white- and terra cotta-colored walls, tapestry chair rail and seat cushions, ultramodern light fixtures, a lavish use of marble and earthenware pots of flowering plants.
La Viola has added sepia-tone photos of Italy in former days and a giant wall menu.


Foreclosures on Rise While Prices Still Falter
WHILE most of the Connecticut economy languishes, one sector is thriving.
Lawyers, auctioneers, real estate agents and others involved in foreclosures are doing a booming business.
Four years ago, when real estate prices in Connecticut were at an all-time high, about 20 mortgages of every 1,000 were in foreclosure.
But as real estate prices plummeted and many people lost their jobs, foreclosures have now soared to 159 for every 1,000 mortgages, the fourth highest rate in the nation, according to the Mortgage Bankers Association.


Good For a Laugh
To the Editor:
In his essay "Shock Jocks Shake Up Uncle Sam"  [ Nov. 15 ] , Jon Pareles asks why Americans listen to Howard Stern.
The answer is simple: he's funny.
If the humor is a tad adolescent, so be it.
The fact is, there's no one on radio who comes close to being as funny as Howard Stern, unless you count Rush Limbaugh, who I'm willing to listen to for pure entertainment value, even though I don't subscribe to his ultraconservative views.
BRUCE FOX Jericho, N. Y.


This Week's Numbers
Last
Consensus
Period
Estimtes
(I.D.E.A. Inc.)
Tuesday
Oct. leading indicators, percent change
-0.3
+0.3
Oct. construction spending, percent change
+1.3
+0.6
Nov. purchasing managers' index
50.6
52
Wednesday
Oct. new-home sales, percent change
-1
+2
Thursday
Mid-Nov. jobless claims, thousands
374
380
Oct. factory orders, percent change
+1.1
+2
Nov. car sales, in millions, annual rate
5.6
6.3
Third-qtr. nonfarm productivity, % change
+2.6
+2.8
Friday
Nov. unemployment rate, percent
7.4
7.4
This Week's Developments Tuesday: Johnson-Redbook survey of retail sales released


Lisa Coleman and Jonathan Bradlow
Margret and Thomas Bonito of Livingston, N.J., have announced August wedding plans for her daughter, Lisa Margret Coleman, and Dr.
Jonathan Avery Bradlow, a son of Frieda and Dr.
Paul A. Bradlow of New York.
Ms.
Coleman, 28 years old, is a reporter at Forbes magazine in New York.
She graduated from Smith College and received an M.B.A. degree from New York University.
Her mother is a clinical social worker in the East Orange, N.J., public schools.
Ms.
Coleman's stepfather is a senior pension consultant in Roseland, N.J., for Noble Lowndes, an employee-benefits consulting concern.


Dour Sentinels of Lenin's Tomb They Are Not
ELECTED two and a half years ago but "in a different era and a different country," as one commentator noted, the Congress of Peoples' Deputies, which convenes for the seventh time on Tuesday, has become one of the most boisterous institutions of the new Russia.
Formally, the Congress is the highest legislative authority in the Russian Federation.
Only the full Congress can amend the Constitution or adopt a new one.
The Congress is supposed to meet twice a year.
Between its sessions, legislative work is entrusted to a standing parliament, the Supreme Soviet, whose 248 members are named by the Congress.
As of mid-November, there were 1,041 deputies to the full Congress.


Good-Time Bookstore
SOME go there for the vegetarian pasta.
Others pop in to pick up a portable Shakespeare.
One woman meets all of her blind dates there.
Washington's Kramerbooks and Afterwords is one part bookstore, one part restaurant and perhaps one part singles bar.
Offering everything from best sellers to the latest titles in the occult, the arts and government, as well as red and white wine, the Connecticut Avenue shop has been a cultural institution in Washington for more than a decade.


Once a Husky Coach . . .
Washington's DON JAMES, who has been mentioned in the search for a new football coach at Auburn, says he has no intentions of leaving the Huskies -- as long as he's wanted.
James, 59 years old, said Washington will be his last football coaching job.
"I would consider my options if someone tells me they don't want me here," James said Friday.


Results Plus
N.H.L.
Penguins Beat Capitals Mario Lemieux and Shawn McEachern scored 59 seconds apart in a three-goal second period that carried the Pittsburgh Penguins to a 5-3 home victory over the Washington Capitals last night.
Lemieux, the National Hockey League's scoring leader, added his second goal of the night and 29th of the season into the empty net with 10 seconds left to seal the victory.
The Penguins ended the Capitals' 3-0-1 streak by splitting the home-and-home series that started with Washington's 6-4 victory on Friday night.
Washington is 2-8 against Patrick Division opponents this season.
After falling behind by 2-0, Pittsburgh's comeback started when Rick Tocchet scored on a power play at 17 minutes 10 seconds of the first period.
Kevin Stevens, Lemieux and McEachern scored in the second period for Pittsburgh.
Stevens beat goalie Don Beaupre to a loose puck at 1:24 for his 17th to tie the score.
Lemieux put the Penguins ahead on a power play at 13:02. (AP) SKIING Norwegian Tops Tomba Kjetil-Andre Aamodt of Norway had two good reasons to celebrate in the men's World Cup opener yesterday in Sestriere, Italy.
He scored the first World Cup giant slalom victory of his career and he beat Alberto Tomba of Italy in front of the superstar's adoring fans.
"For the first time in my life I beat Tomba, and I am overjoyed," said the 21-year-old from Oslo, the 1992 Olympic super giant slalom champion.
His only previous World Cup victory was in a Super-G -- a speed race -- last season in Aspen, Colo.
Aamodt, whose career has been plagued by injuries and mononucleosis, skied two faultless runs down the Kandahar-Borgata course.
His total time of 1 minute 48.34 seconds beat Tomba by 0.47 seconds.
Tomba, supported by a crowd of 20,000 enthusiastic fans, trailed Aamodt by only one-hundredth of a second in the first run but was outrun badly in the second heat. (AP) Maier Wins Giant Slalom Race: Ulrike Maier of Austria, twice a world champion but never the winner of a World Cup race, ended years of frustration by capturing the season-opening women's giant slalom yesterday in Park City, Utah.
Maier, who won super giant slalom gold medals in world championship competitions in 1989 at Vail, Colo., and in 1991 in Saalbach, Austria, completed two trips down the 4,200-foot course in 2 minutes 21.87 seconds, .23 faster than Carole Merle of France, the defending World Cup giant slalom champion. (AP)
TENNIS  Australians Advance Top-seeded Todd Woodbridge and Mark Woodforde rallied to win their semifinal match yesterday and will meet the defending champions, Anders Jarryd and John Fitzgerald, in the final of the ATP world doubles championships in Johannesburg.
The final today will give Woodbridge and Woodforde, both of Australia, a chance to get even with Jarryd and Fitzgerald, who knocked them out of the semifinals last year.
Woodbridge and Woodforde overcame seventh-seeded Sergio Casal and Emilio Sanchez of Spain, 4-6, 6-1, 6-4, in a two-hour match.
Meanwhile, Jarryd, of Sweden, and Fitzgerald, of Australia, seeded fourth, defeated the sixth-seeded Australians Mark Kratzmann and Wally Masur, 7-6 (7-5) 6-3. (AP) SOCCER United Moves Up Manchester United climbed from eighth place to fifth in England's Premier League standing with a 1-0 victory yesterday over Arsenal, which dropped from second to third.
The league leader, Norwich, extended its lead to 5 points with a 3-2 victory at Aston Villa. (AP) Brazil Retains Title: Brazil trounced the United States, 4-1, to defend its title in the FIFA Five-a-Side Indoor World Championship in Hong Kong.
Dale Ervine, who scored three goals against Iran in the semifinals Friday, did not play in the final for the United States because he was assessed a second yellow card in the match against the Iranians. (AP) Duke Reaches Semifinals: Duke reached the N.C.A.A. soccer semifinals for the first time since 1986, beating Southern Methodist, 7-6, on penalty kicks at Durham, N.C., after a scoreless tie.
The Blue Devils (15-3-3) play Virginia or Dartmouth in a semifinal Friday at Davidson, N.C.
San Diego or Indiana plays Davidson or North Carolina State in the other semifinal. (AP)


Hungary Fights Unrest With New Social Contract
Nervous about the possibility of unrest, the Government is negotiating a new social contract with its citizens, who are showing increasing concern over their falling standard of living.
After meetings with labor leaders and employers' representatives, Government officials agreed this week to a new minimum wage, a list of items that would be exempted from a new value-added tax, and ways to deal with the country's steadily rising unemployment rate, which was 11.6 percent at the end of October.


Just Across the Golden Gate
LIKE many of the residents of California, the rocks of the Marin Headlands came from someplace else, in this case from the middle of the Pacific Ocean, near the Marquesas Islands, where Paul Gauguin died and Herman Melville jumped ship and had the adventure he wrote up as "Typee."
There 200 million years ago lava rose through the earth's crust along what is called a spreading zone and formed basaltic pillows that solidified when they met the sea.
Pushed by the rising of the new Pacific floor, these pillows migrated northeastward and eventually reached the edge of what is now North America, where, like other newcomers, they attached themselves.


After 500 Years, Discovering Jewish Ties That Bind
They were strangers to each other until they shared their personal histories as descendants of Jews who fled Spain 500 years ago.
Some wept as they recounted their search for a religious identity.
Others compared geneologies, seeking common ancestors.
Still others were content to reach out in friendship, saying they were experiencing a sense of kinship and were confident, even without documented proof, they had discovered "primos," or cousins.


Operation Balkan Storm: Here's a Plan
Here's how the Balkan crisis could unfold.
It is late January 1993.
President Clinton decides it is in the American security interest to oppose Serbian aggression in the Balkans with force, in particular to permit the Bosnians to defend themselves.
His advisers believe there is a third option beyond the choices President Bush claimed he faced -- either doing nothing or sending in hundreds of thousands of ground troops.
Mr.
Clinton's advisers develop a three-step plan based on the use of American competitive advantages.


Nina Coleman, Andrew LeSueur
Janine Michelle Coleman, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Joseph P. Coleman of Greenwich, Conn., was married yesterday to Andrew Jaquith LeSueur, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Harvey C. LeSueur of Plymouth, Mass.
The Rev.
Mark Connolly performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Catherine of Siena Church in Riverside, Conn.
Mrs.
LeSueur, who is known as Nina, is the coordinator of field distribution for GTE Mobile Communications, the cellular telephone company, in Atlanta.
She graduated from Princeton University.
Her father is an oral surgeon in Greenwich.


BENEFITS
Multiple Sclerosis Benefit
MONDAY -- There will be dancing and a cash bar at Tatou, 151 East 50th Street, from 6 to 10 P.M. to benefit the New York chapter of the National Multiple Sclerosis Society.
Tickets, $10, at the door.
Information: (212) 463-7787.


Food-and-Wine Benefits Train the Undexterous
IN a changing environment the superior species learns to adapt.
Dr.
Howard Gruber can now hold a plate of food, a glass of wine and a conversation all at the same time.
The dexterous Dr.
Gruber is a veteran of the latest trend in Long Island fund raising -- wine and food tasting.
"I like to sample wine," Dr.
Gruber, a dentist from Plainview, said, "and I like to sample foods."


Publish or Percolate: When Is a Story Ready?
WHAT, to paraphrase the question, did reporters suspect and when did they suspect it?
Two news stories -- one in Washington, the other in New York -- raised that question last week.
Together, they cast a spotlight on the difficult choices that people in the news business make about when to "go with" reports and why some news stories take years to see the light of day.


Lawsuit Attacks the Segregation of Urban Schools From White Suburbs
The de-facto segregation that divides Connecticut into poor, largely minority cities and affluent white suburbs is about to go on trial here in a lawsuit attacking the racial isolation of Hartford's public schools.
The suit, scheduled for trial Dec. 15 in Superior Court, asks a state judge to rule that segregated conditions, whatever their cause, violate the Connecticut constitution's guarantee of equal educational opportunity.


Kennedy and Jennings Win
Bob Kennedy completed an extraordinary week of racing and Lynn Jennings won her sixth consecutive title today in The Athletics Congress national cross-country championships.
Kennedy, a 22-year-old Indiana University senior who won the National Collegiate Athletic Association cross-country title in Bloomington, Ind., on Monday, sprinted past the defending champion, Todd Williams of Knoxville, Tenn., on the home stretch this afternoon to triumph by half a stride.
Kennedy and Williams, both 1992 Olympians, received the same time, 29 minutes 41 seconds, for the muddy 10,000-meter course at the University of Wisconsin-Parkside.


NEWS SUMMARY
How will the President-elect define the tasks of the nation's intelligence agencies?


Corrections
A listing of semifinalists from Long Island for National Merit Scholarships omitted a name on Nov. 1.
He is Kevin Carter of Centereach High School in Centereach.


IN SHORT/SMALL PRESSES: NONFICTION
THE MEMOIRS OF MADAME ROLAND A Heroine of the French Revolution.
Edited by Evelyn Shuckburgh.
Moyer Bell, $19.95.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
MATTER OF TIME
At the beginning of this century, about one of every four clocks was made in Connecticut.
In recognition of this historical nugget, Old Saybrook Historical Society has borrowed a cache of made-in-the-Nutmeg State clocks from members, friends, collectors and the Clock Museum in Bristol for an exhibition that may be seen today, and every Friday, Saturday and Sunday through Dec. 20.


Sandra Silverman, Richard Gorelick
Dr.
Herbert A. Silverman and Ruth Botwinik, both of Baltimore, have announced the engagement of their daughter, Sandra Nadine Silverman, to Richard Dean Gorelick, the son of Ronnie H. Gorelick of Melrose Park, Pa., and the late Morton S. Gorelick.
A February wedding is planned.
Ms.
Silverman is an assistant dean of students at Princeton University in Princeton, N.J.
She graduated from Amherst College and received a master's degree in education from Harvard University.
The prospective bride is the stepdaughter of Paul P. Botwinik of Baltimore.


Restoring the Steamy Bits, and More
SONS AND LOVERS
By D. H. Lawrence. 464 pp. New York:  Cambridge University Press. $24.95.


Feeding Birds and the Uninvited Squirrels
GARDENERS can be thankful for the birds that will hang around during the next few months.
The birds are not only delightful and colorful to see but also continue to eat insect grubs and eggs, or any morsels they can find.
Gardeners who place feeders near the windows find these feathered friends a pleasure to watch, especially at breakfast.
Activity at feeders is busy at this time of year, with the birds following an established pecking order.
It is a fascinating ritual: each species has its turn, with the local population determining the line of action.
The feeders may beckon evening grosbeaks, cardinals, nuthatches, titmice, chickadees, juncoes and white-throated sparrows.


Pastiche of Rodgers And Hammerstein
FOR the 50th anniversary of the collaboration of Richard Rodgers and Oscar Hammerstein 2d, the Queens Theater in the Park is presenting "Some Enchanted Evening," a revue of their canon.
It would be nice to say that the show lives up to its title, but the lackluster cabaret concept, developed by Jeffrey B. Moss, trips over the sheer volume of material.


Business Diary
THE ECONOMY Maybe This Time Recovery Was Just Around the Corner
Just weeks after an election that turned on three factors -- the economy, the economy and the economy -- a flood of numbers spilled out suggesting that things may be looking up.
Economic growth was surprisingly strong in the third quarter, home sales, consumer confidence and personal income rose and jobless claims fell for the sixth time in eight weeks.
The election's winners and losers seemed to lapse by habit into campaign mode, with Marlin Fitzwater shouting, to the accompaniment of a roaring Presidential helicopter, "The Bush recovery is coming on strong," while Bill Clinton took more of a wait-and-see stance.
News that the economy grew 3.9 percent in the quarter "could have some impact" on short-term judgments about a stimulus, he said, but it "won't change my long-term plans" to try to strengthen industrial competitiveness.
Meanwhile, many economists came down on the side of caution, saying it was too early to call a turning point for a recession that has blinked repeatedly but has defiantly refused to get out of town.


Leaks About Slain Officer Inappropriate, Kelly Says
The New York City Police Commissioner, Raymond W. Kelly, acknowledged yesterday that police officials had inappropriately leaked information to the press indicating that a police officer shot to death in Queens earlier this month had had sex shortly before her death with the man accused of killing her.
The Commissioner's remarks, at a memorial service for the officer, Milagros T. Johnson, came after a number of police fraternal organizations had accused the department of maligning the officer's character, treating her case insensitively because she was a woman and she was black.


Joan Baez, the First Lady of Folk
Until recently, people were asking Joan Baez, "Do you still sing?"
"At first I was furious," she says.
"Then I thought, 'Well, how are they supposed to know?' "


For Football Teams' Launderers, Enemy Is Blood, Sweat and Grass
LONG after the fans and players had left Giants Stadium last Sunday, the lights burned late in the back room at Park Cleaning.
There, Barry Barone worked into the night, loading and unloading two small washing machines as they beat that day's sweat and dirt out of 47 Giants uniforms.
The next day, he picked up the same number of grimy uniforms from the Jets and repeated the process.


Back in the Saddle
SWEET MEDICINE
By David Seals. 250 pp. New York:  Orion Books/Crown Publishers. $20.


Free Screenings Of Prostates
"As Population Ages, Prostate Cancer Takes High Toll on L.I."  [ Sept. 13 ]  listed the Strang Clinic -- our correct name is the Strang Cancer Prevention Center -- as a resource without mentioning why.
Your readers might be interested to know that Strang, in conjunction with the New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center, is offering free screenings to men more than 45 years old who have a family history of prostate cancer.


If Caterpillars Could Ski
It's doubtful that the Colorado Tourism Board got permission from the woolly bear caterpillar before making it the star of a campaign to advertise the state's ski slopes.
No one has yet discovered a woolly bear caterpillar that skis.
Those with any sense are sound asleep during the big snow months.
But if any of them do ski, they're not likely to choose Colorado.
The new campaign is distinguished by its pictorial modesty.
Colorado ski advertising commonly features dramatic Rocky Mountain scenery, or action shots of downhill racers in Day-Glo jump suits exploding out of powdery snowdrifts.
The new ad shows only a woolly bear caterpillar crawling across empty space.


London Fashion: An S O S
LONDON fashion is an endangered species.
When the 1960's were revisited in the spring fashion showings in Europe last month, it was the Milanese designers who did the reviving.
The top British designers offered safe and sane clothes, keeping down the risk factor as they hoped to weather the worst economic upheaval in years.


Residential Resales
Closings in the week ended Nov. 14  MANHATTAN  Gramercy Park  $160,000
44 Gramercy Park North  1-bedroom, 1-bath, 900-sq.-ft. co-op in unrenovated prewar building; 24-hr. doorman, manned elevator, fireplace, 2 exposures; maintenance $964, 42% tax-deductible (Broker: M.P.R. Group Ltd.)  Greenwich Village  $195,000
20 East 9th Street  (Brevoort East)  1-bedroom, 1-bath, 900-sq.-ft. postwar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, concierge, dining area, renovated kitchen, 10-ft. ceilings; maintenance $969, 45% tax-deductible (Broker: Bellmarc Realty)  Greenwich Village  $345,000
34 East 10th Street  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 2,000-sq.-ft. co-op in loft building; elevator, high ceilings, 3 exposures; maintenance $1,400, 70% tax-deductible (Broker: Olshan Realty)  Upper West Side  $580,000
789 West End Avenue (99th St.)  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,900-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, maid's room, dining room, remodeled baths, 3 exposures, Hudson River view; maintenance $1,350, 30% tax-deductible (Broker: Halstead Property Co.)  West Village  $220,000
130 Jane Street  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,300-sq.-ft. duplex co-op in prewar building; elevator, fireplace, 12-ft.-ceilings, 2 exposures; maintenance $1,320, 55% tax-deductible (Broker: Delson/ Ginsberg Real Estate)  BRONX  Castle Hill  $185,000
1979 Haviland Avenue  2-family semi-attached brick house; 3 bedrooms, 2 baths in primary unit; 1 bedroom, 1 bath in other; dining room in each; finished basement, 1-car garage, 25- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,400 (Broker: Marland Real Estate)  City Island  $170,000
165 Reville Street  2-family detached stucco and wood-frame house; 1 bedroom, 1 bath, eat-in kitchen in each unit; enclosed porch, 1-car garage, 33- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,500 (Broker: Jacqueline Kyle Kall)  BROOKLYN  Park Slope  $150,000
255 6th Avenue  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 850-sq.-ft. co-op in 4-story brownstone; fireplace, private rear deck, 2 exposures; maintenance $360, 53% tax-deductible (Broker: Joseph Berman Realty)  Prospect Heights  $150,000
20 Plaza Street  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,200-sq.-ft. co-op in prewar Art Deco building; entry foyer, dining area, remodeled kitchen, Prospect Park view; maintenance $663, 45% tax-deductible (Broker: Warren Lewis Realty)  Sheepshead Bay  $265,000
2049 Bedford Avenue  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, one-family detached brick and stucco frame house; eat-in kitchen, finished basement, 2-car garage, 30- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,512 (Broker: Jacob Gold Realty)  QUEENS  Flushing  $255,000
35-11 168th Street  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, one-family detached colonial; dining room, finished basement, 1-car garage, 42- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,300 (Broker: Value Lane Realty)  Forest Hills  $280,000
93-10 68th Avenue  3-bedroom, 2-bath, one-family attached brick town house; raised-dining room, fireplace, finished basement, 20- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,800 (Broker: Madeleine Realty)  STATEN ISLAND  Richmondtown  $207,000
10 McCully Avenue  2-family detached frame house; 3 bedrooms, 2 baths, dining room in primary unit; 1 bedroom, 1 bath in other; finished basement, 75- by 94-ft. lot; taxes $1,467 (Broker: Century 21/Papp Realty)  Westerleigh  $174,000
92 Sawyer Avenue  3-bedroom, 1-bath, one-family detached, Cape Cod; dining room, eat-in kitchen, finished basement, 40- by 101-ft. lot; taxes $1,470 (Broker: Coldwell Banker/DeSimone Realty)


No Headline
To the Editor:
Your review of "The Rascal King" reports, "From 1935 to 1939 he  [ Curley ]  served as Governor of Massachusetts." Not so.
At that time, the Governor's term was two years.
Curley did not seek a second term.
Instead, in 1936 he became the Democratic candidate for United States Senator.


The Flu Pandemic
During the flu epidemic of 1918, according to medical lore, victims were struck down almost in midstride.
Four women in a bridge group played cards together until 11 o'clock in the evening.
By the next morning three of them were dead.
One man got on a streetcar feeling well enough to go to work, rode six blocks and died.
During the single month of October, influenza killed 196,000 people in this country -- more than twice as many as would die of AIDS during the first 10 years of that epidemic.
By the end of the winter of 1918-19, two billion people around the world had come down with influenza, and between 20 million and 40 million had died.
The flu outbreak of 1918 was "the most devastating epidemic that we have ever had in history," says John R. La Montagne, chief of infectious diseases at the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases in Bethesda, Md.
"And it happened in this century. No one really knows why it occurred, but there's every expectation that if it occurred once, it can occur again." The 1918 influenza pandemic killed as many people in a single year as died in the four-year Black Death, the bubonic plague that ravaged Europe from 1347 to 1351.


Keansburg Journal; Cheers for a Football Hero's Return
JONATHAN EDWARDS SCHULTHEIS is back at Keansburg High School, and people here view his return as a harbinger of good things to come.
They remember him when he was the school's leading football star, back in the late 1970's, and then the only resident of this mile-square borough of 11,000 people to graduate from Princeton University.
They remember that he turned down a pro football offer to pursue a career as a teacher, and to keep his Sundays for the Pentecostal Church.


New &amp; Noteworthy
FLOW CHART, by John Ashbery. (Knopf, $13.) In a 216-page poem that our reviewer, Marjorie Perloff, compared to Wordsworth's "Prelude," John Ashbery shows how even the minutiae of television broadcasts, telephone calls and other daily interruptions can become the stuff of poetry.
Of his long works, "perhaps none is quite so various, so beautiful and so new as 'Flow Chart,' " she said last year.
CONSCIOUSNESS EXPLAINED, by Daniel C. Dennett. (Little, Brown, $14.95.) It is difficult for most human beings to think about thinking -- the processes that enable us to distinguish between a fish tank and a toaster occur with such apparent simultaneity that breaking them down into neurons and synapses seems to take all the poetry out of existence.
But this book demonstrates that the computer model of the brain has validity and virtues.
"In illuminating these ideas and relentlessly putting them to the test, Mr. Dennett's exposition is nothing short of brilliant, the best example I've seen of a science book aimed at both professionals and general readers," George Johnson said in The Book Review last year.


Susan Horwitz, C. B. Pomerantz
Susan Grace Horwitz, a political and military analyst, was married last evening to Charles Barry Pomerantz, a restaurant consultant.
Rabbi Norman Kahan performed the ceremony at the Harrison House in Glen Cove, L.I.
Mrs.
Pomerantz, 28 years old, is employed by the United States Defense Department in Arlington, Va.
She graduated magna cum laude from Emory University and received a master's degree in law and diplomacy from Tufts University.
She is a daughter of Dr.
Theodore and Dr.
Barbara Horwitz of Roslyn, L.I.
Her father is an associate clinical professor of obstetrics and gynecology at North Shore Hospital-Cornell University Medical College in Lake Success, L.I.
Her mother is an associate professor of English at the C. W. Post Center of Long Island University in Brookville, L.I.


Kathryn Lorenzo, S. R. Eichenbaum
Mary and Robert Lorenzo of Woodbury, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Kathryn Rose Lorenzo to Steven Robert Eichenbaum, a son of Carole and Samuel Eichenbaum of Highland Park, N.J.
A February wedding is planned.
Ms.
Lorenzo, 25 years old, is a nurse at St.
Barnabas Medical Center in Livingston, N.J.
She graduated from Rutgers University, from which she also received a nursing degree.
Her father is a naval architect at the Philadelphia Naval Shipyard.
Her mother is a psychologist at the George Hess Educational Complex, an elementary school in Mays Landing, N.J.


A New Wine Cellar Stocked With Vintage Choreography
PINNING DOWN THE FLEETING art of movement is no easy task.
But it can be done.
As proof, the Dance Notation Bureau has a little list.
Actually, it's not all that little.
It's 97 pages long and filled with marvels.
The work, published earlier this fall and edited by Lisa Siegel Machlin, is called "Notated Theatrical Dances: A Listing of Theatrical Dance Scores Housed at the Dance Notation Bureau."


ANXIETY IN 3/4 TIME
It is difficult to take Ian Buruma's ruminations about Vienna seriously ("Anxiety in 3/4 Time," Nov. 8).
His historical references seem superficial.
They are certainly misleading.
His obvious distaste for middle-class life and values steers his cynicism into doubtful conclusions and distorted observations.
Much of what he has written as criticism of Austria could be said of most of the Western world.
For example, after various allusions to neo-Nazism and sinister implications of its 17 percent polling strength in the recent national election, Buruma finally describes the "right-wing F.P.O" (Freedom Party of Austria) and its leader as "a populist reaction to an increasingly messy world." Some use those words to describe the Perot movement, which garnered 19 percent on Nov. 3.
The separatist movement in Italy is approaching that strength.
In France, Jean-Marie Le Pen is an ideological counterpart of F.P.O.'s Jorg Haider.
One wonders why France, six times as large as Austria, is not a more realistic target for Buruma's anxiety.


'Carnegie Hall All but Collapsed'
HOROWITZ
His Life and Music.
By Harold C. Schonberg.
Illustrated. 427 pp.
New York: Simon &amp; Schuster. $27.50.


Lessons for the Future May Lurk in the Past
From any of the 922 seats in the Kaufmann Concert Hall at the 92d Street Y, one can look up and see some imposing names in gilt near the ceiling.
There are Virgil and Homer, Shakespeare and Dante, Lincoln and Jefferson, Moses and Maimonides, Bach and Beethoven, Spinoza and Einstein.
The hall establishes a sort of canon; it proclaims its own foundations.
Risking portentousness, it links concert music with the Western literary tradition, the American liberal political tradition, Jewish philosophy and the Enlightenment.
No other New York concert hall displays such inscriptions.
But the Y is not really an arts organization.
It was founded in 1874 for, as its constitution later put it, "the improvement of the mental, moral, spiritual, cultural, social and physical condition of young men and young women and the fostering of Judaism." It was a Jewish version of the Y.M.C.A., offering a location for socializing, recreation and religious education.


Gallery of the Past, Mirror of the Present
In the bowels of the U.S.S.
Intrepid, tourists and schoolchildren passing through an exhibit of artifacts and maps encounter a series of portraits of the great explorers.
Here, in this quincentennial year, they see faces from history: Columbus, Cortes, Magellan, Balboa and Hudson.
What most don't realize, though, is that the faces are also a virtual Who's Who of prominent people in Queens.
There is City Councilman Thomas V. Ognibene of Middle Village, posing as Vasco da Gama.
And Richard (Bo) Dietl, the former detective who ran for Congress in 1986, as Amerigo Vespucci.
George G. Nemeth, the businessman and fund-raiser, as Marco Polo.
Marvin Sylvor, who operates the Forest Park carousel, as Sebastian Cabot.
Justice Joseph G. Golia of State Supreme Court as Giovanni da Verrazano.


It's Summer in Montreal Biodome
Even on cold winter days, vistors to Montreal may opt for warm-weather attire when they visit the tropical rain forest in the city's newest tourist attraction, the Biodome.
Situated in the former Velodrome, a cavernous building erected for the 1976 Olympic cycling events, the Biodome, which opened in June, is an amalgam of zoo, aquarium, botanical garden and museum designed to re-create, with flora and fauna, four different environments.


Unions Brace for Fight Over County Contracts
UNION leaders furious over the Board of Legislators' refusal to ratify their contracts -- say their rank and file feel like pawns in a power struggle, betrayed by government leaders who "sat back in their ivory tower and played with other people's lives."
"It's not fair," said Thomas F. O'Neill, president of the Corrections Officers Benevolent Association.
"You're not only dealing with people's money but with their emotions, too."


Peace Is a Bookshelf Away
Here is Benjamin Hoff, little known best-selling author of "The Te of Piglet" and "The Tao of Pooh," going bump bump bump down the road, carrying two passengers, a 1971 Oregon road map and a cargo of birdseed and laundry.
There are no waiting limousines.
No book tours.
No speaking engagements.
No movie deals.
All there is for the author of "The Te of Piglet,"(Dutton; 1992) now in its tenth week on the bestseller list (Piglet being the sequel to best-selling "The Tao of Pooh," published in 1982) is a rent-a-car with a very flat tire loaded down with birdseed and laundry.


Immigrants' Faith Lifts the Housing Market
When Tricia and Philip Chen landed on American soil in 1990, having endured an eight-year wait to gain entry from their native Taiwan, buying a house was low on their list of family priorities, somewhere below becoming fluent in English and obtaining credit cards.
But priorities quickly changed.


Scandal Drains Japan's Ruling Party
Two days of ambiguous testimony by Japan's most powerful politicians about their reported links to a gangster have further damaged the scandal-tainted governing party by confirming reports that an organized crime group was instrumental in making Noboru Takeshita Prime Minister five years ago.
The parliamentary testimony, obviously rehearsed but occasionally conflicting, offered a devastating glimpse into how key decisions were made by the Liberal Democratic Party's leaders, and demonstrated a casual attitude regarding contacts with organized crime groups.


Seoul in Effort To Draw Visitors
South Korea is building hotel rooms for an expected surge in visitors from Expo 93 and the subsequent 1994 promotion, Visit Korea Year.
Twenty-three hotels now under construction will be ready by the end of next year, Korean officials say.
Among them are three, the Ka Yang, Shatto and Poongyeon, being built in Taejon, the Expo site about 90 miles south of Seoul.
The Ka Yang is expected to open next month, the other two in April.
Seoul, Pusan and Cheju Island are among places where hotels are also going up.
From August to November next year, the Taejon Expo '93 will be held in Taedok Science Town, on the outskirts of Taejon.
The theme, "The Challenge of a New Road to Development," refers to problems of industrialization and the environment.
Cultural events as well as science and technology exhibitions and symposiums are scheduled.


CHRONICLE
After months of speculation about who would play Norma Desmond in his new musical, "Sunset Boulevard," Sir ANDREW LLOYD WEBBER announced yesterday that it would be PATTI LUPONE.


New Group Speeds Food to the Hungry
As the director of Island Harvest, a newly formed prepared-and-perishable-food program on Long Island, I appreciate your thoughtful reporting about the hungry on Long Island.
Island Harvest is a network of volunteers who pick up unserved fresh or prepared food from restaurants, caterers, convenience stores, groceries, bakeries, etc.
This food would normally be thrown away, because, while still quite edible, it is not as fresh as the business requires for sale to its customers.
The food is then delivered to local soup kitchens, homeless shelters and other not-for-profit tax-exempt agencies that feed people in need.


Leonard Cohen, the Lord Byron of Rock-and-Roll
Leonard Cohen has stopped to smell a rose.
He was in the middle of a train of thought, sitting at a table in a piano lounge of a ritzy hotel in midtown Manhattan.
But the lure of blood red petals, the possible prick of thorn and the whiff of romance have proven irresistible.
He leans forward, bends the stem toward him and breathes.
The fragile petals contrast sharply with the chisled age of his face.
The strong reds and greens accentuate his iron-gray hair and tailored charcoal suit.
Mr.
Cohen is a man made for such poetic moments.
Songwriter, icon of 60's folk, sometime novelist and perennial sage, he is in town to talk about his new album, "The Future" (Columbia), his first record since the critically lauded "I'm Your Man" in 1988.
He says he enjoys doing interviews, but he says it with a bit more flourish: "I'm very happy to cooperate with the convention of promoting the record."


WOMAN VICTORIOUS IN CLIENT-SEX CASE
A Superior Court jury has awarded $225,000 in damages to a Rhode Island woman who asserted that her divorce lawyer coerced her into having sexual relations with him.
In a verdict returned last week, the jury awarded the woman, Maria Del Rosario Vallinoto, $25,000 in compensatory damages and $200,000 in punitive damages from the lawyer, Edmond A. DiSandro.


Japan (Bush Backer) Tiptoes Around Clinton
The Japanese Government is spreading a quiet message to the hundreds of bureaucrats, businessmen and politicians who hop trans-Pacific flights every week to the United States: Visit your factories, play lots of golf, but stay out of Little Rock.
As President-elect Bill Clinton assembles his transition team, Japanese officials, who openly rooted for the loser, say they are fearful that an overly eager rush to build bridges with the Democrats could prompt a post-election backlash.
After a campaign marked by repeated criticism of foreign lobbyists -- and promises by Mr.
Clinton to raise $45 billion in new revenue by taxing foreign companies more heavily -- there are words of caution.


A Christmas Plea on the 'Lords' of Commerce
Saying that the commercialization of Christmas "devours some, leaves others in ruinous debt and punishes the poor," a group of 25 major Christian leaders have issued an open letter urging Americans to exercise "moderate and thoughtful giving" and "genuine charity."
The letter, signed by Catholic, Protestant and Unitarian leaders and issued Wednesday, is sharply critical of the "advertising lords" of Madison Avenue, who, it says, have "reduced Christmas to a carnival of mass marketing."


Little Rock, Big Time
"Welcome to the Center of the Universe," the woman said, then laughed at the absurdity of her greeting.
Charlotte Brown, the director of development for the Arkansas Arts Center, was reflecting on the fortunes of Arkansas's capital city since Nov. 3.
Little Rock, with fewer than 200,000 residents, is reveling in and reeling under the harsh klieg lights of its sudden fame.


Graduate Aides Strike at Berkeley to Set Up Union
Several hundred graduate students who serve as instructors and researchers are on strike at the University of California at Berkeley over the university's refusal to recognize their union.
The strike has emptied many classrooms at the 30,000-student campus, with the strikers picketing campus entrances and exhorting fellow students and teachers to boycott the university.
Neither the university nor the striking students' group were able to say how many classes had been disrupted by the strike.
But many students and faculty members have heeded the pickets' pleas to "please stay off campus." Some instructors have been teaching classes at their houses or in coffee houses on the campus perimeter.


RAGE IN A TENURED POSITION
For some of us relatively new to Columbia's English department, the question is not whether Heilbrun's anger is earned, but whether the institutional history that produced that anger can be changed.


At Work; New Generation Feeling the Fire
GRADUATION day, a bittersweet time for most college seniors and parents as they look backward and forward, may have provided Derrick Diggs's parents with one alarmingly bittersweet moment last spring.
They assumed their talented son had spent some part of his last year at Morehouse College in Atlanta applying to graduate schools or looking for a job, as most anxious seniors do.
No, he told them after the family returned to its hotel from a shopping trip.
"They said, 'Well, this is your last party. After that you're on your own,' " Mr.
Diggs said.


When All They Really Want Is Seafood
ONE of the most frequently asked questions we encounter is "Where can I find a good seafood restaurant?" Anyone in the Hartford area might supply a quick answer: the Capitol Fish House.
For nine years or so the Capitol Fish House has been preparing fresh fish and seafood with considerable consistency, which is no small feat.


Seminoles Pound, Then Root For Gators
The Florida State football team today provided a convincing argument for its participation in a national championship showdown.
Operating mostly from a shotgun formation that has transformed them into a veritable scoring machine, the Seminoles dispatched the Florida Gators with ease, winning, 45-24, before a record 68,311 fans sandwiched into Doak Campbell Stadium.


New Orleans Journal; A Monument That Can't Find a Home
The bloody Battle of Liberty Place began at 4 P.M. on Sept. 14, 1874, and people here are hoping it will soon end.
The uprising of white Democrats against the biracial Republican administration that ruled Louisiana after the Civil War raged through the downtown streets and ended with 32 dead on both sides.
Within few years the whites here, and throughout most of the South, regained power and held it for almost a century.


'Paradise' Seekers Drive Up Idaho Prices
Standing on the wooden porch of her daughter's alpine home in the pine forests of northern Idaho one recent chilly evening, 73-year-old June Rinck took a deep breath of clear mountain air and insisted she was standing on "a piece of paradise."
She had followed her daughter to this idyllic spot three years ago, she explained, after they had both fled -- literally to the hills -- from Southern California to escape congestion, pollution and random violence.
Besides, she added softly, she needed a tranquil environment for her retirement years.


Robin Westfield, David Briskman
Robin Anne Westfield, a management consultant, was married Thursday to David Klar Briskman, an industrial engineer.
Judge Howard Spitz of New York State Family Court performed the ceremony at La Reserve in White Plains.
Ms.
Westfield, who is 27 years old, is keeping her name.
She is employed by Coopers &amp; Lybrand, the accounting firm, in New York.
She graduated from Cornell University, as did her husband, and received a master's degree in engineering from the Rochester Institute of Technology.


Food-and-Wine Benefits Train the Undexterous
IN a changing environment the superior species learns to adapt.
Dr.
Howard Gruber can now hold a plate of food, a glass of wine and a conversation all at the same time.
The dexterous Dr.
Gruber is a veteran of the latest trend in Long Island fund raising -- wine and food tasting.
"I like to sample wine," Dr.
Gruber, a dentist from Plainview, said, "and I like to sample foods."


Jenny-Anne Martz, Galen R. Horst,
Jenny-Anne Martz, the public information coordinator for the American Association for Cancer Research in Philadelphia, was married on Friday to Galen R. Horst, the executive director of the Germantown (Pa.) Mennonite Church Corporation, a historic trust.
The Mennonite ceremony took place at the Historic Mennonite Meetinghouse in Germantown.
Mrs.
Horst-Martz, 34 years old, graduated from Wesleyan University and received a law degree from Brooklyn Law School.
She is the daughter of Anne and Larry Martz of New York.
Her father is a writer and a contributing editor at Newsweek magazine in New York.


Whose Woods? Hunter vs. Homeowner
THE vivid hills of autumn, deeply carpeted with rustling foliage, offer unusual pleasures to thousands of campers, joggers and mountain-bikers who take to the trails in greater numbers each year.
But they are just as tempting to hunters, and from Maine to Montana, the woods that rifle-toting men have for generations called their own now harbor a particularly combustible new mixture: wildly proliferating deer herds and semi-suburban dream houses sheltered from the rifle shots only by the flimsiest curtain of leaves.


Profile: Carol Bartz; Imposing a Hierarchy On a Gaggle of Techies
AS the No. 2 executive at Sun Microsystems Inc., Carol Bartz brushed aside many tentative offers to run a company, everything from a two-person startup to a $250 million concern.
She liked her job at Sun, and "I lacked that male-dominant gene," she said, "the one that says you have to be C.E.O., like the one that says you don't ask for directions."
One has to wonder, then, why she said yes when a search committee from Autodesk Inc. came calling.
This was, after all, a company known as a theocracy of hackers, where a cabal of counterculture senior programmers took their dogs to work and tried to reach a consensus on strategy through endless memos sent by electronic mail.
And it was a company where the founder, John Walker, a programmer himself, telecommuted from Switzerland and issued memos blasting the management he put in place.
No wonder: The company's growth had slowed and profits had fallen.


Hensley Evans, Michael Abert
Mr. and Mrs.
George J. Evans Jr. of New Canaan, Conn., have announced May wedding plans for their daughter, Mary Hensley Evans, and Michael Bruce Abert, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
James G. Abert of Washington.


Robin Strauss, Ira Rashbaum
Robin Suzanne Strauss, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Marvin Strauss of Oyster Bay, L.I., was married on Thursday to Dr.
Ira Glenn Rashbaum, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Bernard Rashbaum of Huntington, L.I.
Rabbi David Nesenoff performed the ceremony at the Woodbury (L.I.) Jewish Center.
Mrs.
Rashbaum, 24 years old, is the brokerage manager at the Strauss Agency in New York, a life-insurance brokerage.
Her father is the president of the agency and her mother, Sheila Strauss, is the director of administration.
The bride graduated from Cornell University.


NOV. 22-27: Offering Troops; Bush Sets a Course For Getting Involved In Helping Somalia
Even though he is in the midst of a transition he has called long and merciless, President Bush showed last week that he is still willing to wield power on the world stage.
In offering to dispatch 20,000 or more American troops as part of a proposed United Nations force to help distribute food to the starving in Somalia, he was trying to bestir other heads of government to do much more in that East African country.
Each day, 1,000 Somalis are dying because a civil war has prevented the distribution of famine relief.


Formula One Has Wrong Idea
To the Sports Editor:
I am writing in response to the Formula One finale on Nov. 8.
This circuit has become more and more high-tech; the racers play an unimportant role.


A Big Impression In a Small Venue
Alcorn State University was crushed in its Division I-AA football playoff game last night against top-ranked and heavily favored Northeast Louisiana, but there had been a feeling that the Braves of Lorman, Miss., would carry an inspirational edge into it.
This reasoning was tied to the fact that 1992 is the 100th anniversary of black college football.
How fitting it would have been for Alcorn State, the nation's oldest historically black land-grant college, to pull off an unexpected victory.


China Removes Some Price Controls on Food
In what was seen as a significant step toward freeing prices and creating a more rational market system, the Government announced today that it was removing price controls on grain in China's most populous province and on meat and eggs in Beijing.
The official New China News Agency said consumers in Sichuan Province, home to 108 million people, from now on would pay market prices for rice and other staple grain products.
In Beijing, officials told employees today that beginning on Tuesday they would have to pay up to 40 percent more for meat, as well as smaller increases for eggs and vegetables.


Reform School
LOOKING LIKE POOH Bear in the lions' den, Yegor Timurovich Gaidar, the Acting Prime Minister of Russia, strode to the podium to face his harshest audience, the Supreme Soviet, the standing Parliament chosen 21 months before the Soviet Union collapsed.
Gaidar, only 36 years old, was sweating, clearly nervous.
The Parliament had come back into session this day, Sept. 22, after a summer of increasingly bitter denunciations of Gaidar and his Government, which is dominated by young, westernized economists like himself.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
Top Delivery for 27 Years
AFTER 27 years of delivering mail to Great Neck lanes named Byron, Shelley, Keats and Whitman, a touch of the poet has rubbed off on Christ (Chris) Millisys.
Asked to describe his customers, the mailman said, "Well, they are well read and well bred."


New York City's Deadliest Intersections
Traffic fatalities involving pedestrians in New York City have dropped to the lowest level in five years, but two hit-and-run accidnts on the Grand Concouse in the Bronx this month have drawn attention to unsafe intersections on that street.
There were 13 traffic deaths on the Consourse last year, according to a study by the City Transportation Department, making it one of the most dangerous streets in the city.


Free Screenings Of Prostates
"As Population Ages, Prostate Cancer Takes High Toll on L.I."  [ Sept. 13 ]  listed the Strang Clinic -- our correct name is the Strang Cancer Prevention Center -- as a resource without mentioning why.
Your readers might be interested to know that Strang, in conjunction with the New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center, is offering free screenings to men more than 45 years old who have a family history of prostate cancer.


The Joy and Ease of a Gliding Pocket Door
POCKET doors operate virtually without flaw, seldom need adjustment and are easy to install in new or existing walls.
Because remodeling procedures can vary when installing a door in an existing wall, only new-wall installation is described.
Pocket-door kits have metal frame parts, hardware and instructions.
Doors are sold separately, and any door can be a pocket door, if it can be trimmed to fit the frame.


They Might Be Costumes
To dress Denzel Washington for "Malcolm X," Avery Lucas simply looked in the mirror.
"I basically took what I would wear every day and put it on Denzel," said Mr.
Lucas, who designed the suits that Mr.
Washington wears during the parts of the film set in the late 1930's and 1940's.
"What I wear myself are a lot of double-breasted, side vented suits with peaked lapels and a very nipped waist. It's very British, 1936 to 1942. To me, that period was the height of men having sex appeal."


Streetscapes: The Brinckerhoff Carriage House; The End for a Victorian Gem
IF you are a fan of New York City's funny little midblock surprises, it is now time to mourn the 1882 Brinckerhoff carriage house, a Victorian gem that miraculously survived until this fall, when the Allen-Stevenson School made it a footnote to a gym-and-classroom expansion.
Except for the 1869 German (now Lenox Hill) Hospital on the south side, East 77th Street between Park Avenue and Lexington Street was essentially raw land in the late 1870's.
But, apparently by common consent, local owners set the north side of the block aside for carriage houses serving private families farther west.


Escape Hatch For Commuters
To the Editor:
Jon Pareles attributes Howard Stern's popularity to the "arrested development" of a large segment of America's listening audience.
I have a little secret for Mr.
Pareles: the problem may lie not so much in the audience as in the programming against which Mr.
Stern competes.


Second Terminal Opening at Narita
A second terminal at the New Tokyo International Airport in Narita, which handles two-thirds of all international flights in and out of Japan, is to begin operation next Sunday.
The terminal is 1.65 times the size of the first terminal building and will be able to serve 10 million passengers a year, a Japanese tourist official said.
Terminal 2 will house 32 international airlines, more than half of those that use the airport, including Continental, Delta and Japan Airlines.
It has a shuttle train running on two tracks to and from the main terminal, and one floor, the fourth, devoted to restaurants and duty-free and other stores.


Feeding Birds and the Uninvited Squirrels
GARDENERS can be thankful for the birds that will hang around during the next few months.
The birds are not only delightful and colorful to see but also continue to eat insect grubs and eggs, or any morsels they can find.
Gardeners who place feeders near the windows find these feathered friends a pleasure to watch, especially at breakfast.
Activity at feeders is busy at this time of year, with the birds following an established pecking order.
It is a fascinating ritual: each species has its turn, with the local population determining the line of action.
The feeders may beckon evening grosbeaks, cardinals, nuthatches, titmice, chickadees, juncoes and white-throated sparrows.


Corrections
An article in Styles of the Times last Sunday about St.
Marks Place misidentified the organizer of a bus tour of hippies to Queens.
The tour was conceived by Joey Skaggs, a performance artist.


It's China Against the World, With a Great Deal at Stake
THE American bullies, joined by the greedy French arms peddlers and the deceitful British colonists, are brazenly conspiring to overthrow our Communist system, subvert the return of Hong Kong to the motherland, and detach Taiwan as their permanent "unsinkable aircraft carrier." But comrades, what can we do about it?
That kind of bunker mentality, according to knowledgeable Chinese, hangs in the air these days behind the high red walls of Zhongnanhai, the domain of China's past and present emperors.
If many Americans are frustrated by an inability to get China to moderate policies that seem outrageous, reciprocal sentiments vex leaders on this side of the Pacific Ocean.


Corrections
A photograph on Nov. 15 with an article about "Home Alone 2" carried an incorrect credit.
It should have read, "Andy Schwartz/20th Century Fox."


The Joy and Ease of a Gliding Pocket Door
POCKET doors operate virtually without flaw, seldom need adjustment and are easy to install in new or existing walls.
Because remodeling procedures can vary when installing a door in an existing wall, only new-wall installation is described.
Pocket-door kits have metal frame parts, hardware and instructions.
Doors are sold separately, and any door can be a pocket door, if it can be trimmed to fit the frame.


Sports of The Times; The Knicks Are Banging Doors, Bulls
A FRIEND of mine once told the story of how his high school coach motivated the team: Just before a big game, the coach locked the first string in the dressing room and said they couldn't start because of casual play in recent days.
"We banged on the door, and by the time he unlocked it, we went out and killed the other team," my friend recalled.
"The only problem was that the guy tried it again a week later. He locked us in and said the second team was starting. This time we didn't knock on the door."


Gifts Destined For a Suitcase
IN gifts of travel gadgets, lighter is almost always better.
But in the mind of the writer and former Metropolitan Museum curator Thomas Hoving, the fattest, heaviest model of the Swiss Army knife is the best one, despite its weight of seven ounces.
"It is the most important thing I carry when I travel," Mr.
Hoving said.
"It has the miniature eyeglass screwdriver inside the corkscrew, which is the most vital item. You can go down to half the weight and give up the pliers, but I won't." He said that the scissors were also important.
This would make a compact if expensive gift for anyone who travels a lot.
Mr.
Hoving said that in all his time of traveling with his gadget in his pocket, security officers had objected only once, on a domestic Italian flight, when he had to abandon his treasure and buy another later.
The other features of the Victorinox Swisschamp include several other screwdrivers, a tiny magnifying glass, tweezers, a rope saw and a fish-scaler.
The model, in red or black, has a suggested retail price of $88, which is what it sells for in Hoffritz stores, but is sold at Remington Shavers at 37 West 43d Street for $80 and in some catalogues for $70.
Eastern Mountain Sports stores carry it at $69.50, and phone orders may be placed at the company's store in Peterborough, N.H. (603) 924-7231.


Reading, Writing and Arithmetic and, Now, Right and Wrong
FORGET for the moment why Johnny can't read.
Consider instead why Johnny can't tell right from wrong.
Can he be taught to make morally informed decisions?
And should he be taught tolerance for those different from himself?
Mirroring a nationwide trend, many schools in Westchester County are grappling with these questions.
Educators are studying and, in some cases, implementing a re-introduction of moral and democratic values into both the curriculum and the school setting.
For many parents and teachers, the focus represents a long-overdue recognition of the schools' critical role in combatting what they see as a deteriorating moral climate surrounding children.
But others are balking at what they see as the schools' intrusion into what has historically been the role of the family.
And some argue that an emphasis on values detracts from the schools' principal job of teaching academic subjects.


On the Sidewalks of Saks
The Fifth Avenue store unveils its windows, Nov. 23.


Duo-Pianists Offering Rare Transcriptions
THE duo-pianists David Bradshaw and Cosmo Buono have made a specialty of researching and performing fascinating, though little known, transcriptions by major composers.
Three such pieces adorn their program today at 3 P.M. at the Emelin Theater in Mamaroneck: Schubert Landler (Austrian dances), rescored for piano, four hands, by Brahms, Debussy's "Prelude to the Afternoon of a Faun," in a Ravel arrangement more effective than the composer's own two-piano edition, and Rossini's "William Tell Overture," given a virtuosic keyboard translation by Louis Moreau Gottschalk.
Surrounding these novelties are Bradshaw and Buono's own version of the waltzes from Richard Strauss's "Rosenkavalier" and what might be called a double transcription: Liszt's two-piano setting of his own organ "Fantasie and Fugue on 'Ad Nos, ad Salutarem Undam,' " itself based on a theme from the Meyerbeer opera "Le Prophete." More information may be obtained by calling 698-0098.


Point Reyes: Paradise Retouched
THE trail up to Mount Wittenberg rises steep but short, so if you pace yourself you can reach the top with enough breath left to cheer the view.
From this 1,400-foot lookout in the middle of the Point Reyes National Seashore in California, green-black forests and golden meadows roll down to a coastline that the eye can follow for miles without spotting a living soul.
In the middle distance two estuaries, named Drakes Estero and Limantour Estero, cut inland like the last blank spaces in a topographic puzzle.
To the left the long sandy finger of Limantour Spit points outward along the great arc of Drakes Beach toward Chimney Rock and blue infinity.


Christmas in the Air
For Henri Bendel's fragrant decorations, a late-afternoon preview, Nov. 24.


In Drag


POSTINGS: Preserving Housing; Rental Seminar
Representatives of city government, the business community and the residential real estate industry will gather on Thursday at a seminar in Manhattan on maintaining the city's rental housing.
"The preservation of the rental housing," said John Gilbert 3d, president of the Rent Stabilization Association, the landlord organization sponsoring the conference, "is an important issue not just for tenants, owners and public officials, but also for business and industry. The city's economic health depends, in part, on the retention of rental housing."


The Mayor Of Passaic Is Convicted Of Corruption
Joseph Lipari, the Mayor of Passaic, N.J., was convicted today on two charges of extortion and five counts of income tax evasion after a five-week corruption trial in Federal District Court.
At the same time, the jury found him not guilty of seven other extortion charges.
Mr.
Lipari, 56 years old, who is normally feisty and emotional, seemed crestfallen at the verdict.
He lowered his head and placed his face in his hands as the jury pronounced guilty verdicts shortly before 2:30 P.M. on the first two extortion charges in a 14-count indictment returned against him in March.
He looked up, with little expression, as the acquittals on the next seven charges and the guilty verdicts on the five income tax counts were announced.


A Heisman Duel Is Reduced to a Hurricane Tuneup
Gino Torretta didn't strike a pose.
That is not his style, and on the night of the Heisman confrontation that never happened, this was not the time and place.
He was carried off the field on the shoulders of teammates as the University of Miami completed its second consecutive perfect season, and its fourth in the last seven seasons, with a 63-17 victory over San Diego State tonight.


Carolyn Donohoe and Thomas Marieb
Carolyn Marie Donohoe, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
David A. Donohoe of Potomac, Md., was married there yesterday to Thomas Norman Marieb, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Norman Marieb of Orange, Conn.
Msgr.
Robert P. Mohan performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Church of Our Lady of Mercy.
Mrs.
Marieb, 28 years old, is the owner of Donohoe Communications, a public relations and marketing company in San Francisco.
She graduated from Tulane University.
Her father is a senior managing partner in the Washington law firm of Akin, Gump, Hauer &amp; Feld.


Data Bank/November 29, 1992
New Orders for Durable Goods
Oct.
Sept.
Aug.
Monthly percent change
3.9
0.3
-0.4
Personal Spending
Monthly percent change
0.7
0.9
-0.2
Personal Income
Monthly percent change
1.0
0.5
-0.2
Gross Domestic Product
III Q'92
II Q'92
I Q'92
Annual Rate, percent change
3.9
1.5
2.9
Corporate Profits
Percent change
-6.0
1.3
10.8
Weekly Jobless Claims
Nov. 13
Nov. 6
Oct. 30
In thousands
374
386
355
Crude Oil, W. Texas Intermediate
Nov. 27
Nov. 20
Nov. 13
End of week spot price, per barrel
20.27
20.40
20.08
3 Month Treasury Bills
Rate in percent
3.23
3.19
3.05


Elizabeth Sigety, Gerald Marcus
Mr. and Mrs.
Charles E. Sigety of Pipersville, Pa., have announced the engagement of their daughter Elizabeth Snell Sigety to Gerald P. Marcus, a son of Elaine Marcus of Wayne, N.J., and the late Richard P. Marcus.
A January wedding is planned.
Miss Sigety, 30 years old, is the vice president of marketing for Navigator Realty, a real estate management and development company in New York.
She graduated from Tulane University and received an M.B.A. from New York University.
Her father is the chairman of Professional Medical Products Inc., a manufacturing company in Greenwood, S.C.


Libya Faces More Sanctions at a Precarious Time
The French Foreign Ministry issued a statement this week raising the specter of further sanctions against Libya at a time when the country is reeling from rising economic chaos, deepening isolation within the Arab world and a new series of strange pronouncements by its leader, Col.
Muammar el-Qaddafi.
In a joint communique issued in Paris on Friday, France, the United States and Britain promised "even more effective" sanctions to force Libya to cooperate in investigations of the bombings of American and French airliners in the late 1980's by delivering two of its security services agents for trial either in Britain or the United States and four others for questioning to France.
Since March, Libya has been under Security Council sanctions that ban all civilian flights to and from the country and the sales of any arms to Libya.


BEST SELLERS: November 29, 1992
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
2
MIXED BLESSINGS, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $23.50.) Three couples' lives are strained by the problems of having children.
2
2
6
THE TALE OF THE BODY THIEF, by Anne Rice. (Knopf, $24.) Lestat embarks on a dangerous enterprise; "The Vampire Chronicles," continued.
3
6
4
MEXICO, by James A. Michener. (Random House, $25.) While researching the lives of his ancestors, an American journalist learns about the history of the land south of the border. (LP)
4
5
7
THE STARS SHINE DOWN, by Sidney Sheldon. (Morrow, $23.) The fortunes of a businesswoman are imperiled by secrets from her past. (LP)
5
4
5
MOSTLY HARMLESS, by Douglas Adams. (Harmony, $20.) In the fifth volume of the "Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy" series, a survivor tries to cope with new predicaments.
6
3
5
DRIVING FORCE, by Dick Francis. (Putnam, $21.95.) An ex-jockey's horse-transport business is besieged by a series of mysterious deaths.
7
8
7
SABINE'S NOTEBOOK, by Nick Bantock. (Chronicle Books, $17.95.) Continuing the epistolary romance begun in "Griffin &amp; Sabine."
8
12
16
THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $14.95.) A photographer and a lonely farmer's wife in Iowa.
9
7
2
THE GENERAL'S DAUGHTER, by Nelson DeMille. (Warner, $21.95.) The investigation of the murder of a woman officer, a general's daughter, unearths scandals in the military.
10
9
38
THE PELICAN BRIEF, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $22.50.) A woman law student probes the murder of two Supreme Court justices.
11
10
13
GRIFFIN &amp; SABINE, by Nick Bantock. (Chronicle Books, $17.95.) The romance of an artist and a secret admirer, told through cards and letters.
12
11
2
RED SQUARE, by Martin Cruz Smith. (Random House, $23.) Investigator Arkady Renko, returning to Moscow and Berlin after the collapse of Communism, still faces a perdurable mafia.
13
15
20
GERALD'S GAME, by Stephen King. (Viking, $23.50.) Twenty-eight hours of horror suffered by a woman handcuffed to a bedpost.
14
1
DOMES OF FIRE, by David Eddings. (Del Rey/ Ballantine, $22.) The veterans of the fantasy series "The Elenium" contend with new dangers in the first book of another series, "The Tamuli."
15
13
14
WHERE IS JOE MERCHANT? by Jimmy Buffett. (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, $19.95.) A couple on the trail of a dead rock star who has been sighted.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
2
11
THE WAY THINGS OUGHT TO BE, by Rush H. Limbaugh 3d. (Pocket, $22.) Anecdotes and opinions offered by the talk show host.
2
1
4
SEX, by Madonna. (Warner, $49.95.) Erotic photographs of the pop star by Steven Meisel, and her reflections on them.
3
3
8
IT DOESN'T TAKE A HERO, by H. Norman Schwarzkopf with Peter Petre. (Linda Grey/ Bantam, $25.) The autobiography of the general who commanded the allied forces in the gulf war.
4
4
6
I CAN'T BELIEVE I SAID THAT! by Kathie Lee Gifford with Jim Jerome. (Pocket, $22.) The autobiography of the co-host of the television show "Live With Regis and Kathie Lee."
5
5
13
EVERY LIVING THING, by James Herriot. (St. Martin's, $22.95.) Continuing the memoirs of the Yorkshire veterinarian.
6
7
25
EARTH IN THE BALANCE, by Al Gore. (Houghton Mifflin, $22.95.) The Vice President-elect discusses factors affecting the environment and what must be done to save the earth.
7
6
5
BANKRUPTCY 1995, by Harry E. Figgie Jr. with Gerald J. Swanson. (Little, Brown, $19.95.) The authors predict the collapse of America under Government debt and suggest ways to cope with it.
8
9
16
WOMEN WHO RUN WITH THE WOLVES, by Clarissa Pinkola Estes. (Ballantine, $20.) A Jungian analyst reinterprets myths and folk tales to enable women to understand their psyches.
9 *
14
2
MY LIFE, by Earvin (Magic) Johnson with William Novak. (Random House, $22.) The autobiography of the retired Los Angeles Lakers basketball player.
10
10
10
THE TE OF PIGLET, by Benjamin Hoff. (Dutton, $16.) Aspects of Taoist philosophy explained through the actions of an A. A. Milne character.
11
8
27
THE SILENT PASSAGE, by Gail Sheehy. (Random House, $16.) The psychological and social significance of menopause for today's women.
12
12
4
GENIUS, by James Gleick. (Pantheon, $27.50.) The life and achievements of Richard Feynman, the Nobel Prize-winning physicist.
13
11
24
TRUMAN, by David McCullough. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $30.) A biography of the 33d President.
14
15
5
THE CHANGE, by Germaine Greer. (Knopf, $24.) An extensive survey of the physical, psychological and social effects of menopause.
15
13
13
YOUNG MEN &amp; FIRE, by Norman Maclean. (University of Chicago, $19.95.) An account of a disastrous fire in a Montana forest in 1949.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
1
20
HARVEY PENICK'S LITTLE RED BOOK, by Harvey Penick with Bud Shrake. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $19.) Anecdotes and tips about golf.
2
6
10
THE MEASURE OF OUR SUCCESS, by Marian Wright Edelman. (Beacon, $15.) Rules to live by.
3
3
9
THE AMERICAN HERITAGE DICTIONARY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE. (Houghton Mifflin, $39.95.) The third edition.
4 *
5
39
A RETURN TO LOVE, by Marianne Williamson. (HarperCollins, $25.) Inspirational advice.
5
2
9
ARE YOU THE ONE FOR ME? by Barbara De Angelis. (Delacorte, $21.) How to choose and keep the right partner in love and marriage.
6 *
4
10
LIFE'S LITTLE INSTRUCTION BOOK, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $12.95.) Some 500 tips for achieving a self-fulfilling life.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,050 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 28,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.
And Bear in Mind
(Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)
JFK: Reckless Youth, by Nigel Hamilton. (Random House, $30.) A British scholar's gripping first volume of an ambitious life of John F. Kennedy that mines new and old sources to reveal a dreadful family dynamic from which the young man struggled, with imperfect success, to emancipate himself.
IN MY PLACE, by Charlayne Hunter-Gault. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $19.) A genuinely charming memoir by the female protagonist of the integration of the University of Georgia in 1961.
HENRY JAMES.
The Imagination of Genius: A Biography, by Fred Kaplan. (Morrow, $25.) A thoughtful, balanced book that gives a consistent, persuasive account of James's development as an author -- and does this in only one volume.
JAPAN AT WAR: An Oral History, by Haruko Taya Cook and Theodore F. Cook. (New Press, $27.50.) Powerful, hideous and remarkably candid recollections by Japanese veterans who confirm the worst allegations of American wartime propaganda.
A CHORUS OF STONES: The Private Life of War, by Susan Griffin. (Doubleday, $22.50.) Ms.
Griffin, a poet, imagines her own life together with the history of the 20th century in an associative meditation that embraces cellular chemistry and two world wars.
THE ANATOMY OF THE NUREMBERG TRIALS: A Personal Memoir, by Telford Taylor. (Knopf, $35.) Mr.
Taylor, a prosecutor at the trials of German war criminals in 1946, makes a strong case that justice was done at Nuremberg, and seen to be done.
THE ART PACK, by Christopher Frayling, Helen Frayling and Ron van der Meer. (Knopf, $40.) An irresistibly seductive book that uses "paper engineering" and a battery of scientific and geometric devices to make art history yield up its secrets.


81st Annual Campaign For the Neediest Begins
After roaming the country as a migrant farm worker for more than two decades, Rene P. Velez returned to New York City in 1989 in search of his childhood.
He spent his first 36 hours on the elevated subway lines he remembered riding as a young boy, peering out the windows for a glimpse of a familiar station, building or street.
When he found none, he felt that his identity would remain forever clouded, that the future held nothing for him because he had no past on which to build.
Angry and despondent, he tried to commit suicide by taking an overdose of pills.


POSTINGS: Harlem Beach Esplanade; A Riverside Park For the Community
"Harlem" and "Beach" are words that do not customarily go together.
And no one will be encouraged to swim off Harlem's shore.
But the first $1 million is in hand for the Harlem Beach Esplanade, a 20-acre park that is eventually to run from 125th to 145th Street, along the Harlem River.
Borough President Ruth W. Messinger of Manhattan said that while pollution rendered swimming unsafe, the esplanade would have features "to evoke the sense of a beach and to encourage beach-style activities": barbecuing, picnicking, fishing, sunbathing, wading, jogging, biking and strolling.


After 8 Months, First Relief Reaches One Bosnian Town
Thousands of Muslims lined the roads into the Bosnian town of Srebrenica today to greet the first United Nations aid convoy to reach them since the beginning of the eight-month war in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
For three days Serbs from villages around the nearby town of Bratunac had held up the 17-truck convoy carrying 40 tons of food, blankets and other supplies to Srebrenica just as they had blocked every other aid convoy to the area since the war began in April.


NOV. 22-27: Neo-Nazi Challenge; Killings Prompt Germany To Crack Down
The killings of three Turkish citizens in a firebombing last week increased the pressure on the German Government to show that it is not ignoring the challenge posed by spreading rightist violence, and by the end of the week it responded by banning a neo-Nazi organization.
Interior Minister Rudolf Seiters suggested there would soon be more such bans.
Public outrage about the rising violence against foreigners had reached a new peak after the firebombing Monday, in the western town of Molln, which killed a 51-year-old woman and two girls, aged 14 and 10.
Anonymous telephone callers claimed responsibility for the attack, signing off with the cry, "Heil Hitler!" A skinhead was soon arrested, but the prosecutor withdrew the charge the next day, saying he probably was not guilty.


Price and Performance Add Up to a Real Bargain
WITH STEREO HIGH on many holiday shopping lists, the classic distinction between price and value becomes a timely concern.
In sound equipment, cost and quality are not always proportional.
Excellence is often overpriced, and cheap goods are no bargain.
But it is possible to pinpoint models in every price range that exceed the norms for their class and therefore offer exceptional price/performance ratios.
These are the real bargains.


Inspiration: Mother Of High-Level Upsets
YOU can be reasonably sure that there are more upsets in high-level chess than in other games or sports, even though we must rely on fragmentary reports rather than statistics.
The reason for this is that inspiration can intervene and overcome the best that discipline and technique can produce.
And inspiration is not the exclusive possession of the stronger player.
A good example of brilliant success by an underdog is the game between Luc Winants, a Belgian international master, and Gata Kamsky of Brooklyn, one of the highest-ranked grandmasters in the world, in the Interpolis International Tournament, which ended Oct. 28 in Tilburg, the Netherlands.
The match was played in Round 3.


On Being 'Colored,' an Invention of Apartheid, in South Africa
To the Editor:
Re your Nov. 1 report that mixed-race voters in South Africa are joining the apartheid Nationalist Party: As a member of South Africa's colored population group, I am heartened by that group's interest in more than one political party.
I firmly believe that the coloreds will be the only ethnic group to pledge allegiance to political parties across ethnic boundaries.
Only similar action by other ethnic groups will prevent South Africa's struggle for social justice from degenerating into full-scale race war.


Santos Ready to Return After Speedy Recovery
Jose Santos still winces when he thinks of the collision at Belmont Park on July 13 when three horses and three jockeys went down.
He still misses the $400,000 he might have earned since then.
He still wonders if the two metals pins and 14 screws have mended his fractured right arm so that he can control 1,000-pound race horses again.
The 31-year-old jockey from Chile, four times the national leader in prize money won, reported to Scotty Schulhofer's barn at Gulfstream Park at 6:15 yesterday morning and worked three horses out of the starting gate.
Then he reported that the day of reckoning was here.
He will make a dramatically early return to the races on Tuesday at the Calder track in Miami, three months earlier than expected.


As Pay for Nurses Increases, So Does the Number of Men Entering the Field
Gary Welch, an industrial parts distributor, decided to change careers the night he went to Valley Children's Hospital here to watch his sister work.
"I thought it would be boring," Mr.
Welch said of his sister's job.
"But there was this young patient, a girl, 11 or 12, who coded. Short for code blue, cardiac arrest. The activity! The nurses, the interns, all interacting. They got the girl breathing. 'Wow!' I thought, 'this is exciting. Everything going on to preserve the life of a person.' That got me hooked."


U.S. Move Might Save Ailing Somali Relief Effort
The dispatch of American troops to help efforts here to feed the starving could rescue an international relief effort that has achieved improvement despite enormous obstacles but is in danger of collapsing, aid officials said.
A largely desert country of perrhaps six million people on the Horn of Africa, Somalia has ceased to exist in the usual sense as a nation.
Two years of civil conflict has destroyed any semblance of government and brought about the famine that is believed to have already killed several hundred thousand people.


RAGE IN A TENURED POSITION
I enjoyed your article, but was a bit perplexed by the final paragraph that describes Heilbrun as mysteriously alone in her study, "not entirely willingly." It adds a tone of sadness and defeat to what I read as a strong and sensible next step for a successful female scholar in Heilbrun's not-at-all-mysterious position at Columbia: Leave!
With lots of publicity about the reason.
SUSAN SCHAEFER DAVIS
Haverford, Pa.


Chicago's Exchanges Look Toward an Electronic Salvation
LAST December, after President Bush toured the trading floor of the Chicago Mercantile Exchange, he came away dazzled by the frenzy of shouts and hand signals.
"I have seen the future," he said.
Officials at the Merc and its longtime neighbor and rival, the Chicago Board of Trade, were pleased by the vote of confidence.
But in fact they are counting on the future looking a bit different.
Separately and jointly, the two exchanges are investing heavily to modernize as they battle to preserve their leadership in the world's markets for futures, options, and related instruments.


When All They Really Want Is Seafood
ONE of the most frequently asked questions we encounter is "Where can I find a good seafood restaurant?" Anyone in the Hartford area might supply a quick answer: the Capitol Fish House.
For nine years or so the Capitol Fish House has been preparing fresh fish and seafood with considerable consistency, which is no small feat.


CHRONICLE
After months of speculation about who would play Norma Desmond in his new musical, "Sunset Boulevard," Sir ANDREW LLOYD WEBBER announced yesterday that it would be PATTI LUPONE.


The St. Lawrence
To the Editor: Pamela J. Petro's tempting article about three islands in the St.
Lawrence River ("Old World Isles in the St. Lawrence," Sept. 13) have undoubtedly "discovered" these Quebecois havens for many future tourists to Canada.
After two extended respites on Ile d'Orleans, just outside of Quebec City, my wife and I are worried that the island is no longer our secret.
In addition to Ms.
Petro's list might we add these highlights of an island sojourn: the artistry found in the ironmonger's shop in Ste.
Laurent; the Auberge Chaumont in Ste.
Francois; the many "ble" stands where for a pittance a steaming ear of corn is plucked out of a pot.


The New Neediest
Imagine that you are 16 years old in New York City and you can't go home.
You can't go home because a parent will rape or sodomize you.
You can't go home because you will be beaten within an inch of your life.
You can't go home because your parents are in jail, or dead.
You can't go home because you were told to get out forever: you're gay or lesbian; you're a financial burden; you took drugs; you're just no good.


Seton Hall Loses a Game but Picks Up Some Insight
One of the best things about a rigorous early-season basketball competition like the preseason National Invitation Tournament is that regardless of who wins, each team walks away having gained something valuable.
Indiana walked away with more than anyone else Friday night, winning the championship in a hard-fought 78-74 victory over Seton Hall at Madison Square Garden.


'NO LOCALS' RULE FUELS MOTEL SUITS
When Cologne Bennerman and her boyfriend, Barry Hunter, drove to a 120-room motel in Maryland one August evening in 1988 to spend the night, they wound up instead filing a lawsuit.
The couple tried to register at the Red Roof Inn in Oxon Hill, Md., a suburb of Washington, where the couple lived.
Instead, a desk clerk turned them away because motel policy prohibited renting a room to anyone living within a 15-mile radius.


Ho, Ho, Ho
Barneys unveils its holiday windows and caricatures, Nov. 23.


A Celebration in Black
A CONSTANT procession of contemporary deities -- John Malkovitch, Paloma Picasso, Sandra Bernhard -- passed through the wrought iron gate and buzzed the doorbell (labeled Blanche DuBois and Stanley Kowalski) to enter the Lower East Side home and studio of the photographer Timothy Greenfield-Sanders last Monday night.
The neo-Gothic former Roman Catholic rectory, built in 1904, was transformed that evening into a shrine to the clothing designer Rei Kawakubo, the high priestess of Comme des Garcons, who is known for cerebral designs that elevate fashion from just clothes into attitude and a way of life.


GERMANY CREATING POLICE UNIT AIMED AT RIGHTIST GROUPS
Germany will create a new police unit to monitor and combat far-right groups, the Federal police chief said today.
The announcement came a day after the Government officially banned a neo-Nazi group in a response to the outcry against anti-foreigner violence.
In a newspaper interview, the police chief, Eckart Werthebeck, said the Interior Ministry had authorized him to order a "massive increase" in the number of agents and officers assigned to monitor and repress rightist movements.


2 Brothers Are Held In a Carjacking Case
Two brothers from Queens were arrested yesterday in a carjacking when the stolen Lincoln they were driving became stuck on railroad tracks, the police said.
The brothers, William Skeans, 21 years old, and Patrick, 23, both of 304-A 88th Street in Rockaway Beach, robbed the Sure Way Car Service in Richmond Hill of $300 at 12:45 A.M.
Saturday and went looking for a getaway car, a police spokesman, Sgt.
John McCluskey, said.


How the President Lost: a Campaign of Disorganization and Disappointment
By the time the Republican Party massed in Houston last August for its convention, President Bush's re-election campaign appeared a thoroughly snakebit enterprise.
In just eight months it had been jolted by an ugly primary fight, a third-party challenge, two White House staff shake-ups, an urban riot and a seemingly endless economic slump.
Bill Clinton led in the polls by 15 points.
Yet the President, his political advisers say, was utterly, serenely certain of victory come fall.
It was the advisers who were starting to perspire.


Stowe Lights Up For Night Skiing
Stowe, the ski area in Vermont, is installing lights for night skiing on Mount Mansfield and plans to switch them on in time for the Christmas holidays.
Nearly 21 acres of intermediate terrain will be illuminated, opening up an 8,800-foot-long trail with an average width of 150 feet.
The lights will operate on the Gondolier Trail, from top to bottom, and on portions of the Perry Merrill Trail from 5 to 10 Wednesday through Sunday and seven nights a week at holiday periods.


Players Can Find a Sublime Simplicity in the Birthplace of the Game
"The game was invented a billion years ago. Don't you remember?"
Old Scottish saying.


RAGE IN A TENURED POSITION
When I read last summer that Carolyn Heilbrun had resigned from Columbia rather than continue to be the token woman in a male chauvinist department, I was so excited that I called to congratulate her.
Her stand seemed as courageous and honest as Anita Hill's ("Rage in a Tenured Position," by Anne Matthews, Nov. 8).
I came from Barnard to the graduate faculties at Columbia in the fall of 1963, and was shocked by the different world across the street.
At Barnard, female creativity was nurtured and applauded.
At Columbia, women were treated like Martians.
Except for Carolyn Heilbrun and James Clifford (who also knew that talent did not have a gender), the graduate English department seemed designed to crush female talent and harass women into leaving.


International Gala
The Spanish Institute presents awards at a dinner-dance, Nov. 24.


No Peace for the U.N.; As Its Operations Around the World Falter, An Angry Council Takes a Tougher Stand
A year ago, after Communism's collapse, the United Nations seemed to be carving out a major new role for itself.
It began ambitious peace initiatives in trouble spots around the world from Central America to the Balkans through Africa and the Middle East to Cambodia.
But today, despite undoubted success in defusing conflicts in Nicaragua and Namibia, many of the initiatives seem to be faltering.
In some cases, a lack of resources or poor diplomacy appears to be the reason, but often the explanation lies in an underestimation of the animosity that lies behind these conflicts.


For the Arditti, There's No Time Like the Present
It may seem paradoxical to regard versatility as a principal endowment of an ensemble that plays hardly any music composed before 1900.
But after listening to the Arditti String Quartet's recent CD's and rehearing some of its older recordings, one can only agree with the players' contention that the 20th-century repertory offers an unprecedented universe of stylistic variety.
The literature demands everything from manic, cacophonous sliding and lightning-fast bowing to lushly harmonized chordal passages; from bleeps, buzzes and snaps to flowing, gracious melodies.
If the Arditti's persuasiveness in all of this does not represent versatility, what does?
The English quartet, formed by the violinist Irvine Arditti in 1974, has played nearly 500 works over the years, and its performances in the United States, since 1988, have become highlights of the new-music calendar.
This afternoon the Arditti plays a program at Alice Tully Hall that displays its range.
Included is the only early-19th-century work in its repertory, Beethoven's "Grosse Fuge." The more characteristic fare comprises Janacek's Quartet No. 1, a searing clash of Romanticism and modernism, and two atonal works: "Officium Breve," by the Hungarian Gyorgy Kurtag, and "Visions," by the American Roger Reynolds.


No Headline
To the Editor:
The myth of the "downward mobility" of the Irish cited by Kevin Phillips in his review of "The Rascal King," a biography of James Michael Curley (Oct. 25), is as false as it is durable.
For the last quarter-century, analyses of data collected by the National Opinion Research Center have shown that on measures of education, income and occupational prestige, Irish Catholics are the most successful gentile group in America.
Their love for the political game may not have helped their success (did God make politics for the same reason She made the drink -- so that the Irish wouldn't own the world?), but an obsession with politics did not impede Irish success.
There are two reasons why Irish Catholics have made it in America: education and hard work.
As long ago as the first decade of this century they had already surpassed the national level of college attendance for young people of college age.
International survey data show that in both Europe and America Irish Catholics have the highest scores on the work ethic.
The last Protestants in the world are Irish Catholics.
ANDREW GREELEY Chicago


Hearty Cold-Weather Fare From Alsace
ONE of the glories of Alsatian cuisine is choucroute garnie, a dish composed of sauerkraut braised in white wine and served with an assortment of sausages, ham and fresh and smoked pork.
Boiled or steamed potatoes and strong mustard accompany the dish.
It is earthy peasant fare, suited to cold weather.
And now that French bistro and brasserie cooking is all the rage, choucroute garnie is starting to appear on restaurant menus.
But it is also relatively easy to prepare at home and, because it can be reheated, makes an excellent party dish.
A big platter of choucroute garnie, the various meats arrayed on a bed of sauerkraut, is certainly an impressive dish.


A Foreign Notion for Washington: U.S. Needs Higher Taxes
SOMETIMES other countries view the United States as a rich spoiled brat that not only refuses to eat its broccoli but steals precious crumbs from poorer kids.
This view jumped off the pages of a new economic report issued by 24 industrial nations that scolded the United States for refusing to increase taxes to cut its gargantuan budget deficit.
The report from the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, a Paris-based group of wealthy nations, said that because of its $290 billion deficit, Washington was forced to borrow billions in investment capital from abroad.
This, the report suggested, was turning the United States into an economic ogre -- gobbling up huge sums desperately needed by third world nations and the former Soviet bloc in order to continue living beyond its means.


This Can't Be Love, I Feel This Evolutionary Spell
ANATOMY OF LOVE
The Natural History of Monogamy, Adultery, and Divorce.
By Helen E. Fisher. 431 pp.
New York: W.W.
Norton &amp; Company. $22.95.
SEXUAL STRATEGIES
How Females Choose Their Mates.
By Mary Batten. 248 pp.
New York:  Jeremy P. Tarcher/G.P.
Putnam's Sons. $21.95.


IN SHORT/SMALL PRESSES: NONFICTION
THE DECLINE AND FALL OF THE AMERICAN EMPIRE By Gore Vidal.
Odonian Press, Box 7776, Berkeley, Calif. 94707, paper, $5.


Lisa Hewitt, William Cassara
Frankie Hewitt of Kensington, Md., and Don Hewitt of New York have announced the engagement of their daughter Lisa Gabrielle Hewitt to William Louis Cassara, the son of Louis and Jeanine Cassara of Whitestone, Queens.
An April wedding is planned.
Miss Hewitt, 26 years old, is the coordinating producer of the television show "A Current Affair" in New York.
Her fiance is a cameraman for the show.
She graduated from Boston University.
Her father is the creator and executive producer of "60 Minutes" in New York.
Her mother is the producing director at Ford's Theater in Washington.
The prospective bride's stepmother, Marilyn Berger Hewitt, is a freelance journalist in New York.


God Save The Taxpayer
If anyone doubts 1992 has been "annus horribilis" for Britain's royal family, as Queen Elizabeth II herself complained last week, consider the harsh medicine Her Majesty prescribed to improve the monarchy's blotchy image.
Facing a public weary of reports about her children's splashy marital difficulties, as well as demands that she herself pay to restore recent fire damage to Windsor Castle, the Queen suddenly revealed that she had forsaken royal privilege and would now pay tax on the income generated by her considerable private wealth.


Graham Is a Factor Under Consideration
Out of the rubble that resulted from the Giants' loss at Dallas on Thursday, there was this news: Jeff Hostetler could be back on Monday, well enough to finish a season earmarked for disaster.
If he is, what happens to Kent Graham?
Graham, the rookie who started against the Cowboys, will undoubtedly go back to the bench, despite being one of the few beacons in the Giants' 30-3 skewering by the Cowboys.
But it might not mean he will stay there.


Robert N. Gilmore Jr., Lawyer, 79
Robert N. Gilmore Jr., senior vice president for legal affairs and general counsel for the American Insurance Association, died yesterday at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in New York.
He was 79 and lived in West Islip, L.I.
He died of cancer, said his son Robert N. Gilmore 3d.


The Inmate Riddle, and Its Moral
New research on violence in America discloses a startling contradiction:
The prison population nearly tripled between 1975 and 1989 -- but in those same years the level of violent crime barely budged.
How could that be?
The answer to that riddle bears a powerful message for the incoming Clinton Administration.


Carolyn Thompson and Glenn Garrison
Carolyn Jean Thompson, a daughter of Judge and Mrs.
George Thompson of Bellevue, Neb., was married there yesterday to Glenn Thomas Wilson Garrison, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John R. Garrison of Shiloh, N.J.
The Rev.
Thomas Ward performed the ceremony at St.
Mary's Roman Catholic Church.
Mrs.
Garrison, 24 years old, is a manager of the Philadelphia Bar and Grill in Bellevue.
She graduated from the University of Nebraska.
Her father is a judge for the Second District Court of Nebraska in Papillion, Neb.
Her mother, Sylvia Thompson, is the associate director of mission education for the Columban Fathers, Roman Catholic missionaries in St.
Columban, Neb.


New Corporate Credo Addresses Society's Ills


Q and A
Driving New Zealand
Q.
My family is considering a trip to New Zealand, during which we hope to rent a motor home.
Where can I get hold of a list of companies that rent them and do we have to rent a different one for the North and South Islands? -- Steven M. Fetter, Okemos, Mich.


Pastiche of Rodgers And Hammerstein
FOR the 50th anniversary of the collaboration of Richard Rodgers and Oscar Hammerstein 2d, the Queens Theater in the Park is presenting "Some Enchanted Evening," a revue of their canon.
It would be nice to say that the show lives up to its title, but the lackluster cabaret concept, developed by Jeffrey B. Moss, trips over the sheer volume of material.


Feeding Birds and the Uninvited Squirrels
GARDENERS can be thankful for the birds that will hang around during the next few months.
The birds are not only delightful and colorful to see but also continue to eat insect grubs and eggs, or any morsels they can find.
Gardeners who place feeders near the windows find these feathered friends a pleasure to watch, especially at breakfast.
Activity at feeders is busy at this time of year, with the birds following an established pecking order.
It is a fascinating ritual: each species has its turn, with the local population determining the line of action.
The feeders may beckon evening grosbeaks, cardinals, nuthatches, titmice, chickadees, juncoes and white-throated sparrows.


New Life for Faded Photographs
OVER the last 20 years, the prices of vintage photographs by the masters have risen at least 50-fold, with some selling for as much as $250,000.
But every silver lining has its cloud, which in this case is the dearth of such prints.
Fortunately, Vincent Vallarino, a partner in the former Light Gallery in Manhattan and the source of the statistic, anticipated the shortage when, in the early 1970's, he began to collect reproductions of such prints, that is to say, photogravures.
These are images obtained by transferring photographs to copper or zinc plates, which have been dusted with rosin, as if for aquatints.
After that, the plates are heated, bitten with acid and inked and the prints pulled by hand.


Nathan Appleman, 88, Oilman and Benefactor
Nathan Appleman, an oilman and philanthropist who was active in the American Jewish Committee and in the Republican Party, died on Thursday at his home in Palm Beach, Fla.
He was 88 years old.
He died of skin cancer, said his wife, the former Ann Thomka-Gazdik.


Sports of The Times; Jets Need Boomer. But Giants May Need A Quarterback, Too.
SHOULDN'T the Jets try to trade for Boomer Esiason in the off season?
And have the Giants already begun to develop Kent Graham or Dave Brown as their next quarterback?
In the National Football League, every team is always searching for a quarterback.
Not somebody who plays the position.
Each roster has sturdy young men who can hunch over the center.
But not everybody who plays the position is a quarterback, a quality quarterback capable of lifting his team to the championship level.


Bernard M. Baruch Jr., Financier's Son, 90
Bernard M. Baruch Jr. a former member of the New York Stock Exchange, died on Thursday at the Mount Sinai Medical Center.
He was 90 years old and lived in Manhattan.
Mr.
Baruch was born in Manhattan to Barnard M. Baruch, the financier, who died in 1965, and his wife, Annie Griffen Baruch.
He grew up in Manhattan, attended Milton Academy in Milton, Mass., and graduated from Harvard College in 1923.


Robinson Superb in Debut as Boilermakers Triumph
Connecticut was beaten by Purdue and also lost one of its key players today in its opening game of the season.
Purdue had a dominant player -- Glenn Robinson, who scored 30 points in his college debut -- and Connecticut did not as the Boilermakers defeated the Huskies, 73-69, at the Starter Hall of Fame Tip-Off Classic in the Springfield Civic Center.


INSIDE
Bush's Failed Campaign: 11 Weeks of Incoherence
As Bush campaign officials tell it, the re-election effort struggled with bouts of confusion.
The campaign, they say, operated without help from a disorganized White House.
Yet the President was confident.
Page 26.
Russians Are Making Do
Despite economic problems in Russia, there is little unemployment, and supplies of food in the stores are more than adequate.
Page 3.
Jet Tape Missing, Korea Says
A tape was reported missing from one of two flight recorders on the Korean Air Lines jet shot down in 1983 with the loss of 269 lives.
Page 9.


IN SHORT/SMALL PRESSES: FICTION
VEILS Short Stories. By Nahid Rachlin. City Lights Books, paper, $8.95.


Corrections
A listing of semifinalists from Long Island for National Merit Scholarships omitted a name on Nov. 1.
He is Kevin Carter of Centereach High School in Centereach.


In the Region: Connecticut; South Norwalk Commercial Pump Primed
A ROLLER-COASTER economy over the last decade has taken the rehabilitation of South Norwalk to the heights of the mid-80's, the depths of the 90's and the occasional whiplash stop.
Rather than continue at the mercy of such forces, the city decided in 1991 to include in its capital budget a $1 million fund for what it calls the Facade Improvement Program, which can -- despite its name -- include other exterior work such as landscaping.


Elizabeth Lane, Stuart Zweighaft
Richard and Susan Lane of Wyckoff, N.J., have announced June wedding plans for their daughter Elizabeth Ann Lane and Stuart Jay Zweighaft, a son of Joyce Bartfield of Long Beach, L.I., and Dr.
Harold Zweighaft of New York.
Ms.
Lane, 29 years old, is a pediatric nursing instructor at Felician College in Lodi, N.J.
She graduated from Vanderbilt University and received a master's degree in education from Columbia University.
Her father is the president of the Diraje Corporation, a home builder in Franklin Lakes, N.J.


Carwash Accepts Settlement
A DAVID AND GOLIATH struggle between the White Plains Hospital Medical Center and a carwash on hospital-owned land here has been settled amicably, freeing the hospital to begin a $54 million building project next year.
Bruce Sands, owner of Minit-Man Carwash on the corner of Davis Avenue and East Post Road, said he had reached a financial agreement with the hospital center and would leave the business he has operated since 1976.
Mr.
Sands, who had fought to keep the business going until his lease ran out in four years, said he hoped the hospital would allow the carwash to remain through March.


What We Need Money for and Where to Get It
To the Editor:
The attention of the incoming Administration of Bill Clinton must be focused on the funds needed to improve the infrastructure -- roads, bridges, transportation equipment, all sadly neglected for the last 20 years -- including the need for more affordable public housing, which has also been sadly neglected.


Danger From Runoff To Drinking Water
Erwin Ernst has done much over the years to raise public awareness of pollution in our marine environment  [ "Harsh Lesson of L.I. Waters," Nov. 15 ] .
In identifying sewage-treatment plant effluent and lawn fertilizer runoff as major sources of nitrate contamination in coastal waters, he suggests curtailing the latter by building berms in front of lawns to prevent water from transporting fertilizers onto roads and thence into coastal waters via storm drains.
Some nitrates in the trapped water would, he claims, then be absorbed by vegetation after seeping into the ground.


The Homeless Sharply Split Santa Monica
To some people here, Robert M. Myers is a hero, a man who stands up for those who have long ceased to stand up for themselves.
To others, who fear and resent the homeless people crowding the city's otherwise impeccable streets and parks, Mr.
Myers's outstretched hand has stretched too far.
In September the City Council voted 6 to 1 to dismiss him as City Attorney after he refused to draft an ordinance to restrict outdoor feeding programs for the city's swelling population of homeless people.
Not only did Mr.
Myers object on moral and legal grounds, but he also had helped set up such a program on the lawn of City Hall.


Guardian Angel Training Inadequate, Critics Say
Clayton Prince is not surprised that the most painful punch he withstood during his years as a Guardian Angel came during a frenetic raid on a South Bronx crack den.
He just didn't expect it to be thrown by a fellow Angel, who lacked schooling in the art of street fighting.
Mr.
Prince, a television actor and martial artist who joined the patrol group in 1988, recalled that he had pinned down a crack dealer when he was stunned by a blow to his back.


Gorge and Be Well
A HISTORY OF FOOD
By Maguelonne Toussaint-Samat.
Translated by Anthea Bell.
Illustrated. 801 pp.
Cambridge, Mass.:  Blackwell Publishers. $39.95.


Flood Tunnel: A Way To Avert Tragedy
Re: "Passaic Flood Tunnel: A Turning Point," Nov. 8:
I find it incredible that the people least affected by the flooding in the Passaic River basin are those most opposed to the only viable flood protection measure -- the construction of the Passaic River flood tunnel.


Sgt. Barbie And Sgt. Ken Of the Marines
If you're just looking for a few good dolls, try Barbie and Ken of the Marine Corps.
The new recruits to the shelves of the Barbie on Madison boutique are turned out in replicas of authentic dress blues with red piping and natty officer caps.
Each doll has attained the rank of sergeant and has been decorated with medals for achievement, good conduct and service in the Persian Gulf war.
The look is a welcome, tailored departure from the usual sparkle and glitz.
The pair is $46 at F. A. O. Schwarz.


Generals Over Their Heads
THIS TERRIBLE SOUND
The Battle of Chickamauga.
By Peter Cozzens.
Illustrated. 675 pp.
Urbana:  University of Illinois Press. $39.95.


Hogs Rule Out Kines
JOE KINES, the interim coach at Arkansas, said yesterday that he has been ruled out as the school's new coach.
Kines, who took over for JACK CROWE one game into the season, said at a brief and emotional news conference that he had met for a few minutes with the school's selection committee.
He said AL WITTE, the Arkansas faculty representative and a member of the committee, "told me that the University of Arkansas would look for an experienced head coach to lead this program."


CHILDREN'S BOOKS
THE DRESS I'LL WEAR TO THE PARTY
By Shirley Neitzel.
Illustrated by Nancy Winslow Parker.
Unpaged.
New York: Greenwillow Books. $14. (Ages 4 to 8)


What We Need Money for and Where to Get It; Fixing Unemployment
To the Editor:
In this century no political party has been able to retain control of the White House after a four-year increase in civilian employment of less than 5 percent.
Warren G. Harding in 1920, Franklin D. Roosevelt in 1932, Dwight D. Eisenhower in 1952, John F. Kennedy in 1960 and Bill Clinton in 1992 were all able to oust the incumbent party from the executive office when increases in civilian employment were 3.1, -15.7, 3.3, 3.1 and about 2.4 percent, respectively.


Creating 'Mondo Me'
NAME: Hoyt Richards.
IDENTITY: 30-year-old model.


Amy Penwell, S. W. McLaughlin
Amy Ruth Penwell and Steven William McLaughlin, who are both employed by New York investment companies, have announced February wedding plans.
Miss Penwell, 28 years old, is a treasurer of McIntosh &amp; Company.
She graduated from Lynchburg College.
She is a daughter of Carolyn W. Penwell of Summit, N.J., and the late Delos Penwell.
Her father was a vice president of national sales at Burlington Industries, the textile manufacturer, in New York.
Her mother is the manager of the Overlook Hospital Gift Shop in Summit.


Fighting Mafia in Sicily Under Shadow of Death
Since he and his colleagues ordered the biggest roundup of Mafiosi in eight years last week, Paolo Giordano has been expecting "a reaction" from the mob.
But that, he said, is part of his job tracking down the "men of honor," as mafiosi are called here.
In Sicily, "reaction" usually means killing, as it did earlier this year when Italy's most senior anti-Mafia crusaders, Giovanni Falcone and Paolo Borsellino, were murdered in huge bomb attacks in Palermo that left no doubt about the mob's resolve.


Public &amp; Private; The Transition Trimester
A wise obstetrician once said a newborn baby is so unfinished that the first three months of its life constitute a kind of fourth trimester of gestation.
A wise political strategist might do well to consider the transition as a kind of fourth trimester of Bill Clinton's Presidential campaign.


What's in Store for the Retirees of Unisys
To the Editor:
"The Legacy of Jack McGann" (Nov. 15) pointed up the need for legislation to prevent companies from cutting benefits for medically necessary treatment.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
WHERE TO CUT A TREE
The Cornell Cooperative Extension Service has made available a farm produce map of Dutchess County showing where residents of Westchester and surrounding counties may cut their own Christmas trees and buy local produce, plants, honey, dairy products, meats, fowl, wines and other items.


Some Holiday Offerings for Youngsters
FEW seasons conjure up as many cozy images of family togetherness as the Christmas and Hanukkah holidays.
Whether traditions focus on festive meals around a lavishly decorated tree, outdoor caroling or menorah-lighting parties, there is no denying that celebrations are geared toward the younger set.
Keeping children entertained throughout the school vacation, however, can be daunting for even the most resourceful parent and is a particular challenge for parents who have to work.
The following is a selected list of holiday minicamps, workshops and activities.
Advance registration is recommended. (As a result of budget cuts and staff shortages, many libraries that previously offered holiday story hours are not offering them this year.)


Nutritionists Urging Schools To Offer All Pupils Breakfast
RUMBLING stomachs, short attention spans, poor test scores, more colds and school days missed, behavioral problems in the classroom.
These, nutritionists say, are the consequences of children coming to school without a nourishing breakfast.
Yet for many children, the day's first meal is either a 10 A.M. candy bar and soda, gulped down between classes, or lunch.
These children learn less than those who eat a well-balanced breakfast, researchers say.
They are hungry, and they are as likely to come from affluent or middle-class families as poor ones.


What Hath Ureli Corelli Hill Wrought?
FOR 99 YEARS BEFORE THE Japanese bombing of Pearl Harbor and the 51 years since, the now infamous date Dec. 7 has carried happier significance for the New York Philharmonic and its extended family of listeners.
On Dec. 7, 1842, the 63-member orchestra of the Philharmonic Society of New York presented its first concert, to about 600 listeners in the Apollo Rooms on lower Broadway.
Three conductors took part, including the orchestra's founder, Ureli Corelli Hill, who led Beethoven's Fifth Symphony.
Though not the first orchestra in the United States, the Philharmonic has survived and thrived to become the oldest.
Next week the Philharmonic's seasonlong celebration of its 150th anniversary reaches a high point.
On Monday, Dec. 7, Lincoln Center will salute the orchestra with a multimedia program outdoors on the plaza, and the Philharmonic will play a special concert in Avery Fisher Hall, conducted by music directors past and present: Pierre Boulez, Zubin Mehta and Kurt Masur.
Mr.
Masur will conduct Dvorak's "New World" Symphony, which was given its world premiere by the orchestra in 1893, under Anton Seidl.


New Haven Finds Offense Just in Time
Accustomed to playing in small stadiums, the University of New Haven put its high-scoring and undefeated team on display today at the Yale Bowl.
Playing before a crowd of 7,800 in the 70,000-seat stadium -- which Yale had donated to New Haven without charge -- the Chargers crushed Ferris State of Big Rapids, Mich., 35-13, to advance to the semifinals of the N.C.A.A.
Division II tournament.


The Lease Runs Out at Subic Bay
As the Stars and Stripes was lowered for a final time over the American naval base at Subic Bay last week, ending 94 years of American military presence in the Philippines, there was a sense among many Southeast Asians that they had entered a new era with its own potential dangers.
While the withdrawal of American forces cheered Philippine nationalists, it worried Asian leaders who had come to see the American military as a useful regional policeman, keeping local military rivalries in check.


Agreement on an Indian Claim Opens New Areas of Dispute
GOVERNMENT negotiators offered cash and miles of public and private lands in Arizona last week to bring peace to the Hopi and Navajo tribes.
But as soon as the proposed settlement was made public, it ignited a new battle in and out of the Government between those anxious to end the torment of two ancient peoples and others who said it would set a bad precedent for using valuable public lands to settle Indian claims.
The proposal, which must be approved by Congress, was the fruit of months of secret court-sanctioned negotiations among the tribes, the Department of the Interior and the Justice Department and is intended to compensate the Hopis for decades of strife caused by Navajos' living on their lands.


The Senator And the Builder: A special report.; Gramm's Homebuilding Bargain Raises Issue of Possible Conflict
Senator Phil Gramm, the Texas Republican who is a leading member of the Senate Banking Committee, helped guide a troubled Dallas savings and loan operator in dealings with Federal regulators one year after the executive had picked up nearly half of about $117,000 worth of building expenses on the Senator's waterfront vacation home in Maryland.
Back in 1987, Jerry D. Stiles, then a prominent homebuilder and developer in the Dallas area, took on a project for Mr.
Gramm and his wife, who together had bought more than 35 acres on a remote part of Maryland's Eastern Shore and needed a contractor to finish construction on the shell of a two-story house.
Mr.
Stiles also owned three Texas savings and loans, which later failed and which regulators say will cost taxpayers more than $200 million.


Danger From Runoff To Drinking Water
Erwin Ernst has done much over the years to raise public awareness of pollution in our marine environment  [ "Harsh Lesson of L.I. Waters," Nov. 15 ] .
In identifying sewage-treatment plant effluent and lawn fertilizer runoff as major sources of nitrate contamination in coastal waters, he suggests curtailing the latter by building berms in front of lawns to prevent water from transporting fertilizers onto roads and thence into coastal waters via storm drains.
Some nitrates in the trapped water would, he claims, then be absorbed by vegetation after seeping into the ground.


Soraya Chemaly, Thomas Jones
Soraya Lisa Catherine Chemaly was married yesterday in Nassau, the Bahamas, to Thomas Jones 6th.
The Rev.
Foster B. Pestaina performed the Anglican ceremony at Christ Church Cathedral.
Ms.
Chemaly, who is 26 years old, is keeping her name.
She is the marketing communications coordinator for the Gannett Company, the media concern, in Washington.
She and her husband graduated magna cum laude from Georgetown University, where they were elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
She is a daughter of Edward P. and Norma S. Chemaly of Nassau.
Her parents own and manage Archaos Ltd., a chain of gift shops in the Bahamas.


Yankees Are Often a Pawn in Free Agents' Game
In the beginning, George Steinbrenner was No. 1 in the courting and signing of free agents.
No one played the new game better than the Yankees' owner.
His masterly recruiting efforts produced such players as Reggie Jackson, Don Gullett, Rich Gossage, Luis Tiant, Tommy John, Rudy May, Bob Watson and Dave Winfield and two World Series championships.
But Steinbrenner lost his touch.
His money and his charm were no longer a match for the way he operated the Yankees.
John Denny, a free-agent pitcher, sent the first signal that Steinbrenner's methods were turning off free agents.


Who Speaks for Malcolm X? The Writings of Just About Everybody
IN "The Autobiography of Malcolm X," the charismatic black religious nationalist recalls his momentous 1964 pilgrimage to Mecca, a visit that would alter the course of his life and career.
For 12 years this minister of the Nation of Islam had been trumpeting a doctrine of the intrinsic evil of white people, likening the dream of American equality to a nightmare for American blacks and championing a plan to redeem black Americans by saving them from the tide of brainwashing that had drowned awareness of the black race's true superiority.
But now Malcolm X writes of an incident in Jedda, in which he is treated with great hospitality by a man who, in the United States, would be considered white.


Education for the Gifted, Seen As a Luxury, Faces Cutbacks
As financially pressed school districts in the region struggle with declining Federal and state aid, rebellious taxpayers and rising costs, special programs for gifted and talented students are being trimmed, gutted or eliminated.
Enrichment classes, honors courses and other educational tools intended to accelerate learning at all levels of instruction are also experiencing setbacks in many districts.
Advanced courses are being dropped from the curriculum, class sizes are swelling, and teachers are working harder with fewer resources.


Grand Illusions
Bergdorf's toasts a trompe-l'oeil holiday, Nov. 24.


Encore in Italian Family-Style Dining
WHEN La Viola of Cedarhurst was visited earlier this year, it proved to be the most outstanding Italian family-style restaurant on Long Island.
La Viola has now opened a second front in Syosset.
The newcomer takes over the premises that once housed Ultimo.
Despite its casual format, modest prices and slim storefront location, La Viola looks opulent and upscale.
Much of Ultimo remains, including its white- and terra cotta-colored walls, tapestry chair rail and seat cushions, ultramodern light fixtures, a lavish use of marble and earthenware pots of flowering plants.
La Viola has added sepia-tone photos of Italy in former days and a giant wall menu.


Explanation Asked for Higher Gasoline Prices
The New York State Energy Commissioner has asked oil companies and gasoline retailers in the New York City area and on Long Island to explain larger-than-expected price increases for cleaner-burning gasoline that went on sale this month under new state regulations intended to reduce air pollution.
In letters to the major oil companies and gasoline retailers associations, the Commissioner, Francis Murray Jr., said Federal energy and environmental experts had expected prices to rise 3 to 5 cents a gallon after Nov. 1, when the regulations mandating the sale of cleaner-burning gasoline took effect.


Ms. Cavanagh, George Herrick
Nannette Christine Cavanagh and George Gardner Herrick were married in New York on Wednesday.
The Rev.
James Parks Morton performed the Episcopal ceremony at the Cathedral of St.
John the Divine.
Mrs.
Herrick is a partner in CMB Communications, a public relations firm in New York.
She is a daughter of Nancy M. Cavanagh of Newport, R.I., and the late Edward F. Cavanagh Jr.
Her father was a Fire Commissioner and a Deputy Mayor of New York, then the president of Wells Fargo Inc., the security company.
Her grandfather the late William W. Miller, was a founding partner of the New York law firm of Willkie Farr &amp; Gallagher.
The bride's two previous marriages ended in divorce.


John C. Daniel, 93; Admiral Had a Role In '53 Korean Truce
Vice Adm.
John C. Daniel, retired, who played an important role in the negotiations that led to the exchange of wounded and ill Korean War prisoners and to the end of the war itself, died Monday at North Beach Hospital in Fort Lauderdale, Fla., where he lived.
He was 93 years old.
He died of complications of pneumonia and heart problems, his family said.


A Fast Journey To 2 Celebrations
A supersonic splurge that allows travelers to ring in the New Year twice for the princely sum of $14,000 a person has been organized by Atlantic Time Tunnel, a British tour operator that has chartered a Concorde.
The 100 participants will be flown (in business class) from their nearest airport to London on Dec. 30, where they will stay overnight at the London Hilton on Park Lane, and rest up for what is planned as a marathon party beginning Dec. 31.
The festivities start with a black-tie reception at Heathrow Airport and a short flight on the Concorde to Shannon, Ireland.
There the group welcomes the New Year before boarding the plane again at 12:30 A.M., local time, for a supersonic flight to Bermuda and another round of celebration, beginning at 11:30 P.M., local time, that will include entertainment by the Bermuda Regiment Marching Band.


The Smart Club Comes to the White House
We've been reminded over and over that Bill Clinton will be the first President born after World War II and that he represents the coming to power of a new generation.
True enough, but new generations come to power all the time.
Another Clinton first is more important: he is the first product of the American meritocracy to reach the White House.
Only two or three times in a century does a new elite take broad control of our country.
The Clinton inaugural could mark one of those times -- but it's by no means a certainty, because the meritocracy, though triumphant at the moment, is in a precarious position.


Tune In, Drop Out
To the Editor:
John J. O'Connor's assessment of the current television season  [ "TV's Midterm Grade: A 'D' for Effort," Nov. 1 ]  is undoubtedly on target, but I can't say for sure because I am part of the large audience that has been alienated for several years.


On Sunday; For Shoppers, Celebration Was on Friday
THE great shoppers do not know fear.
For years, on the Friday after Thanksgiving, Paula Bryant and her sister Mary Ann Liberatore have risen before dawn in Dunellen, N.J., and traveled to New York City to shop Macy's Herald Square, tackling the world's biggest store on its busiest day.
They pin bells on their sweaters in case they're separated by shopping mobs.
"We call it our jingle day," said Mrs.
Bryant, ringing her sweater for emphasis.
"Jingle, jingle," said Mrs.
Liberatore.
They love the challenge of shopping against a crowd.
"The only way," said Mrs.
Bryant.


Denise Brine, F. F. Gonzalez
Mr. and Mrs.
John Brine of Bryn Mawr, Pa., have announced the engagement of their daughter Denise Kent Brine to Fernando F. Gonzalez, a son of Blanca Gonzalez Cuzan of Miami and the late Alfredo Gonzalez Cuzan.
A February wedding is planned.
Miss Brine, 32 years old, is a substitute art teacher in the Radnor, Pa., school system.
She graduated from William Smith College and received a master's degree in teaching from the Maryland Institute College of Art.
Her father is the president and chief executive of Merian State Bank and Knoblauch State Bank, both in Philadelphia.


Focus: Idaho Panhandle; 'Paradise' Seekers Drive Up House Prices
STANDING on the wooden porch of her daughter's alpine home in the pine forests of northern Idaho one recent chilly evening, 73-year-old June Rinck took a deep breath of clear mountain air and insisted she was standing on "a piece of paradise."
She had followed her daughter to this idyllic spot three years ago, she explained, after they had both fled -- literally to the hills -- from Southern California to escape congestion, pollution and random violence.
Besides, she added softly, she needed a tranquil environment for her retirement years.


The Word From Social Security
To the Editor:
In "The Payroll Tax Is Getting Out of Hand," Nov. 8), Norman Ornstein states that the Social Security payroll tax (F.I.C.A.) is ". . . the single largest tax burden on more than three-fourths of Americans." In fact, only 29 percent of those who pay Social Security tax pay more in F.I.C.A. tax than they do in Federal income tax. Mr. Ornstein's figure stems from an illogical comparison, weighing the Social Security tax paid by both employer and employee to the income tax paid by workers alone.
His chief argument regarding the regressivity of the payroll tax ignores two very important facts.
First, Social Security is a social insurance program -- 40 percent of today's benefits go to surviving spouses and children, as well as disabled workers and their dependents.
Second, Social Security's benefit structure is highly progressive.
Low earners are provided considerably higher benefits in relation to preretirement earnings -- and F.I.C.A. taxes paid -- than high earners.


Commercial Property: Retailer's Recession Strategy; Opportunity Drives Kmart's Expansion
LAST spring, the Kmart Corporation went looking for 15 acres or so in suburban Detroit on which to build a 108,000-square-foot Pace Warehouse Club.
What it found instead was 35 acres in nearby Utica, Mich., at a major highway intersection a quarter mile west of a big regional mall.
Seems the persistent real estate slump had killed the developer's plans for an office complex.
The space was going cheap and Kmart's lender was willing to use Kmart's commitment to lease any buildings that went up as collateral for financing the developer.


What Is And Isn't Needed
To the Editor:
I applaud the roundup of opinions on David Mamet's "Oleanna"  [ "He Said . . . She Said . . . Who Did What?" Nov. 15 ] .
The choice of writers was interesting, and the overall attitude toward the play was suitably ambivalent -- surely a reaction that Mr.
Mamet would likewise applaud.


TRANSACTIONS
Football  National Football League  PITTSBURGH STEELERS -- Activated Gerald Williams, nose tackle, from injured reserve.
Waived Mark Didio, wide receiver.
Hockey  National Hockey League  NEW YORK ISLANDERS -- Called up Brad Dalgarno, right wing, from Capital District of the American Hockey League.


The Joy and Ease of a Gliding Pocket Door
POCKET doors operate virtually without flaw, seldom need adjustment and are easy to install in new or existing walls.
Because remodeling procedures can vary when installing a door in an existing wall, only new-wall installation is described.
Pocket-door kits have metal frame parts, hardware and instructions.
Doors are sold separately, and any door can be a pocket door, if it can be trimmed to fit the frame.


Q and A
Closing a Public Space Question: I understand that some high-rise buildings receive benefits from the city in return for creating pocket parks, plazas and other public spaces.
A building in my neighborhood had such a park.
Recently, the entrance to the park was permanently sealed off with large iron gates topped with razor wire, presumably to keep homeless people from living there.
Is there a way to prevent the the arbitrary closing of these public spaces? . . .
Durer Shomer, Manhattan.
Answer: Yes.
According to Robert Flahive, director of the Manhattan office of the Department of City Planning, arbitrary closing of such a space would be a violation of the zoning rules pertaining to bonus spaces.
"If a 20 percent space bonus or some other kind of benefit is granted in exchange for creating a public plaza or park," he said, "then that space must be maintained."


Elaine Eraklis, Jaap L. Tonckens
Elaine Katherine Eraklis, a lawyer in Paris, was married yesterday to Jaap Cornelis Warmolt Lunsingh Tonckens, an associate in Paris for the New York law firm of Shearman &amp; Sterling.
The Rev.
Nicholas Manikas performed the Greek Orthodox ceremony at the Holy Cross Chapel at Hellenic College in Brookline, Mass.
Ms.
Eraklis, who is keeping her name, graduated from Smith College and received a law degree from Emory University.
She is a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Angelo J. Eraklis of Belmont, Mass.
Her father is a pediatric surgeon at Children's Hospital in Boston and an associate professor of surgery at Harvard University.


Hartford Musicians Returning To Bushnell
MANAGEMENT and musicians of the Hartford Symphony have resolved their dispute and the orchestra, fortified by a new three-year contract, returns to the Bushnell tomorrow and Tuesday evenings at 8.
The opening programs will be capped by Dvorak's "New World" Symphony, with the orchestra's music director, Michael Lankester, on the podium.
For reservations or subscription details, call the box office at 244-2999.
The Greater Bridgeport Symphony welcomes Isaac Stern to its performance at 8:30 P.M. on Saturday at Klein Memorial Auditorium.
The violinist will play both Bartok's Concerto No. 1 and Dvorak's Romance in F Minor at his only orchestral appearance in the state this season.
The group's music director, Gustav Meier, has also scheduled Beethoven's Symphony No. 7.
Since the Klein Auditorium is open only on concert days, the Symphony office, 576-0263, can be called for reservations.


IN SHORT/SMALL PRESSES: FICTION
ZAPATA ROSE IN 1992 And Other Tales.
By Gary D. Keller.
Maize Press/Bilingual Press, Hispanic Research Center, Arizona State University, Tempe, Ariz. 85287, paper, $14.


A What? A Club? Not Here!
The owners of the four-week-old Tenth Street Lounge have one big concern.
They claim they don't want their bar to become too trendy or too popular too quickly.
Instead of throwing a crowded opening-night party with velvet ropes, press agents and magazine editors, the bar's three partners, Erin Shilliday, Gunnar Myers and Rita Norona (from left, above), held a block party for their neighbors.
"They drank for free," said Mr.
Shilliday, also the lounge's designer.


Catharine Pereira and Nicholas Restifo
Catharine E. Pereira, a daughter of John F. and Abigail A. Pereira of Potomac, Md., was married yesterday to Dr.
Nicholas P. Restifo, a son of Louise M. Restifo of Westlake, Ohio, and the late Dr.
Nicholas P. Restifo.
The Rev.
Isidore Dixon officiated at St.
Matthew's Roman Catholic Cathedral in Washington.
Mrs.
Restifo, 31 years old, is an editor at Health and Sexuality magazine in Washington.
She graduated magna cum laude from George Washington University, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and received a master's degree in journalism from Columbia University.
Her father is the chief of the historical review group at the Central Intelligence Agency in Washington.
Her mother is the managing program director at the Center for Continuing Education at George Washington.


Deeper Dish
FOR YEARS IT HAS BEEN impossible to utter the word "casserole" in polite company.
It evokes tuna and noodles, macaroni and cheese, green beans and cream of mushroom soup -- all gooey and bound in perpetuity.
Underneath these culinary cliches lurks the good mother of the 50's.
The one who sought to be thrifty, efficient and creative in her nurturing, the one who wound up locked in Ozzie and Harriet land, unable to move past the canvas of a Corning Ware dish, the palette of a can of Campbell's soup, the mushy dominion of which she was queen.
"I hate casseroles," announced a 7-year-old at a family dinner several years ago, training beams of hatred toward the grandmother who had created a quaint collage of ground beef, red beans and rice.
The health fanatics at the table zealously fell on the subject of girth and fat in casseroles.
The epicures delivered sniffs and sneers.
The grandmother looked as crushed as the layer of Fritos that topped her creative casserole.


Corrections
A brief article on Oct. 18 about the Supreme Court's declining to review the life sentence of the former Navy analyst Jonathan J. Pollard described his crime incorrectly.
Mr.
Pollard pleaded guilty to spying for Israel, not treason.
Lawyers for Mr.
Pollard first questioned the article on Oct. 23; publication of this correction was delayed by an editorial lapse.


Euro Disney
To the Editor: I recently returned from Paris and a day spent at Euro Disney.
I was shocked to find that there were no bins to place bottles, cans, plastic cutlery or food containers for recycling.
Is this indicative of French attitudes towards recycling, or is this typical of Disney theme parks in the United States as well?
It seems environmentally wasteful to say the least.
MICHAEL SHERNOFF New York, N.Y.
Kym
Murphy, vice president for environmental policy for the Walt Disney Company, responds:
An office of environmental affairs has been established to deal with the issues at Euro Disney, which is 49 percent owned by our company.
Here in the United States, environmental efforts continue.
Recently a 30,000-square-foot materials recovery facility was put into service at Walt Disney World.
This allows us to intercept, segregate and recycle a significant amount of the resort's waste.
Our company has recycled nearly 33,000 tons of material this year.


Support Groups Grow For Transplant Patients
THE 12 men and women sat on chairs in a circle as they talked about the news that they had just heard.
A member of their group had died.
One man said: "Victor had been waiting for his second heart transplant and died within a few days of finally getting it. He rejected his new heart."
"But he lived two good years after the first transplant," another person added.
"Every day is a gift. Just because Victor died doesn't mean it will happen to me. We're all going to go some time, some of us before others."
Two men wore identical blue T-shirts with the message, "Don't take your organs to heaven; heaven knows we need them here!"
The men and women meeting on a recent Monday evening in New Hyde Park are members of a support group for organ-transplant recipients and their families.
The group is sponsored by Homecare Management Inc. of Ronkonkoma.
The number of recipients has remained fairly steady over the last few years, but attendance has grown significantly at few support groups on the Island for recipients, both before and after surgery.  3-Year-Old Chapter in Uniondale
A Long Island chapter of the Transplant Recipients International Organization was started in 1989 with 35 participants, and attendance at monthly meetings has grown to about 70, said Anne Treffeisen, the head of the chapter who received a liver transplant six years ago.
The group meets in Uniondale and features a professional speaker each month.
The popularity of the first group run by Homecare Management in Ronkonkoma led last year to the start of the New Hyde Park group.
The new group began with six members and now draws up to 18 people at its meetings.
A third group was formed in the summer in Long Island City.
Support groups meet two times a month and provide a forum for recipients and their families to support one another while waiting for donor organs and after the transplants, said Catherine Hirsch, director of social services for Homecare Management.
There is no charge.  'Regular Networks May Be Broken'
Evidence shows that when people face crises, support groups can make a big difference in improving their lives, Ms.
Hirsch said, adding:
"The groups provide them an opportunity to bond, share, feel intimacy and closeness. People who are waiting to receive donor organs have many things going on in their lives. They are frightened that they're dying. They have financial concerns. Their regular networks may be broken down."
While hospitals address medical needs, Ms.
Hirsch said, there is often a need for more emotional support, and support groups pick up the slack.
"If you take care of a person emotionally, he'll do better physically," she said.
Homecare Management plans to start a transplant-recipient support group for children and their families, Ms.
Hirsch said.
"Children transplant recipients have special needs and would be best served in their own support groups," she said.
"We're aiming to get this going by November." Plans for Groups at Stony Brook
Stony Brook University Hospital is the sole federally designated transplant center on the Island, specifically for kidneys.
Last year 22 kidney transplants were performed at the hospital.
Up to August there have been another 22 this year.
There are no formal support groups at the hospital, but hospital officials hope to introduce them, said David Bekofsky, a spokesman for transplantation services in the surgery department.
"We encourage patients to participate in support groups," Mr.
Bekofsky said.
"In any situation where somebody goes through lifesaving surgery there are side effects and dramatic changes in life style. Many people need more support than they can get from their family alone."
For Robert Carroll, 34, of Queens, who three years ago had pancreas, kidney and liver transplants at the same time and from the same donor, being part of the New Hyde Park support group has been very helpful, he said.
"For the first few months after surgery I held my breath, waiting in fear for my body to reject my new organs," he said.
"The medical staff at the hospital tried to help, but their main priority is to fix bodies, and they didn't have time to offer me emotional support. Talking to a psychiatrist who hadn't experienced this didn't mean the same thing as talking to others who understood what I've gone through." 'Help Each Other Ease the Guilt'
One of the most difficult factors, Mr.
Carroll said, is living with the guilt that the donor had died.
"We carry guilt around that we were waiting for someone to die, for us to be able to live," he said.
"We have to help each other ease the guilt by reminding ourselves that these people would have died anyway; they just would have gone to their graves with their organs."
The United Network for Organ Sharing in Richmond keeps data on transplants and the national transplant waiting list.
According to a spokeswoman, Karen Slack, there is no breakdown for numbers in Long Island, but statistics are kept by state.
Last year in New York there were 530 kidney transplants, 161 liver transplants, 119 heart transplants, 1 pancreas transplant, 3 heart-lung transplants and 19 lung transplants.
The total of 833 was up from 824 in 1990.
As of June this year the national waiting list had 20,953 for kidneys, 2,571 for hearts, 2,149 for livers, 866 for lungs, 771 for pancreases and 162 for heart-lung combinations.
Shortage of Donors
As donations stay about the same, the waiting list continues to grow, Ms.
Slack said, adding that in 1990, 2,105 people from the combined waiting list died while awaiting organs.
Concern over the shortage of donors was one topic for participants at the meeting of the New Hyde Park support group.
Larry Juliano of Albertson, said: "I'm one of the lucky ones who got a new kidney eight years ago. But it won't last forever, and I hate to think of what will happen down the road when I'll need another one. Will I be able to get one?"
The other issues included concern over insurance costs and fear that by next year insurance will not cover the expensive daily medications that transplant recipients have to take, the hope that patches will deliver medications and the recent death of the first man to receive a baboon liver.
"Animal rights' activists are angry at using animals for experimental procedures," a woman said.
"But let's face it. Human beings come first. You have to be in the position we've been in. Then you can talk about it."  Hopes and Realities
Ms.
Hirsch said that for transplant recipients, the issues and psychosocial needs before and after the transplant were very different.
"Before surgery people are usually dying and are very frightened," she said.
"Their main concern is getting that transplant to have a chance to live. After the transplant recipients realize that things aren't perfect. They must deal with harsh realities, that they have to be permanently on expensive medications that may have side effects and may play havoc with their moods, that they may have to go in and out of hospitals. In essence, they've traded a terminal illness for a chronic illness."
A heart-transplant recipient from Queens, Richie Bernardo, who leads the group, said the most difficult time was before the transplant, waiting for a donor.
"When I first heard the word transplant, my hair stood up on end," he recalled.
"Today I'm 57 on the outside, but inside I'm 37. You have to beat it mentally and say, 'I gave this heart life the same way this heart gave me life.' " Visits to New Recipients
The support group is like a family, he said, adding: "We share each other's happinesses and sorrows. Now, a year and a half after my heart transplant, I try to be on the giving end. I go to hospitals and talk to heart patients. When they see me standing there, it's a help to them. When I see fear in another man's eyes, I hold his hand and tell him that I've been through it. It's not easy, but he'll get through it."
Another man in the group, Rob Skaretka of Forest Hills, said he had been very frightened before his heart transplant.
"I was in the hospital," Mr.
Skaretka recounted, "and I saw Richie there visiting, just six weeks after he had had his transplant. I couldn't believe it. He looked so great that suddenly I wasn't afraid anymore."


Mutual Funds; When the Time Is Right to Sell
BUYING mutual fund shares is simple, partly because the industry is so eager to help.
But when it comes to deciding to sell, investors are on their own.
While people hang on to losing shares for many reasons -- benign neglect, for one -- most fund purchases are not lifelong commitments, investment advisers say.
It makes sense to periodically review a portfolio and prune.
Some clues: changes in performance, management or asset base.


Jennifer Chirlian, Stephen Wood
Jennifer Ann Chirlian, a daughter of John and Margaret Lloyd of Delungra, New South Wales, Australia, was married yesterday to Stephen Hollingsworth Wood, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
James Wood of Mount Kisco, N.Y.
The Rev.
John Andrew, an Episcopal priest, officiated at the home of the bridegroom's parents.
Mrs. Wood, 31 years old, was a widow. Her parents are farmers and ranchers in Delungra.


Staying Cool At Whoopi's Talk Show
Whoopi Goldberg is being Whoopi Goldberg, the home girl iconoclast with the metamorphic face and sandpaper voice, looking more Haight-Ashbury than Beverly Hills in her dreadlocks and granny glasses.
She is sitting in the very lush, very Biedermeier library of the St.
James's Club in West Hollywood, her foot up in the chair, eating a hamburger, fries and onion rings.
Outside, up and down Sunset Boulevard, in one of the world's vainest cities, starlets flaunt taut black minis and stiletto heels.
Ms.
Goldberg, whose age is reported to be anywhere between 37 and 43, is wearing rumpled jeans, thick socks, clogs and no makeup.


Bosnian Town Sees Relief Supplies for First Time in Eight Months


New Hospital Housing Plan in White Plains
A PROPOSAL by a major hospital here to build 1,200 units of town-house-style housing on undeveloped hospital property, which some residents see as the city's future "Central Park," has received a warmer welcome from the Common Council than a more ambitious project offered for the same site a decade ago.
The new proposal, which would use 90 acres of the heavily wooded 235-acre campus owned and occupied by New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center, a psychiatric institution, is smaller in scope than the original plan, eliminating proposed office buildings, a motel and a shopping mall and reducing the planned residential space by a third.
The new project would provide the hospital with at least 200 units of additional housing for its staff, as well as income needed for research and services.


Elisa Scholnick, David Ansell
Elisa Scholnick, the daughter of State Supreme Court Justice and Mrs.
Leonard Scholnick of Orangeburg, N.Y., was married on Friday to David James Ansell, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Gerald Ansell of Endicott, N.Y.
Rabbi George Stern officiated at the Woodcliff Lake (N.J.) Hilton.


'My Enemy Brother'
WITH FRIENDS LIKE YOU
What Israelis Really Think About American Jews.
By Matti Golan.
Translated by Hillel Halkin. 184 pp.
New York: The Free Press. $19.95.


Jordan And Bulls Are Lost in New York
What the Knicks did to the Chicago Bulls yesterday afternoon was as subtle as a punch in the face.
It was the Knicks at their best.
It was the Bulls and Michael Jordan at their worst.
It was just one game, but it was the sort of performance that New York would like to bottle and reopen for the playoffs.


Talking: Paydowns; Reducing Mortgage Principal
ABOUT two years ago, Paul Havemann, vice president of HSH, a mortgage monitoring and advisory service in Butler, N.J., decided to personally try out an idea increasingly being promoted in his industry: making additional principal payments each month so the balance of his home mortgage could be paid off faster.
He had been in his Jefferson Township house only two years and, like other homeowners, was worried that any attempt to refinance could be rejected if the value of his home had dropped too sharply.
This is likely to happen when a mortgage balance loan exceeds the customary 80 percent loan-to-value limit.


Poised in Haiti: 2 Kinds of Refugee With a Single Goal
IN the shade of an unfinished vessel that will almost certainly one day spirit Haitians off on a clandestine journey toward the United States, two distinct voices of desperation can be heard.
Audelin Julien, a fast-speaking, rail-thin 20-year-old who supported Haiti's exiled President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide, tells of how several times he has been harassed and narrowly escaped arrest by the police for his political views.
Then, pointing to the beached wooden hulk nearby, he says, "By the time Jan. 20 comes, I will have enough money to buy a seat on that boat and then, God willing, I will go."


For the Rangers, It's 'Who's in Goal?'
Don't say "goaltender controversy" in front of Coach Roger Neilson.
The Rangers don't need any more problems at this point.
There is controversy over the number of talented forwards on the roster.
There is controversy over the decision to scratch which players when.
There are questions as to why the Rangers have played erratically this month, questions as to whether a trade for another defenseman is finally going to happen, and ever-standing questions about Mark Messier's relationship with his coach.


Wall Street; Equal Justice for Vultures?
PEOPLE who specialize in the securities of bankrupt companies -- called vultures -- fear they are becoming second-class citizens.
Their alarm stems from developments in seemingly dissimilar cases across the country.
In each case, bankruptcy speculators see a common issue: Should they be treated worse than traditional creditors simply because they bought the distressed securities at less than their face value?


Keeping Grown-Ups Pacified
THERE IS A MAGICAL MOMENT FOR ADULTS in Disney's new "Aladdin." The giant blue genie escapes from the bottle and -- what a relief -- turns out to be Robin Williams.
He doesn't look like Robin Williams, but he acts and sounds exactly like him at his most manic, which is to say, at his best.
He jumps in and out of characters and voices with delirious speed: he's Groucho Marx, Jack Nicholson, Arnold Schwarzenegger, Ed Sullivan.
He parodies game shows and talk shows.
The magic of this shape-shifting genie is not lost on small children, though his dead-on impression of William F. Buckley Jr. probably is.
Mr.
Williams does more than hold together "Aladdin," an elaborate but uneven version of the classic story.
He relieves the boredom for adults and even makes it possible to recommend the film for unaccompanied grown-ups.
His performance is a prime example of the Rocky-and-Bullwinkle Syndrome, that well-known but still vital approach in which topical allusions whiz over children's heads without diminishing their interest in the adventure.
Five-year-olds, who presumably have never seen "Taxi Driver," will not be in the dark when the genie asks in his De Niro voice, "Are you lookin' at me? Did you rub my lamp?"


Assessments
To the Editor:
In "A Sale Underscores the Market's Decline," on Nov. 15, Jeffery Gural says Class B office building assessments will drop 50 percent within two years.
The article concludes with: "The message is that the city is no longer able to rely on its commercial tax base for revenue growth."


Marge Schott: Baseball's Big Red Headache
She was in a hurry as she strode to the elevator behind the press box, trailed by her small party and the smoke from the cigarette clenched between her teeth.
This was in Riverfront Stadium, home of the Cincinnati Reds.
The woman, with her salt-and-pepper hair cut short, was sturdily built and wore a white-and-red sweater and fire-engine red slacks -- the colors of her team -- and brown loafers.
At the elevator, she turned her back to the steel door and kicked it with repeated thuds.
Very shortly, the elevator door slid open.


San Antonio
America's 10th largest city, halfway between the East and West coasts, also represents the halfway point between urban bustle and the relaxed grace associated with its Spanish and Mexican heritage.
The searing heat of the summer has abated, leaving mild days warmed by jalapeno peppers and the expectation of Christmas fiestas.
Once the largest city in Texas, San Antonio is now overshadowed by the sprawling, flatland metropolises of Houston and Dallas.
But what San Antonio lacks in modern glass office towers and the glitter of oil money it makes up for in history and charm.
"Remember the Alamo" is more than just a battle cry; it is an industry, built around the small mission church and the restored Spanish colonial village at the heart of the city.
That isn't to say San Antonio lacks modern attractions; it is home to an outstanding zoo and botanical gardens, the Sea World and Fiesta Texas theme parks, and its own professional basketball team, the Spurs, now coached by towel-chewing Jerry Tarkanian.


Just Across the Golden Gate
LIKE many of the residents of California, the rocks of the Marin Headlands came from someplace else, in this case from the middle of the Pacific Ocean, near the Marquesas Islands, where Paul Gauguin died and Herman Melville jumped ship and had the adventure he wrote up as "Typee."
There 200 million years ago lava rose through the earth's crust along what is called a spreading zone and formed basaltic pillows that solidified when they met the sea.
Pushed by the rising of the new Pacific floor, these pillows migrated northeastward and eventually reached the edge of what is now North America, where, like other newcomers, they attached themselves.


Tech Notes; Waiter, a Wineglass List, Please
SOME call it science, some call it art, some call it nonsense.
But to anyone willing to listen, Georg Riedel will say, "There is no all-purpose wineglass." Mr.
Riedel, the 10th-generation proprietor of Riedelglas of Kufstein, Austria, designs and produces different glasses for different varietals.
"Each glass shows a different element; it's almost like a concert where you can call for more trumpets, more violins," he said at a workshop he held recently to create a glass for zinfandel, a hearty red varietal unique to American vineyards.
"What we try to explore with shape is to bring forth varietal character."


Former Rebels Balk as a Salvador Deadline Nears
Former insurgent forces have halted their phased demobilization and accused the army of plotting a coup d'etat, but President Alfredo Cristiani shrugged off both issues on Friday, apparently proceeding with plans for formally ending the civil war on Dec. 15.
The Farabundo Marti National Liberation Front, the former guerrilla coalition now organizing as a political party, said that some army officers were planning a coup in order to halt a purge of more than 100 top army officers that was required as part of the peace accords signed early this year.


Bus-Fare Cuts Fail to Lure Queens Riders
Frustrated by the swarms of private vans in southeastern Queens that have siphoned away thousands of riders each day, and millions of dollars in revenue each year, the Transit Authority recently did something it had never done before: It cut the bus fare.
On selected lines to and from the Jamaica Center subway station, where commuters catch Manhattan-bound trains, round-trip fares were cut from $2.50 to $1.50, or 75 cents each way, compared with the $1 van rides.
"We're going to meet them head-on," Peter E. Stangl, chairman of the Metropolitan Transportation Authority, said when he announced the new fare in October.
"We're going to beat them."


A Knockout and a Half?
Forget the old Thrilla in Manila, and get your mind off the next Super Bowl for that matter, at least during halftime of the game on Jan. 31.
RIDDICK BOWE is the heavyweight champion now, and the Brooklyn boxer is thinking big, Super Bout big, in fact.
According to his manager, ROCK NEWMAN, Bowe is considering making his first title defense a televised bout timed to coincide -- and compete -- with the halftime festivities of Super Bowl XXVII.
If the plans work out, Super Bout I would be held at the Washington Convention Center and broadcast on the Fox network while NBC is trying to hold on to an estimated 120 million Super Bowl viewers.


Window Shopping
THE passing of time, even just a decade or two, can change the way you look at things.
Take, for instance, two of the six Christmas windows at Saks Fifth Avenue that re-create scenes from Broadway musicals.
One, of a late-1960's office party in "Promises, Promises," shows young women in festive velvet miniskirts whooping it up in front of leering older male executives.
One of the men is fondling the behind of a woman as she laughs with a kind of desperate-looking abandon that seems a little questionable today, now that sexual harassment has come into the vocabulary of the workplace and AIDS has come into the vocabulary of the bedroom.


Barbie to the Max on Madison Avenue
THE new Barbie on Madison boutique at the F. A. O. Schwarz toy store is a panorama of pink.
Until recently the domain of Ninja Turtles, the store's downstairs area has been given over to one of America's most popular icons -- the big-haired, wasp-waisted, flounced-to-kill Barbie doll -- and all her accouterments.
Last Sunday, crowds milled among stacks of Sparkle Eyes Barbies ($22), Sun Sensation Barbies ($10), Totally Hair Barbies ($18) and Teen Talk Barbies ($40), along with Barbie-logo socks, sunglasses, hats and watches that children can wear.
There were pink mini-Porsche Cabriolets for Barbie ($42), Barbie Chocolate Shops ($60), Spin Pretty Washers ($54), Party Bake Ovens ($64) and the We Girls Can Do Anything board games ($12), which offer actress, ballerina, musician, fashion designer, doctor and pink-uniformed airplane pilot among career choices.


Drunken Driving Cases: Roles for Lawyers
Re: "Drunken Driving: A Mysterious Drop in the Conviction Rate," Nov. 15:
When drunken driving was only a notch above a speeding ticket, a guilty plea was the wise thing to do.
Now that penalties and expenses for a first offense can be in excess of $9,000, the wise thing is to hire a "good" lawyer.


Leaf Fall Connects Us to Cycle of Seasons
To the Editor:
Re your Nov. 12 article on the disenchantment of suburbanites with falling autumn leaves: Isn't it sad how far we as a culture have fallen to regard the raining down of nature's majesty as a "scourge"?


Shift for Urban Renewal: Nurture the Grass Roots
LaVerne Cooper and Deborah Gibson spend their days about two blocks apart in the Sandtown neighborhood, where pride is more memory than reality.
But a chasm separates Mrs.
Cooper, who has a job and will soon own her home, from Mrs.
Gibson, a former heroin addict daunted by the demands of any given day.
Now a generation of urban crusaders is trying to bridge that divide in Sandtown-Winchester, a cluster of 71 blighted blocks just west of downtown named for the residue that gravel-laden carts once left on its streets as they traveled from a nearby quarry.


2D DAY OF VIOLENCE WRACKS VENEZUELA
Breaking a nervous calm that followed the unsuccessful coup attempt on Friday, rebellious Venezuelan policemen hijacked a civilian helicopter here today and raked the presidential palace and surrounding Government buildings with rifle fire.
The presidential guard returned fire and repulsed the attack.
But the clash, in turn, set of a series of sniper attacks from slum high-rises surrounding the palace.
No one was reported wounded, and President Carlos Andres Perez worked "at top speed" in the bomb-damaged palace today, an aide said.


The Executive Computer; So Many Bargains, So Many Confounding Choices
FALLING computer prices have meant bargains for shoppers in the last six months.
But rather than paying less and pocketing the cash, many buyers are reaching for more power.
As a result, the demand for computers based on the Intel Corporation's i486 processors has soared.
Systems based on the i486DX chip and its variants -- Intel's i486DX/2, i486SX and i486SL, and various iterations from other companies -- were ubiquitous at the annual Comdex/ Fall trade show held in Las Vegas, Nev., earlier this month.
Some manufacturers at the show said demand for their 486 machines was so great that they were having trouble getting all the chips they needed.


Recent Sales
Wethersfield, Conn.  $305,500.  599 Ridge Road  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 7-year-old colonial; eat-in kitchen, whirlpool bath, c/a, 0.5 acre; taxes $5,954.
Orange, Conn.  $218,000
830 Birchwood Drive  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 41-year-old colonial; new bathrooms and kitchen, 1-car attached garage, 0.5 acre; taxes $3,306.
Woodbridge, Conn.  $340,000
17 Rollin Road  4-bedroom, 3-bath, 14-year-old contemporary; cathedral ceiling in living room, family room w/fireplace, 1.9 acres; taxes $5,665.
Hartsdale, N.Y.  $193,000
10 Jean Lane  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 39-year-old Cape Cod; foyer, living room, dining room, patio, bar, finished basement; taxes $5,203.
Rye, N.Y.  $266,000
2 Adelaide Street  6-bedroom, 2-bath, 66-year-old Cape Cod colonial; family room, new bathroom, laundry room, 1-car garage; taxes $3,805.
Scarsdale, N.Y.  $645,000
15 Rutland Road  6-bedroom, 4 1/2-bath, 65-year-old Norman Tudor; fireplace, dining room, family room, butler's pantry, attic; taxes $16,048.
OTHER AREAS Bethpage, L.I.  $150,000
340 Martin Place  4-bedroom, 1-bath, 42-year-old Cape Cod; dining room, eat-in kitchen, 1-car attached garage; taxes $3,300.
Copiague, L.I.  $220,000
72 Shore Drive South  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 9-year-old ranch; fireplace, 1-car attached garage, 116- by 125-foot lot, water view; taxes $6,400.
Wyckoff, N.J.  $229,000
152 Elmwood Place  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 35-year-old colonial; great room, new master bedroom, eat-in-kitchen; taxes $5,435.


Lincoln Will Meet Wagner in P.S.A.L. Final
Two touchdown runs by Freddie Sinclair and a pair of scoring bombs from Corey Valentine to tight end Jeff Miller gave undefeated Lincoln its 10th victory of the season, a 24-6 romp at home over Brooklyn rival Canarsie, in a Public Schools Athletic League semifinal playoff game yesterday.
Lincoln, the second-ranked team in New York City and ranked No. 5 in New York State, will play for the P.S.A.L. title next Sunday at Columbia University's Wien Stadium against Susan Wagner of Staten Island, the top-ranked team in both the city and state.


Additional Flights To Caribbean
Carnival Air Lines, which operates chartered and scheduled air service between New York, Florida and the Caribbean, is adding several new routes.
From Tuesday it starts scheduled daily round-trip service between Miami and St.
Thomas in the United States Virgin Islands and daily nonstop round trips between Newark and Fort Lauderdale.
From Dec. 15 it will have scheduled daily round trips between Kennedy International Airport and Santo Domingo, the Dominican Republic, Orlando and Santo Domingo and Miami and Santo Domingo.
Fares will start at $99 one way on the Newark-Fort Lauderdale route and $179 one way between Kennedy and Santo Domingo.
A $299 round-trip fare will be offered for Orlando-Santo Domingo and $289 round trip for Miami-St.Thomas.
Miami-Santo Domingo will be $261 round trip.
Carnival says all flights will be on 727 and 737 jets carrying up to 173 passengers.


The Carhartt Jacket
WHAT: A full-cut, wind-resistant, snag-proof, heavy-duty jacket originally designed for workers and outdoorsmen.
In recent years, Carhartt has kept its traditional public -- hunters, construction workers, farmers and coal miners -- while becoming a fashion accessory for rappers, club kids, preppie hangers-on and the otherwise chronically cool.
As plain as a Mao tunic, the Carhartt is most often seen in mustard and navy blue.
The jackets are made from 12-ounce cotton canvas and held together by triple-stitched seams, with metal rivets at stress points.
It comes in waist- and three-quarter lengths and has patch pockets and more snaps than Blaine and Antoine on "In Living Color." New ones hang as stiffly as bulletproof vests.
Prices range from $40 to $140, depending on the style and on whether the jacket is lined or has a hood.
HISTORY: Carhartt Inc. was founded by Hamilton Carhartt in 1889 in Detroit, and the company made, as it still does, pants and overalls in the same colors and material as the jackets.
Back then, "a good pair of Carhartts was just what a man needed for homesteading in the Oklahoma Territory, hunting deer in Michigan or stoking the fires of Mr. Carnegie's mills," says a three-page brochure included with each jacket.


It's Summer in Montreal Biodome
Even on cold winter days, vistors to Montreal may opt for warm-weather attire when they visit the tropical rain forest in the city's newest tourist attraction, the Biodome.
Situated in the former Velodrome, a cavernous building erected for the 1976 Olympic cycling events, the Biodome, which opened in June, is an amalgam of zoo, aquarium, botanical garden and museum designed to re-create, with flora and fauna, four different environments.


IN SHORT/SMALL PRESSES: NONFICTION
MEMORIES THAT SMELL LIKE GASOLINE By David Wojnarowicz.
Artspace Books, 1286 Folsom Street, San Francisco, Calif. 94103, $15.


The Messages of Pearl Harbor
To the Editor:
One must be wary of any book with "final judgment" in the title.
"Pearl Harbor: Final Judgement" (Oct. 25) is applauded for its "provocative" research, and it hurls blame about persuasively without regard for rank or position.
But the revelation deemed most significant -- that the 14th part of the Japanese message about breaking relations with the United States was available to Washington nine hours earlier than previously assumed -- is open to question, according to the chronology established by the research of Gordon W. Prange in "At Dawn We Slept" and "Pearl Harbor: The Verdict of History."


Feeding Birds and the Uninvited Squirrels
GARDENERS can be thankful for the birds that will hang around during the next few months.
The birds are not only delightful and colorful to see but also continue to eat insect grubs and eggs, or any morsels they can find.
Gardeners who place feeders near the windows find these feathered friends a pleasure to watch, especially at breakfast.
Activity at feeders is busy at this time of year, with the birds following an established pecking order.
It is a fascinating ritual: each species has its turn, with the local population determining the line of action.
The feeders may beckon evening grosbeaks, cardinals, nuthatches, titmice, chickadees, juncoes and white-throated sparrows.


Ellis A. Rosen, Seth R. Lesser
Ellis A. Rosen, the public relations associate at the Children's Aid Society in New York, was married last evening to Seth Richard Lesser, an associate at the New York law firm of Davis Polk &amp; Wardwell.
Rabbi Jack Bemporad officiated at the Lotos Club in New York.
Mrs.
Lesser, 26 years old, graduated from William Smith College.
She is a daughter of Dr.
John F. Rosen of Greenwich, Conn., and Katharine Lardner of New York.
The bride's father heads the pediatric metabolism division at the Montefiore Medical Centert in the Bronx.
She is a great-granddaughter of Ring Lardner, the writer, and granddaughter of Ring Lardner Jr., the Academy Award-winning screenwriter.
The bride is a stepdaughter of Margaret Rosen of Greenwich.


Settling Disputes Without Litigation
IN the current recession, the pressure is on photographers and their clients to keep costs low by making deals and cutting corners, which makes the climate ripe for disagreements.
The phrase "sue me" is being heard nearly as often as "nice shot."
Working photographers, however, have an alternative to going to court: the Joint Ethics Committee, which was organized in 1945 by professionals in the graphic communications industry.


Looking Beyond Brooklyn Heights Toward Heaven
The massive tan buildings stand sentinel near the ramps of the Manhattan and Brooklyn bridges, greeting commuters with two bold signs: "Watchtower" and "Read God's Word The Holy Bible Daily."
To many drivers, the words seem enigmatic and out of place along an otherwise secular urban sky scape.
But to the 3,000 or more Jehovah's Witnesses who converge each day on downtown Brooklyn to work and pray, they serve a distinct purpose.
Not only are the words part of the message in their fervent efforts to proselytize, they also mark the world headquarters of the Watchtower Bible and Tract Society.


Belting It Out


Support Groups Grow For Transplant Patients
THE 12 men and women sat on chairs in a circle as they talked about the news that they had just heard.
A member of their group had died.
One man said: "Victor had been waiting for his second heart transplant and died within a few days of finally getting it. He rejected his new heart."
"But he lived two good years after the first transplant," another person added.
"Every day is a gift. Just because Victor died doesn't mean it will happen to me. We're all going to go some time, some of us before others."
Two men wore identical blue T-shirts with the message, "Don't take your organs to heaven; heaven knows we need them here!"
The men and women meeting on a recent Monday evening in New Hyde Park are members of a support group for organ-transplant recipients and their families.
The group is sponsored by Homecare Management Inc. of Ronkonkoma.
The number of recipients has remained fairly steady over the last few years, but attendance has grown significantly at few support groups on the Island for recipients, both before and after surgery.  3-Year-Old Chapter in Uniondale
A Long Island chapter of the Transplant Recipients International Organization was started in 1989 with 35 participants, and attendance at monthly meetings has grown to about 70, said Anne Treffeisen, the head of the chapter who received a liver transplant six years ago.
The group meets in Uniondale and features a professional speaker each month.
The popularity of the first group run by Homecare Management in Ronkonkoma led last year to the start of the New Hyde Park group.
The new group began with six members and now draws up to 18 people at its meetings.
A third group was formed in the summer in Long Island City.
Support groups meet two times a month and provide a forum for recipients and their families to support one another while waiting for donor organs and after the transplants, said Catherine Hirsch, director of social services for Homecare Management.
There is no charge.  'Regular Networks May Be Broken'
Evidence shows that when people face crises, support groups can make a big difference in improving their lives, Ms.
Hirsch said, adding:
"The groups provide them an opportunity to bond, share, feel intimacy and closeness. People who are waiting to receive donor organs have many things going on in their lives. They are frightened that they're dying. They have financial concerns. Their regular networks may be broken down."
While hospitals address medical needs, Ms.
Hirsch said, there is often a need for more emotional support, and support groups pick up the slack.
"If you take care of a person emotionally, he'll do better physically," she said.
Homecare Management plans to start a transplant-recipient support group for children and their families, Ms.
Hirsch said.
"Children transplant recipients have special needs and would be best served in their own support groups," she said.
"We're aiming to get this going by November." Plans for Groups at Stony Brook
Stony Brook University Hospital is the sole federally designated transplant center on the Island, specifically for kidneys.
Last year 22 kidney transplants were performed at the hospital.
Up to August there have been another 22 this year.
There are no formal support groups at the hospital, but hospital officials hope to introduce them, said David Bekofsky, a spokesman for transplantation services in the surgery department.
"We encourage patients to participate in support groups," Mr.
Bekofsky said.
"In any situation where somebody goes through lifesaving surgery there are side effects and dramatic changes in life style. Many people need more support than they can get from their family alone."
For Robert Carroll, 34, of Queens, who three years ago had pancreas, kidney and liver transplants at the same time and from the same donor, being part of the New Hyde Park support group has been very helpful, he said.
"For the first few months after surgery I held my breath, waiting in fear for my body to reject my new organs," he said.
"The medical staff at the hospital tried to help, but their main priority is to fix bodies, and they didn't have time to offer me emotional support. Talking to a psychiatrist who hadn't experienced this didn't mean the same thing as talking to others who understood what I've gone through." 'Help Each Other Ease the Guilt'
One of the most difficult factors, Mr.
Carroll said, is living with the guilt that the donor had died.
"We carry guilt around that we were waiting for someone to die, for us to be able to live," he said.
"We have to help each other ease the guilt by reminding ourselves that these people would have died anyway; they just would have gone to their graves with their organs."
The United Network for Organ Sharing in Richmond keeps data on transplants and the national transplant waiting list.
According to a spokeswoman, Karen Slack, there is no breakdown for numbers in Long Island, but statistics are kept by state.
Last year in New York there were 530 kidney transplants, 161 liver transplants, 119 heart transplants, 1 pancreas transplant, 3 heart-lung transplants and 19 lung transplants.
The total of 833 was up from 824 in 1990.
As of June this year the national waiting list had 20,953 for kidneys, 2,571 for hearts, 2,149 for livers, 866 for lungs, 771 for pancreases and 162 for heart-lung combinations.
Shortage of Donors
As donations stay about the same, the waiting list continues to grow, Ms.
Slack said, adding that in 1990, 2,105 people from the combined waiting list died while awaiting organs.
Concern over the shortage of donors was one topic for participants at the meeting of the New Hyde Park support group.
Larry Juliano of Albertson, said: "I'm one of the lucky ones who got a new kidney eight years ago. But it won't last forever, and I hate to think of what will happen down the road when I'll need another one. Will I be able to get one?"
The other issues included concern over insurance costs and fear that by next year insurance will not cover the expensive daily medications that transplant recipients have to take, the hope that patches will deliver medications and the recent death of the first man to receive a baboon liver.
"Animal rights' activists are angry at using animals for experimental procedures," a woman said.
"But let's face it. Human beings come first. You have to be in the position we've been in. Then you can talk about it."  Hopes and Realities
Ms.
Hirsch said that for transplant recipients, the issues and psychosocial needs before and after the transplant were very different.
"Before surgery people are usually dying and are very frightened," she said.
"Their main concern is getting that transplant to have a chance to live. After the transplant recipients realize that things aren't perfect. They must deal with harsh realities, that they have to be permanently on expensive medications that may have side effects and may play havoc with their moods, that they may have to go in and out of hospitals. In essence, they've traded a terminal illness for a chronic illness."
A heart-transplant recipient from Queens, Richie Bernardo, who leads the group, said the most difficult time was before the transplant, waiting for a donor.
"When I first heard the word transplant, my hair stood up on end," he recalled.
"Today I'm 57 on the outside, but inside I'm 37. You have to beat it mentally and say, 'I gave this heart life the same way this heart gave me life.' " Visits to New Recipients
The support group is like a family, he said, adding: "We share each other's happinesses and sorrows. Now, a year and a half after my heart transplant, I try to be on the giving end. I go to hospitals and talk to heart patients. When they see me standing there, it's a help to them. When I see fear in another man's eyes, I hold his hand and tell him that I've been through it. It's not easy, but he'll get through it."
Another man in the group, Rob Skaretka of Forest Hills, said he had been very frightened before his heart transplant.
"I was in the hospital," Mr.
Skaretka recounted, "and I saw Richie there visiting, just six weeks after he had had his transplant. I couldn't believe it. He looked so great that suddenly I wasn't afraid anymore."


Dena Weiss And Mark Levie
Dena Rivka Weiss, a market research analyst, was married Thursday to Dr.
Mark David Levie, the chief resident in obstetrics and gynecology at the Albert Einstein College of Medicine in the Bronx.
Rabbi Avraham Weiss, the bride's father, performed the ceremony at Marina Del Ray in Throgs Neck, the Bronx.


Bookshelf
Additional titles of interest:
THE DARK-THIRTY: Southern Tales of the Supernatural.
By Patricia C. McKissack.
Illustrated by Brian Pinkney.
Knopf. $15. (Ages 8 to 12) The title refers to that last half-hour before dark, when children must wind up their play and get safely home -- or else.
These original, short and ghostly stories, which come with brief historical introductions placing them in the American South, are grand for reading aloud.


Eve L. Yohalem and Nicholas Polsky
Mr. and Mrs.
Nathaniel H. Yohalem of Westfield, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Eve Leslie Yohalem to Nicholas Andrew Polsky, a son of Judge and Mrs.
Leon B. Polsky of New York.
A January wedding is planned.
Ms.
Yohalem, 25 years old, is an editorial assistant at Little, Brown, the publishing concern, in New York.
She graduated from Brown University.
Her father is a partner in Gutterman, Wolkstein, Klinger &amp; Yohalem, a Westfield law firm.
Her mother, Louise Yohalem, is the associate director of education for Planned Parenthood of Greater Northern New Jersey in Plainfield, N.J.


The New Neediest
Imagine that you are 16 years old in New York City and you can't go home.
You can't go home because a parent will rape or sodomize you.
You can't go home because you will be beaten within an inch of your life.
You can't go home because your parents are in jail, or dead.
You can't go home because you were told to get out forever: you're gay or lesbian; you're a financial burden; you took drugs; you're just no good.


New Yorker's Team Has Lead in Nationals
Two players from the New York area held a commanding lead going into the semifinals of the premier event at the American Contract Bridge League's Fall Nationals here today.
At the end of play Friday, Robert Blanchard of Manhattan and Bill Pollack of Englewood, N.J., headed the field of 56 teams in the Reisinger Board-a-Match Team Championship, together with Drew Casen of Boca Raton, Fla., a former New Yorker, and Tom Sanders of Nashville, three and a half boards ahead of their closest rivals.


Russian Economic Turmoil Persists, but Not Chaos
A year ago, the stories out of Moscow were full of dark warnings about starvation, destitution, chaos and coups as the Soviet Union lurched toward its end.
This has not been a wonderful year for the Russian economy, as an inexperienced Government tries to manage an extraordinary transition to a capitalistic system.
There is more poverty, purchasing power is down, industrial production has dropped to 75 percent of what it was a year ago, inflation is running at about 25 percent a month and the ruble is hovering around 450 to the dollar, compared with 135 at the end of June.


New Group Speeds Food to the Hungry
As the director of Island Harvest, a newly formed prepared-and-perishable-food program on Long Island, I appreciate your thoughtful reporting about the hungry on Long Island.
Island Harvest is a network of volunteers who pick up unserved fresh or prepared food from restaurants, caterers, convenience stores, groceries, bakeries, etc.
This food would normally be thrown away, because, while still quite edible, it is not as fresh as the business requires for sale to its customers.
The food is then delivered to local soup kitchens, homeless shelters and other not-for-profit tax-exempt agencies that feed people in need.


NOV. 22-27: Economic Upturn; Too Late for Bush, Too Early for Clinton
The economic bulletins in the waning days of the Bush Administration are proving to be good news (though much too late) for President Bush -- and a bit awkward for President-elect Bill Clinton.
Last week, the Commerce Department issued several reports showing that the economy has been much stronger this autumn than most people realized.
It grew at a hearty rate of 3.9 percent a year in the third quarter, much more than the initial estimate of 2.7 percent.
Americans also earned more money in October and spent more, the department said.


Allison Lewis, F. H. Brooks Jr.
Allison Gayle Lewis, a computer programmer, was married yesterday evening to Frederic H. Brooks Jr., a business executive.
Rabbi Jordan Parr performed the ceremony at the Radisson Riverfront Inn in Augusta, Ga.
Ms.
Lewis, who is keeping her name, works at the Computer Sciences Corporation, a computer software programming company in Hanover, Md.
She graduated from the Rochester Institute of Technology.
She is the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Lawrence M. Lewis of Augusta.
Her father, now retired, was a dentist with the United States Army there.
Her mother, also retired, was the general manager of the Augusta Ballet Company.


Betty Sanchez, Michael Cushny
Betty Sanchez Murillo, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Juan Alberto Sanchez of San Cristobal, Venezuela, was married yesterday to Michael Burns Cushny, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Theodorus V. W. Cushny of Rock Hall, Md.
The Rev.
Thomas J. Peterman officiated at Sacred Heart Roman Catholic Church in Chestertown, Md.
Mrs.
Cushny is the audio engineer for a radio talk show from the New York Society of Ethical Culture on WQXR.
Her father is a dentist in San Cristobal.
Her mother, Isabel Sanchez, is a fashion designer there.


Survivor Art
Every summer, Magdalena Abakanowicz retreats to her cottage in the Mazury Lakes region of northern Poland.
There, in the deep forest, far from the muffled ring of the fax machine that has become as much a part of her Warsaw existence as running water, she has been reclaiming huge trees that were, she says, "cut down and thrown out" because they were too irregular to be used for lumber and too dangerous to be allowed to stand on the side of roads.
These gnarled, bumpy trees were, in effect, misfits, rejected because they had too much personality and individuality to fill any standardized role.
Abakanowicz stripped them, inspected them and sometimes bandaged them or encased them in metal.
Wounded yet imposing and irrepressible, they form a growing sculptural series called "War Games" that is a statement of heroic survival and will.
No contemporary artist has mounted a more sustained attack on the very ideas of conformity and confinement.
From the time she was an art student in Warsaw in 1950, Abakanowicz (pronounced aba-ka-KNOW-vitch) has been struggling against authority -- "I hate rules," she says -- and "trying to escape from the world of categories." Politics under Communism was inflexible; art was not.
As an artist, she could fight group thinking.
She could defy the tyranny of explanations.
"In Poland it was almost forbidden to talk about mystery," she says.
"I did."


And Speaking of Taxes . . .
To the Editor:
With regard to the tax issue, President-elect Clinton might take a look at the inequity imposed by our married Senators on all single people with regard to Federal withholding tax.
The amount deducted from a single person's pay is considerably larger than that deducted from a married person's, although rent, utilities, property taxes, depreciation and insurance fall on just one resident of a dwelling, while two "in residence" pay these same expenses while getting a large payroll tax break each payday.


Corrections
The Architecture View column on Nov. 15, about renovations planned for the CBS building in Manhattan, characterized the building's plaza incorrectly.
While no entrance to the building faces the Avenue of the Americas, there are stairs from the avenue to the plaza.


Psychiatric Hospitals Faulted On Medication of Children
State-run psychiatric hospitals for children typically fail to notify parents about the medications they give their patients and often prescribe drugs to control tantrums rather than as part of a treatment program, a New York State watchdog agency has found.
But the agency, the Commission on the Quality of Care for the Mentally Disabled, also had a number of positive things to say in the report, scheduled to be released today, based on a survey of a random sample of 94 children at eight state-run psychiatric hospitals from Rochester to Long Island in 1990.
The commission found that most of the records it examined contained explanations of which drugs were being dispensed and why, and said that in general, the doctors avoided using several medications in the same pharmacological family when only one was necessary.


Amy Kittenplan, Joshua Hubbard
Amy Blythe Kittenplan, a daughter of Stephen and Gail Kittenplan of New York, was married last evening to Joshua Uriel Hubbard, a son of Ann G. Hubbard of Camden, Me., and Robert Hubbard of Chicago.
Rabbi Ronald Sobel performed the ceremony at Temple Emanu-El in New York.
Mrs.
Hubbard, 27 years old, teaches English at the Iolani School in Honolulu.
She and her husband graduated from Cornell University, she cum laude.
Her father is a first vice president and a stockbroker at Smith Barney, Harris Upham &amp; Company, the securities brokerage, in New York.
Her mother, Gail Kittenplan, owns Gail Kittenplan Associates, a personal shopping service in New York.


Hearty Cold-Weather Fare From Alsace
ONE of the glories of Alsatian cuisine is choucroute garnie, a dish composed of sauerkraut braised in white wine and served with an assortment of sausages, ham and fresh and smoked pork.
Boiled or steamed potatoes and strong mustard accompany the dish.
It is earthy peasant fare, suited to cold weather.
And now that French bistro and brasserie cooking is all the rage, choucroute garnie is starting to appear on restaurant menus.
But it is also relatively easy to prepare at home and, because it can be reheated, makes an excellent party dish.
A big platter of choucroute garnie, the various meats arrayed on a bed of sauerkraut, is certainly an impressive dish.


In Trenton, It's the Vote No One Wants to Cast
There will be a lot of people holding their noses in Trenton tomorrow.
That's what governors and lawmakers do in New Jersey when they have left themselves little room to maneuver and are forced to sign or vote for legislation they publicly decry.
"I'm going to sign this bill, but I'm going to hold my nose while I do it," has been said by more than one governor to indicate to the public that he is being forced to do something by circumstances beyond his control and shouldn't be held accountable.


Big Effort Makes Little Difference
What was an ailing Michael Jordan doing on the court until the final 2 minutes 57 seconds of the most lopsided defeat of his professional career?
In retrospect, he didn't really know.
"Had I known the outcome was going to be like this, I probably wouldn't have played," he said after the Chicago Bulls were hammered by the Knicks, 112-75, yesterday at Madison Square Garden.


Rosalyn Robinson, Warren B. English
Rosalyn Karen Robinson, a deputy general counsel with the Pennsylvania Governor's office in Harrisburg, Pa., was married on Friday to Warren Baxter English, an electrical engineer in consulting services at the Philadelphia Electric Company, the Philadelphia utility.
The Rev.
James A. Groves performed the Baptist ceremony at the Merion Tribute House in Merion Station, Pa.


In the Region: Long Island; Recent Sales
Bethpage L.I.  $150,000
340 Martin Place  4-bedroom, 1-bath, 42-year-old Cape Cod; dining room, eat-in kitchen, 1-car attached garage; taxes $3,300.
Copiague  $220,000
72 Shore Drive South  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 9-year-old ranch; fireplace, 1-car attached garage, 116- by 125-foot lot, water view; taxes $6,400.
East Norwich  $210,000
30 Gilbert Court  4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 33-year-old split level; dining room, eat-in kitchen, finished basement, 1-car attached garage; taxes $3,300.
Glen Cove  $352,000
1 Jodi Court  5-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 8-year-old colonial; dining room, eat-in kitchen, finished basement, 2-car garage; taxes $7,000.
Lindenhurst  $137,000
600 Heathcote Road  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 36-year-old split level; dining room, eat-in kitchen, finished basement, 1-car garage; taxes $3,800.
Westbury  $217,000
1068 Roxbury Drive  4-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 37-year-old split level; dining room, family room, finished basement, 2-car attached garage; taxes $6,100.
OTHER AREAS Woodbridge, Conn.  $340,000
17 Rollin Road  4-bedroom, 3-bath, 14-year-old contemporary; cathedral ceiling in living room, family room w/fireplace, 1.9 acres; taxes $5,665.
Hartsdale, N.Y.  $193,000
10 Jean Lane  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 39-year-old Cape Cod; foyer, living room, dining room, patio, bar, finished basement; taxes $5,203.
Wyckoff, N.J.  $229,000
152 Elmwood Place  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 35-year-old colonial; great room, new master bedroom, eat-in-kitchen; taxes $5,435.


The Art of the Insult
To the Editor:
William Safire's trenchant comment concerning Disraeli and Gladstone (column, Nov. 5) prompts me to relate another exchange between two other prominent Englishmen that is singularly appropriate to the just-concluded Presidential campaign.


Trade New World; As It Comes Together, It's Pulling Apart
In these waning days of the Bush Administration, with the Clinton regime still unborn, two competing forces are at work in the world, one pushing nations closer together and the other ripping them apart.
The clash between the two forces was clearly in evidence last week as the United States and Europe reached a compromise in their incipient trade war -- and farmers, politicians and others in France reacted furiously to the deal.
Both accord and discord aptly illustrated how, at the same moment, nationalistic political impulses and pressures for economic integration are increasing dramatically.
The resulting conflict threatens world stability and presents President-elect Bill Clinton with potentially severe problems.


Amanda Ramsay, John S. McGraw
Amanda Carolyn Ramsay, the daughter of Col. and Mrs.
David J. Ramsay of Brooklyn, was married yesterday to John Stephen McGraw, the son of John L. McGraw and Terry McDougle, both of Houston.
The Rev.
William Tolley, a Presbyterian minister, performed the ceremony at the Union Church of Bay Ridge in Brooklyn.
Mrs.
McGraw, 24 years old, graduated from Middle Tennessee State University, where she is a nursing student.
Her father retired as the inspector general of the 125th Army Reserve Command in Nashville.


Suffolk Shootout Goes Bellport's Way
The Suffolk County Conference II championship game came down to Long Island high school football's version of a soccer shootout before Bellport defeated West Islip, 12-9, yesterday.
Bellport will play Garden City for the Long Island ClassII title at Hofstra on Saturday at 5 P.M.


Irish Battle the Flu And Outlast Trojans
Notre Dame halfback Reggie Brooks, who was so pained with the flu he never strayed more than a shirt-tug away from his trainer, made the Southern California defense ill tonight.
He rushed for 227 yards on 19 carries and 3 entertaining touchdowns, as the Irish defeated the Trojans for the 10th straight time, 31-23, at the Los Angeles Coliseum.


NORTHEAST NOTEBOOK: Dover, Del.; Highway Inn Expanding
A HOTEL that opened in this capital city two decades ago is undergoing a $4 million expansion designed to turn the highway lodging into a regional conference center.
The 145-room Sheraton Inn Dover, on Route 13 just north of the city's historic downtown government center, is midway through the 55,000-square-foot addition that will give it a ballroom-banquet room, a catering kitchen and 11 new guest rooms, as well as 9,500 square feet of office space.


Tomorrow's Listeners
To the Editor:
Jon Pareles seems to dilute the Federal Communications Commission's justification for taking steps to tame Howard Stern's raucous and acid mouth.


Conversations/Leticia Quezada; L.A.'s Schools Chief Wants Power, And the Vote, for Immigrant Parents
LETICIA QUEZADA remembers that day 16 years ago when, as a Mexican immigrant fresh out of college with a teaching credential in bilingual education, she applied for work at the Los Angeles schools.
She was turned down "flatly," told Los Angeles did not need bilingual teachers.
Today Ms.
Quezada greets visitors as the first Hispanic president of the Los Angeles Board of Education, presiding over a school system in which nearly half the students cannot speak English.
She also presides over what is now perhaps the biggest crisis the nation's second-largest school system has ever faced.
Six months after the civil disorders and arson that swept Los Angeles, the 641,000-student system is threatened both by insolvency and a strike by teachers furious over a recession-induced pay cut of 12 percent.


A Basketball Circuit Discovers a New Draw
DRIBBLING off to the right side of the court, the man with the salt and pepper hair suddenly fires a 30-foot "no-look" pass to the woman driving toward the basket.
She proceeds to lay in the shot for the game's first basket.
The crowd at the Lyman Hall High School gymnasium in Wallingford roars for this is hardly a typical basketball game.
Instead, it is a perfectly synchonized meshing of talent involving different generations and sexes.
The pass was thrown by Marques Haynes, one of the greatest basketball players of all time who, well into his 60's, shows no signs of letting up, and the receiver was Tracy Lis, Connecticut's all-time leading high school scorer, male or female, and the most prolific scorer in the history of the Big East women's basketball conference.


Hearty Cold-Weather Fare From Alsace
ONE of the glories of Alsatian cuisine is choucroute garnie, a dish composed of sauerkraut braised in white wine and served with an assortment of sausages, ham and fresh and smoked pork.
Boiled or steamed potatoes and strong mustard accompany the dish.
It is earthy peasant fare, suited to cold weather.
And now that French bistro and brasserie cooking is all the rage, choucroute garnie is starting to appear on restaurant menus.
But it is also relatively easy to prepare at home and, because it can be reheated, makes an excellent party dish.
A big platter of choucroute garnie, the various meats arrayed on a bed of sauerkraut, is certainly an impressive dish.


Senators And Baseball
To the Sports Editor:
United States Sen.
Connie Mack of Florida has a problem being consistent in his analysis of the justification for baseball's exemption from the antitrust laws, from my reading of Murray Chass's article ("A Senator Confronts Baseball," The Times, Nov. 4).
Mack has to acknowledge that one of the two reasons offered for reconsidering baseball's antitrust exemption is that the owners who discharged Commissioner Fay Vincent are exhibiting profit-maximizing behavior to the detriment of other objectives.
As Sen.
Howard Metzenbaum pointed out in the same article, if baseball owners exhibit profit-maximizing behavior to the detriment of all other objectives, then maybe they don't deserve their exemption.


Two Are Dead, but Race Goes On
The news last week that two round-the-world sailing competitors, Mike Plant of the United States and Nigel Burgess of Britain and Monaco, were dead at sea had a devastating effect on many of the yachtsmen still racing in the Vendee Globe Challenge.
Five of the 13 solo sailors still competing in the Vendee, a nonstop race around the world, turned back within four days of the race's start, primarily to make repairs after running into a bad storm.
The 24,000-mile competition began last Sunday from Les Sables d'Olonne, France.


POSTINGS: Sarah Lawrence Expansion; A New Science Center
Sarah Lawrence College, in Bronxville, N.Y., began construction last month on a three-story, 2,500-square-foot Science Center, its first new academic building in 20 years.
The center, which is scheduled to open in January 1994 and will more than triple the college's science facilities, will cost $5.2 million to build.
The college is also creating a $1 million endowment fund for annual operating costs.


U.N. INVESTIGATING CROATS' GRAVE SITE
A United Nations war-crimes commission has decided to dig up a cornfield near here that investigators say could be a mass grave.
Officials say the field could hold the bodies of 300 people believed to have been killed by Serbian military men last year.
A member of the commission, Sarif Bassiouni, a law professor at DePaul University in Chicago, said any information gathered from the cornfield in Ovcara could form the basis of the first war-crimes case to emerge from the Yugoslav war if the United Nations Security Council or some other international body creates a court or tribunal to hear it.


No Headline
How many times can we cut enrichment programs, squeeze advanced placement courses or eliminate things like class trips to museums before we start seeing through the fabric of public education?
BARBARA HORL, a New Jersey school board president.  [ 51:2. ]


Just Across the Golden Gate
LIKE many of the residents of California, the rocks of the Marin Headlands came from someplace else, in this case from the middle of the Pacific Ocean, near the Marquesas Islands, where Paul Gauguin died and Herman Melville jumped ship and had the adventure he wrote up as "Typee."
There 200 million years ago lava rose through the earth's crust along what is called a spreading zone and formed basaltic pillows that solidified when they met the sea.
Pushed by the rising of the new Pacific floor, these pillows migrated northeastward and eventually reached the edge of what is now North America, where, like other newcomers, they attached themselves.


Treating Lymphedema, Swelling After Surgery
EIGHT months after breast surgery Jane Frith noticed a swelling in the upper arm.
When the swelling began to travel to the wrist and she lost sensation in the arm, the diagnosis was lymphedema, the swelling of the soft tissues as a result of the accumulation of high-protein lymph fluid.
After trying a compression sleeve and a compression pump, both recommended by her oncologist, her symptoms worsened, she said.
Last month Ms.
Frith, of Bridgehampton, began lymphedema therapy to reduce the severe swelling in the extremities and to drain the fluid.


An N.F.L. Presence With No Pro Experience
When they're up and when they're down, Jim Krivak talks often to his boys in the National Football League.
So last Monday -- "as soon as I heard what happened to Boomer" -- he telephoned Esiason in Cincinnati to talk to him about the future.


Marching To a Drummer Of Her Own
The Susan Rothenberg retrospective here at the Albright-Knox Art Gallery is the pleasure you would expect it to be.
For nearly 20 years -- despite a stretch in the mid-1980's when she seemed to be groping her way from one kind of painting to another -- Rothenberg has proved herself an artist of substance.
She has had her share of critical success since she began to exhibit during the mid-1970's and was featured in the influential "New Image Painting" exhibition at the Whitney Museum of American Art in 1978-79.
But her essentially traditional interests in the formal and expressive possibilities of painting have clearly put her out of step with art world fashion.
Perhaps for this reason, the exhibition of 80 paintings and drawings will not be seen in New York City, as it should be.
Neither the Museum of Modern Art, which two years ago presented a Robert Moskowitz retrospective, nor the Brooklyn Museum, which four years ago played host to a Donald Sultan show (Moskowitz and Sultan were in the "New Image" exhibition), nor the Whitney, which has somehow found room on its schedule for Jean-Michel Basquiat, Richard Avedon and a Mike Kelley "midcareer" survey, is taking this midcareer assessment (which travels to Washington, St. Louis, Chicago and Seattle after closing here on Jan. 3).


Perspectives: Public Construction; The Courts Pipeline Is Starting to Flow
IT has taken five years, but the first tangible evidence of New York City's long-term court-building program -- apparently the largest by any city or state in the country -- is showing itself in Queens and the Bronx.
The Queens project is an annex to the Criminal Court building on Queens Boulevard in Kew Gardens.
The Bronx building is a new housing court.
They are the first of what are to be 31 court projects -- either new construction or major renovations -- costing New York City, under current projections, $2.8 billion.


Wendy Cramer and Andrew Sanford
Robert Cramer of Washington and Susan Tofel of New York have announced the engagement of their daughter Wendy Sue Cramer to Andrew Beatty Sanford, a son of Richard C. Sanford of New York and Elizabeth B. Boocock of Basking Ridge, N.J.
A June wedding is planned.
Ms.
Cramer, who is 26 years old, graduated from Duke University and is a graduate student in social work at Columbia University.
Her father, who is retired, was a public relations executive and journalist in Washington.
She is a granddaughter of the late George J. Hecht, founder and publisher of Parents magazine and president of F.A.O.
Schwarz, the toy store, in New York.


The Economy: Holiday Cheer, But Will It Last?
LAST week's economic reports were a hearty, heartening Thanksgiving feast for statistics mavens.
The economy grew by a stunning 3.9 percent in the third quarter, orders for big-ticket factory goods soared in October, and consumer confidence finally lifted itself.
Although this news provides some much-needed holiday cheer, the consensus among economists is that the 3.9 percent jump in third-quarter output overstates the economy's underlying growth rate.
They expect fourth-quarter growth to be weaker, between 2 and 2.75 percent, for several reasons.
Consumer spending in the third quarter grew faster than disposable income, and third-quarter military spending rocketed despite the downward trend in military outlays.
In addition, business inventories grew strongly for the second straight quarter and corporations won't want to continue that trend.


Taggart Whipple, Law Partner, 80, In Manhattan Firm
Taggart Whipple, an antitrust lawyer who was a longtime partner in the Manhattan-based firm of Davis, Polk &amp; Wardwell, died on Thursday at his home in Oyster Bay, L.I.
He was 80 years old.
He died of cancer of the prostate, said Margaret Whipple, his daughter-in-law of St.
Charles, Ill.


Education for the Gifted, Seen As a Luxury, Faces Cutbacks
As financially pressed school districts in the region struggle with declining Federal and state aid, rebellious taxpayers and rising costs, special programs for gifted and talented students are being trimmed, gutted or eliminated.
Enrichment classes, honors courses and other educational tools intended to accelerate learning at all levels of instruction are also experiencing setbacks in many districts.
Advanced courses are being dropped from the curriculum, class sizes are swelling, and teachers are working harder with fewer resources.


Russia, History and the Struggle Not to Repeat It
RUSSIA has been the object of two of the most extraordinary experiments in modern history.
The first was the attempt to build a Communist society.
The second is the effort to undo the enormous damage of the first, and to return Russia and the other shards of the Soviet empire to the mainstream of history.
Not unexpectedly for so vast, powerful and disoriented a land, the search has generated fierce struggles, many of which go on public display this week when the full Congress of Peoples' Deputies -- the 1,041 elected representatives who purportedly wield the ultimate authority in Russia -- gathers in the Kremlin.


N.H.L. Considers An N.B.A. Officer
Gary B. Bettman, third in command at the National Basketball Association, is one of two finalists for the newly established job of commissioner of the National Hockey League, according to a hockey team owner who is a member of the search committee and an influential voice on the league's board of governors.
The other finalist is Gil Stein, the N.H.L.'s president, who replaced John Ziegler last summer after Ziegler was forced to resign.


Hearty Cold-Weather Fare From Alsace
ONE of the glories of Alsatian cuisine is choucroute garnie, a dish composed of sauerkraut braised in white wine and served with an assortment of sausages, ham and fresh and smoked pork.
Boiled or steamed potatoes and strong mustard accompany the dish.
It is earthy peasant fare, suited to cold weather.
And now that French bistro and brasserie cooking is all the rage, choucroute garnie is starting to appear on restaurant menus.
But it is also relatively easy to prepare at home and, because it can be reheated, makes an excellent party dish.
A big platter of choucroute garnie, the various meats arrayed on a bed of sauerkraut, is certainly an impressive dish.


In Cities and Prisons, Hispanic Gang Grows
With commando stealth, the Latin Kings, about 50 of them, some in military fatigues, swept into the courtyard of the Mills Street housing complex in this fading industrial city, with guns, bats and knives, bent on bringing a wayward faction into line.
Three recalcitrant members of the gang were seriously injured in the attack on April 26, which sent children and other bystanders fleeing.
It was perhaps the most dramatic incident in the violent growth of the Latin Kings, a highly organized band of Hispanic men and women who, law-enforcement officials say, have rooted themselves in Connecticut's cities and prisons for more than a year, cloaking criminal activity with an appeal to cultural identity.


Leslie Greenberg and Wayne Josel
LESLIE GREENBERG, 29 years old, was determined to look bridal, even though she had been married before and had often been told that second brides should wear something more akin to a gray Mao suit.
"There is an incredible cattiness about second marriages," Ms.
Greenberg said.
"People say: 'Well, it's your second. What are you wearing?' Most people think I should be in a suit, like how dare I veil myself?"


Psychiatric Hospitals Faulted On Medication of Children
State-run psychiatric hospitals for children typically fail to notify parents about the medications they give their patients and often prescribe drugs to control tantrums rather than as part of a treatment program, a New York State watchdog agency has found.
But the agency, the Commission on the Quality of Care for the Mentally Disabled, also had a number of positive things to say in the report, scheduled to be released today, based on a survey of a random sample of 94 children at eight state-run psychiatric hospitals from Rochester to Long Island in 1990.
The commission found that most of the records it examined contained explanations of which drugs were being dispensed and why, and said that in general, the doctors avoided using several medications in the same pharmacological family when only one was necessary.


An Act That Knows No Boundaries
MOJO NIXON is not the easiest performer to categorize.
He has a love song called "Debbie Gibson is Pregnant With My Two-Headed Love Child." He also has one called "I Hate Banks."
Though the sound is mostly classic rock-and-roll, it has strong blues and country undercurrents.
And whether he is singing or story-telling, Mr.
Nixon's modes are loud and louder.


Eva Kambot, Thomas Carafa
Eva Kambot, an associate counsel for the New York City Department of Environmental Protection in Rego Park, Queens, was married Friday to Thomas Carafa, a deputy bureau chief in the Brooklyn District Attorney's Office.
The Rev.
Charles J. T. Svendsen performed the ceremony at the First Presbyterian Church in Freehold, N.J.


What Is a 24,000-Square-Foot White Elephant?
28 rms. Riv vu.
That capsule description is about the only thing conceivably compact about Arlene and Gene Kule's Riverdale home, a 24,000-square-foot Tuscan-style, coral-faced mansion so secluded one can ski down the driveway.
The house, which offers a majestic tower and sweeping views of the Hudson River and Palisades, went on the market shortly after the Bronx couple opted for a life style change after their three grown daughters moved out.


What We Need Money for and Where to Get It; Economic Council
To the Editor:
As a co-sponsor of the Commission on Government Renewal, I appreciate your strong support for our proposal for a new economic council in the White House in "The New White House Order" (editorial, Nov. 15).


Bombs at Madison
To the Editor:
The last paragraph of Michael Kazin's review of "Rads," by Tom Bates (Nov. 1), suggests that Mr.
Bates's book is the first about the 1970 bombing at the University of Wisconsin, Madison.
However, my book "The Madison Bombings" precedes it by four years, has sold well in the United States and internationally, has been widely and favorably reviewed, and is currently being written into a film script in Burbank, Calif.


Lauren Spergel, Stuart Baron
Dr. and Mrs.
Martin Spergel of New York have announced the engagement of their daughter, Lauren Renee Spergel, to Stuart David Baron, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Philip Baron of Brooklyn.
A May wedding is planned.
Miss Spergel, 27 years old, and her fiance, 32, graduated from Cornell University.
She received a master's degree in industrial and labor relations from Cornell and Baruch College.
She is a compensation consultant at the Equitable Life Assurance Society in New York.
Her father is a professor of physics and chairman of the department of natural sciences and health professions at York College in Jamaica, Queens.
Her mother, Rochelle S. Spergel, is an associate in the law office of Ian J. Gates in New York.


Malamala at Tackle, And O'Brien at Risk
Even before Bruce Coslet, the Jets' coach, decided to shake up his offense, benching quarterback Browning Nagle and two offensive linemen, his team's matchup against Kansas City (7-4) this afternoon at Giants Stadium had all the earmarks of a mismatch.
Now, with the prospect of Chiefs linebacker Derrick Thomas and defensive end Neil Smith lining up across from Jets rookie tackle Siupeli Malamala, who will make his first National Football League start at left tackle in place of veteran Jeff Criswell, the game should come with a surgeon general's warning for Jets veteran quarterback Ken O'Brien.


It's Summer in Montreal Biodome
Even on cold winter days, vistors to Montreal may opt for warm-weather attire when they visit the tropical rain forest in the city's newest tourist attraction, the Biodome.
Situated in the former Velodrome, a cavernous building erected for the 1976 Olympic cycling events, the Biodome, which opened in June, is an amalgam of zoo, aquarium, botanical garden and museum designed to re-create, with flora and fauna, four different environments.


IN SHORT/SMALL PRESSES: NONFICTION
BRIDGES AND BOUNDARIES African Americans  and American Jews.
Edited by Jack Salzman  with Adina Back and  Gretchen Sullivan Sorin.
Braziller, cloth, $45; paper, $24.95.


Crime
Something always seems to happen to spoil Homecoming, the traditional summer festival in the tiny Wisconsin town of Oakalla, where Garth Ryland owns and operates the local newspaper.
Twenty years ago it was the disappearance of 13-year-old Paul Samuel; last year it rained; and now, when A DRAGON LIVES FOREVER (Barricade Books, 1530 Palisade Avenue, Fort Lee, N.J. 07024, $17.95) opens, Garth and the sheriff are hauling a bloated body out of Hidden Quarry.
Blinking against the bright lights, he finally faces the killer and confronts the deeper tragedy of all small-town boys who lose their childhood when their heroes betray them.


Corrections
A report in the Travel Advisory column on Nov. 8 about an exhibition in Newport News, Va., on Adm.
Horatio Nelson referred incorrectly to the Victory, Nelson's flagship, in Portsmouth, England.
It is the restored original vessel, not a reproduction.


Hailing New 'Lucia'
The Metropolitan Opera Guild holds a benefit at the premiere of the production, Nov. 19.


Feeling Totally at Home With Furniture by Stickley
Gustav Stickley's sprawling log house here, which he called home from 1910 to 1916, is once again filled with the weighty oak furniture and copper lamps in the Arts and Crafts style that he pioneered.
The partially restored residence, 20 miles west of Newark, has been temporarily transformed for the run of "Gustav Stickley -- His Craft," the first comprehensive exhibition of the modernist innovator's works, through Jan. 17.
Dominated by examples of his most famous furniture designs -- the outsize sideboards, drop-front desks, ledge-armed sofas and reclining Morris chairs -- the show also includes lesser known works: a three-foot-tall copper dinner gong, a hefty newspaper rack and a small woven-willow chair.


Witnesses Sought in a Reported Carjacking
The Nassau County police said yesterday that they had found no suspects in a case involving a 73-year-old woman who said she foiled an attempt by two men to steal her car as she drove to a Thanksgiving dinner.
The woman, Anne Stern of Queens, drove over several front lawns of suburban homes in Valley Stream, L.I., and told the police afterward that she had deflected five separate attempts by the men to steal her car over 20 minutes in the mid-afternoon.


Sunny Spots Amid the Drops
Rain fell on Thursday morning on the statue of a Pilgrim (above) at the East 72d Street entrance to Central Park as an army of hikers left their more fashionable clothing at home and bundled up in survival gear, many of them to see the Macy's Thanksgiving Day Parade on Central Park West.
Functional clothes and accessories, ranging from L. L. Bean footwear to umbrellas as bright as kites, helped keep people dry, and rain gear took on the color of ginkgo leaves.
A group in yellow ponchos and slickers (lower left) appeared like rays of sunshine amid the soggy carpet of autumn leaves.
One woman (upper right) seemed to glow like the natural landscape, her yellow coat and umbrella matching the leaves around her.
After the parade, some people trekked back through the park under wisteria arbors, whose pale yellow leaves nearly matched the exterior of the freshly cleaned Dakota apartments on Central Park West (above right).


Clinton Offering Few Hints Of His Plans for Spy Agency
When it comes to the future role of American intelligence, President-elect Bill Clinton's thinking is almost as opaque as the decision-making process of China's aging leaders.
Since the election, Mr.
Clinton has said nothing about what role secret intelligence analyses will play in policy making, whether he favors more or less covert action, whether the United States should spy on corporations or what sort of person will serve as the nation's spy chief.


Higher Pay Attracts More Men to Nursing


League Takes Strides Into a Leaner Era
A PERIOD of strain and upheaval seems to be ending for the American Contract Bridge League, which controls tournament bridge in the United States, Canada, Mexico and Bermuda.
Denis Howard of Australia has completed seven months of valuable service as a temporary chief executive officer, and Roy Green has begun work at the league's headquarters in Memphis as the permanent, paid chief.
A period of financial slippage had left the league's net worth at something less than $1.5 million, from about twice that three years ago.
One contributing cause has been considerable spending by the board, the president and other officers, all of whom are unpaid.
The spending, primarily on travel, lodging and entertainment, amounted to $400,000 a year, but will be substantially reduced.
At a meeting in Orlando, Fla., this month, the board decided to eliminate one of its three annual meetings and to dispense with a presidential dinner.


Multiculturalism Is Examined At the Hudson River Museum
THE Hudson River Museum under the direction of Philip Verre can definitely be rated new and improved.
For one thing, the restaurant with the picture-window view of the Palisades has reopened; for another, the exhibitions are coming thick and fast.
In the current crop is an excerpt from the permanent collection that is focused on the development of the Hudson River Valley.
This, in turn, leads to the show celebrating the 150th anniversary of the Old Croton Aqueduct, without which New York City would probably have died on the vine from epidemics and fires.
Obvious now, at the museum, is a renewed emphasis on the didactic.
But what works perfectly for environmental shows becomes labored when applied to art, namely the museum's principal attraction, "In Plural America." As a curator, Mr.
Verre has a keen eye, a light touch and the knack of conveying just the right amount of information.
On this occasion, though, he joins forces with the museum's curator of school programs, Leigh Bayne, and the result is art almost extinguished by good intentions.


The Children Have Chosen
There's no denying that lots of children see R-rated movies.
But it was still surprising when "Boyz N the Hood" was nominated for best film at the Nickelodeon network's Kid's Choice Awards ceremonies this month.
The film, directed by John Singleton (below), was given an R rating for its strong language, violence and depictions of sex.
A spokesman for Nickelodeon, Marty von Ruden, said the nominations came from children, not from network personnel.
"We do a poll of kids aged 8 to 12," he said.
"It's the kids who decide, and we don't influence it."


Choosing, and Losing, an H.M.O. Doctor
To the Editor:
"Making the Leap to an H.M.O." (Nov. 15), regarding health maintenance organizations, left out a very important yet rarely discussed matter: The doctor you choose may not stay with your H.M.O.
Therefore, you not only have to choose a doctor when you enter the plan, but you have no guarantee that that particular doctor will continue to be available to you.


Hearty Cold-Weather Fare From Alsace
ONE of the glories of Alsatian cuisine is choucroute garnie, a dish composed of sauerkraut braised in white wine and served with an assortment of sausages, ham and fresh and smoked pork.
Boiled or steamed potatoes and strong mustard accompany the dish.
It is earthy peasant fare, suited to cold weather.
And now that French bistro and brasserie cooking is all the rage, choucroute garnie is starting to appear on restaurant menus.
But it is also relatively easy to prepare at home and, because it can be reheated, makes an excellent party dish.
A big platter of choucroute garnie, the various meats arrayed on a bed of sauerkraut, is certainly an impressive dish.


Under Siege: Liquor's Inner-City Pipeline
T S LIQUOR does a brisk business on Jefferson Avenue in South Central Los Angeles, where the small, tidy store sells everything from diapers and panty hose to eggs and tortillas.
And, of course, liquor -- a lot of it.
From the time T S opens at 9 A.M. to its closing 12 hours later, a steady stream of customers calls.
"How ya feeling today, papa-san," yells a woman, buying a 40-ounce bottle of beer at 11:30 A.M., to the store's owner, Ui Man Chung, who smiles and pats her on the shoulder.


'The Speed of Darkness' in Revival
CREDIT the new Logodaedaly Company in Croton Falls, N.Y., with resurrecting a deserving, demanding play.
"The Speed of Darkness" by Steve Tesich was dismissed on Broadway last year after a mere month's run.
Although it is crammed with the excesses of a playwright's fertile imagination, the work of Mr.
Tesich, who is better known for his screenplays ("Breaking Away," "The World According to Garp") than his stage plays ("Baba Goya," "Square One"), has boldness, an original point of view and a powerful payoff.
The reach of Mr.
Tesich runs the risk of pretentiousness but the playwright comes off valiantly.
These are unflinchingly big-time accomplishments: the shaking up of a family's ordered life, sowing the seeds of tragedy upon a domestic scene and finally -- actually -- building successfully to a cathartic release.


Lisa Beth Jaffe And Jeffrey Weltz
Mr. and Mrs.
Ira Jaffe of East Hampton, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter Lisa Beth Jaffe to Jeffrey Lowell Weltz, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Paul M. Weltz of Elberon, N.J.
A June wedding is planned.
Ms.
Jaffe, 26 years old, graduated from the University of Michigan and is studying law at Yeshiva University.
Her father is a senior partner at Kurcias, Jaffe &amp; Kurcias, an accounting firm in Great Neck, L.I.


Sound Bytes; A Wireless Widget Master
BILL CAMPBELL is no stranger to challenges.
Armed with degrees in economics, he spent six years (1974-79) as head football coach at Columbia University, there compiling a 12-41-1 record (even so, it was better than any coach since then).
Then came jobs at J. Walter Thompson, Eastman-Kodak, and Apple Computer Inc., where he rose to executive vice president.
He quit Apple to start the Claris Corporation, a software company.
But when Apple bought Claris in 1990, Mr.
Campbell saw the handwriting on the wall -- or rather, the screen.


NORTHEAST NOTEBOOK: Newport, R.I.; Naval Base Adds Housing
TO ease financial pressures on personnel stationed here, the Navy has spent $21.5 million to renovate a deserted apartment complex and has broken ground on a $1.4 million combined day-care center and Armed Services Y.M.C.A.
Both are on the Navy base.
A total of 392 units has been renovated at the Anchorage apartment complex over the last three years, alleviating a housing shortage that forced many Navy families to seek apartments in the expensive off-base market.


NOV. 22-27: Elections in Peru; A Vote of Confidence (Well, Sort Of)
President Alberto K. Fujimori's political allies won a majority of seats in Congress in elections last week, but did it mean the Peruvian President's seizure of near-dictatorial powers in April had been blessed by the people?
The Japanese reacted as if it did, agreeing to give Peru $100 million in new loans.
The United States said Peru was on the path back toward full democracy.
But a close look at the results shows the victory was far from resounding.
Electoral rules heavily favor whatever party gets a plurality, and Mr.
Fujimori's allies got only 38 percent of the popular vote, according to unofficial projections.
Just two weeks ago, Mr.
Fujimori claims to have put down an attempted coup.


Don't Tie Weimar Clinics to Nazi Horrors
To the Editor:
"Exhibition Examines Scientists' Complicity in Nazi-Era Atrocities" (Science Times Nov. 10), your report on "The Value of the Human Being: Medicine in Germany 1918-45," the exhibition at the National Museum of Health and Medicine in Washington, could lead to a misunderstanding affecting discussions of universal access to health care in this country.


. . . And His Movie For All Seasons
Fifty years ago, on Thanksgiving Day 1942, "Casablanca" opened in New York at the Hollywood Theater.
But the film, directed by Michael Curtiz, didn't attract a cult following until 1957, as recounted in "Round Up the Usual Suspects: The Making of Casablanca" by Aljean Harmetz.
An excerpt from the book, just published by Hyperion, tells how the phenomenon began.


The U.N. Celebrates Human Rights Vision
THE United Nations Postal Administration has issued its fourth-annual series of stamps honoring the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
The six stamps issued each year each celebrate one of the 30 articles of the 1948 declaration and show a work of art associated with each topic.
This year's series covers these articles, Nos. 19 through 24:


CURRENCY
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen
124.50
124.38
129.99
per Dollar
German Mark
1.6005
1.6055
1.6354
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar
1.2864
1.2839
1.1342
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound
1.5100
1.5130
1.7682
U.S. Dollar per British Pound
Gold
$334.50
$335.25
$367.50
*4*Republic National BankCurrency: Friday NY Close


Karen Fox, William Barrett
Karen Fox, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
J.
Robert Fox of Dover, Del., was married there yesterday to William Sisson Barrett, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
John T. Barrett of Providence, R.I.
The Rev.
Gregory M. Howe performed the Episcopal ceremony at Christ Church.
Ms.
Fox, who is keeping her name, is an architect at the Architects Collaborative, an architectural firm in Cambridge, Mass., and an instructor in interior architecture at the Rhode Island School of Design in Providence.
She graduated from Boston University and the Rhode Island School of Design and received an M.B.A. from Simmons College.
Her father, now retired, was an ophthalmologist and otolaryngologist in Dover.
Her mother, Jane Fox, a retired psychologist, was a counselor at Catholic Social Services, a nonprofit service organization there.


Eurailpass Cost To Go Up in '93
Eurailpass has announced increased prices for all its passes in 1993 and changes in how its Eurail Flexipasses will be used.
From Jan. 1 all Eurail Flexipasses will allow travelers to use their 5, 10 and 15 days of train travel time over an expanded period of two months instead of 15 days, 21 days or one month.
Three new Eurail Youth Flexipasses also include the same validity periods.
Youth passes, for travelers aged under 26, allow unlimited train travel in 17 European countries in second class.
All other passes are for first class.
The new prices are as follows: Eurail Flexipass for 5 days' travel in two months, $298; 10 days in two months, $496, and 15 days in two months, $676.
Eurailpasses allowing travel every day are, for 15 days, $460; 21 days, $598; 1 month, $728; 2 months, $998, 3 months, $1,260.
A Saverpass, for three or or more people traveling together between April 1 and Sept. 30 next year or two or more traveling between Oct. 1, 1993, and March 31, 1994, is valid for 15 consecutive days and costs $390 a person.


Bubble, Bubble, Toil and Transition
OUT WITH THE old!
In with the new!
That's the message we're getting from the American language about the Presidential succession.
What was the old word used to denote that awkward 11-week period between Election Day and Inauguration Day -- when the person serving as President is not re-elected?


Couples Is Remaining Right on Course
As powerfully as Fred Couples can pulverize a golf ball, as much as his game has matured and as much as he has manhandled the PGA Tour in the last two seasons, his unique appeal is that -- in an anxiety-ridden profession -- he projects the native, uncomplicated grace of a gifted child.
While many of his tightly wound peers resort to sports psychologists to rediscover the little boy within, the 33-year-old Couples has always been on friendly terms with his.
Other top players who have affected casualness in competition -- like Walter Hagen, Jimmy Demaret, Lee Trevino, or Fuzzy Zoeller -- were clearly fronting a flinty, complicated core.
But even in his pressure-filled triumphs at the Masters and the 1991 Ryder Cup, Couples has never betrayed a sharp edge or a haunted soul.


Seating Plan


The Joy and Ease of a Gliding Pocket Door
POCKET doors operate virtually without flaw, seldom need adjustment and are easy to install in new or existing walls.
Because remodeling procedures can vary when installing a door in an existing wall, only new-wall installation is described.
Pocket-door kits have metal frame parts, hardware and instructions.
Doors are sold separately, and any door can be a pocket door, if it can be trimmed to fit the frame.


From Geo, a Second-Generation Prizm
PITY the poor consumer who wants an American car.
Some full-size Chevies and Mercurys are built in Canada.
Some of Ford's popular Escorts are made in Mexico.
The Dodge Stealth is made in Japan.
Pontiac's LeMans comes from Korea, and nearly every new automobile carries parts from all over the world.
Not only that, but the designs and engineering and economics also are a case of mix and match.
General Motors owns all of Lotus, half of Saab and almost 40 percent of Isuzu.
Ford owns Jaguar and about a quarter of Mazda -- although its new Mercury Villager van is a joint venture with Nissan.
And Chrysler, which owns all of Lamborghini and 15 percent of Maserati, holds an 11 percent stake in Mitsubishi.


St. Helena, Cruelly Downtrodden
To the Editor:
Jean Nathan, who you state writes frequently on the arts, was your reviewer of "The Emperor's Last Island," by Julia Blackburn (Nov. 1).


Norway's Fjords
To the Editor: I recently returned from a trip like the one described by Barbara Freedman in "By Steamer Through Norway's Fjords" (Feb. 2).
It was absolutely magnificent.
One of the best vacations, if not the best, I have ever had.
It was full of scenery, history, nice food, nice people, cleanliness -- just a wonderful trip.
If you think the coast of California is great around the Big Sur area,consider a more rugged coastline of 1,300 miles and the solitude of some of the stops, as high up as the Russian and Finnish border.


Janis L. Oolie and Gregory Feldman
Janis Lisbeth Oolie, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Sam Oolie of North Caldwell, N.J., was married in New York yesterday evening to Gregory Lewis Feldman, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert S. Feldman of North Plainfield, N.J.
Rabbi Norman Patz performed the ceremony at the Pierre.
Mrs.
Feldman, 27 years old, is the assistant director of marketing and special events at William Barthman Jewelers in New York.
She graduated from Simmons College.
Her father is the chairman of Oolie Enterprises, a venture capital company in Fairfield, N.J.


Even for Ordained Women, Church Can Be a Cold Place
IN the business world, women often complain about "the glass ceiling," that invisible barrier that impedes their progress up the corporate ladder.
In the religious world, women call it "the stained glass ceiling," a barrier that many contend is thicker, more opaque and less permeable.
The stained glass ceiling, they say, has kept them from the top jobs in the church and often from the pulpit itself.
Some add that it has also kept churches from recognizing their special needs as women.


Lots of Muscle, and a Touch of Turgeon
In a game that had plenty of rough stuff, Pierre Turgeon added a sizable ration of skill and grace.
He scored twice and assisted on another goal to pace the Islanders to a 9-3 victory over the Philadelphia Flyers tonight before a big, happy throng at Nassau Coliseum.
The victory gave the Islanders a split of their home-and-home series with the Flyers.
The game was played before 14,675, the second-largest crowd of the season.
Some might have purchased tickets in advance to see Eric Lindros, the rookie star of the Flyers, who missed the game with a knee injury.


Roseanne's Husband Playing Follow the Leader
Even if "The Jackie Thomas Show" is not the new television series most watched by viewers, it will almost surely be the one most closely watched by network executives.
The show, which begins tomorrow night on ABC, follows television's biggest current hit, "Roseanne." What has piqued the industry's curiosity so much is that the new show stars Roseanne Arnold's husband, Tom.


Bridge
Many world-class players were in a position to pocket yet another title at the conclusion of the American Contract Bridge League's fall nationals here this afternoon.
Among the 10 teams competing in the final of the prestigious Reisinger Board-a-Match Teams were 17 players who have won world titles.


Dividend Meetings
Following is a partial list of dividend meetings for this week: MONDAY  Albertsons Watkins-Johnson TUESDAY  Browning-Ferris Mutual Omaha Int Shs WEDNESDAY  Alaska Air Group Belding Heminway Corning Helmerich &amp; Payne Loctite Neiman Marcus Peoples Energy Starrett L.S.
Tektronix Times Mirror Transatlantic Hldgs U.S.
Shoe THURSDAY  Amax Apache Brown Group Inc Capital Re Chrysler CML Group Cyprus Minerals Flightsafety Intl Gen Pub Utils Global Govt Plus Fd Marriott Old Rep Intl SPS Techonologies TIS Mtg Invt US West Universal Corp Va Witco Yankee Energy Sys FRIDAY  Dean Foods Federal Home Ln Mtg Piedmont Nat Gas Stanhome Wynns Intl


Essay; Right to Intervene
Before Larry Eagleburger and Brent Scowcroft return to Kissinger Associates, they would do their country and the world a big favor by enlisting a serious speechwriter like Anthony Snow in a great enterprise: They could help the President-unelect articulate the new international "right to intervene."
Last week, lurching to do the right thing despite the lack of policy about intervention, George Bush and his advisers suddenly proposed to send a division or two of U.S. troops to end the anarchy preventing the delivery of food to the starving people of Somalia.


As Legislators Prepare to Meet, Yeltsin Grits His Teeth
Like a general rallying his troops on the eve of battle, President Boris N. Yeltsin told his supporters today that the reforms he had introduced were "the main cause of my entire life" and that he would remain committed to those policies, "whatever turn things may take."
On the other side of the city, outside the gates to Gorky Park, several hundred die-hard Communists braved arctic temperatures at a rally of their own, waving red flags and a banner that reduced the approaching clash to its bare bones: "Lenin Yes! Yeltsin No!"


Kurds Versus Kurds
Twenty million Kurds scattered across Turkey, Iraq and Iran have long aspired to an independent state.
Yet it has been their fate to be manipulated by more powerful nations, including the United States.
The usual result has been betrayal, persecution and defeat.
A new version of that sad scenario may again be unfolding.
Iraqi Kurds, under a Western military umbrella meant to protect them from Saddam Hussein, have joined forces with the Turkish Army to attack the Iraqi base camps of the Kurdish Workers Party, a Marxist group fighting for the independence of Kurdish areas in Turkey.


Revamping U.S. Commerce Agency
The Malcolm Baldrige National Quality Award -- three rectangles of foot-high crystal mounted on an aluminum base -- sits on a coffee table in the office of Commerce Secretary Barbara H. Franklin.
But the base of the nation's highest award for corporate quality does not hold the crystal blocks tightly and it comes apart, Ms.
Franklin said apologetically, adding: "It's the way it was designed."


CHRONICLE
The lights will go down and the candles will come up for the last time in the Quilted Giraffe restaurant on New Year's Eve.
BARRY WINE, the owner, chef and culinary Japanophile, and his wife, SUSAN, told the staff over the weekend that they had decided to close the restaurant for good.
It had been scheduled to be shut down for a year while Sony, which is buying the building at 550 Madison Avenue, near 55th Street, from American Telephone and Telegraph, remodels the first-floor space where the Quilted Giraffe has served its highly acclaimed meals since 1984.
Before that, it had been on Second Avenue, near 51st Street, since 1979.
The Wines said Sony was buying the restaurant's long-term lease for a sum neither they nor Sony would disclose.
"Susan and I are simply ready to retire the restaurant, its name and its glory," Mr.
Wine said in a letter to the 27-person staff.
"We wanted to out while we're still on top."


Union City and Miami: A Sisterhood Born of Cuban Roots
Roberto Moreiro wants his new restaurant to stand out among the dozens of others packed into this Cuban enclave in Hudson County.
So he is serving the food and ambiance of a place his patrons know and love: Miami.
His Union City Cafeteria serves "Miami-style Cuban sandwiches," with thicker cuts of ham than the competition offers, said Mr.
Moreiro, a native Cuban who came here 27 years ago.
The restaurant also offers both a formal dining room and a cozy doughnut-shaped counter like many in Miami but few in Union City.


New Campaigns
*
To emphasize the taste of its Lean Cuisine line of frozen foods, rather than diet claims, Stouffer Foods Corp. is introducing television and print advertising by Tatham Euro RSCG, Chicago, carrying the theme "We make a mean Lean Cuisine." The campaign focuses on Lean Cuisine ingredients to help broaden the line's appeal beyond dieters to more mainstream consumers. *
Cindy Crawford, the model who last month began appearing in print advertisements for Revlon's Charlie fragrance as the 1990's version of the "Charlie girl," is now also appearing on television.
In a 30-second commercial, created by Tarlow Advertising, New York, Ms.
Crawford makes her singing debut, accompanying Little Richard in a version of his hit song, "Good Golly, Miss Molly," renamed "Good Golly, Charlie."


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-9  VIETNAM HAS M.I.A.'S, TOO
When U.S. officials press Vietnam to help search for 2,265 Americans listed as missing in the war, the Vietnamese inevitably mention that many more Vietnamese soldiers are missing -- more than 300,000.
A1  BEIJING-HANOI RELATIONS
China's Prime Minister is to travel to Vietnam for the first such visit by a Chinese leader in over two decades, but ties between the neighbors remain so strained that they threaten the peace in the region.
A6


Books of The Times; Words and Pictures to Make the Holidays Bright
"A good heavy book holds you down," the humorist Roy Blount Jr. has written.
"It's an anchor that keeps you from getting up and having another gin and tonic." In the season of the eggnog, some of these potential gift books, which are arranged according to price, will hold you happily down for hours.
A selection or two or more from EVERYMAN'S LIBRARY, the old familiar collection of world classics in English founded in 1906 and reissued by Alfred A. Knopf last year.
The library includes every sort of book from Homer's "Iliad" to Mary Shelley's "Frankenstein," with new introductions.
"Everyman, I will go with thee, and be thy guide, in thy most need to go by thy side." Remember?


The Pace of Yulification Picks Up


Swiss Watch Cup With French Subtitles
Georges Deniau, like most of his fellow French citizens, will never forget the scene: Guy Forget quivering with joy flat on his back, Yannick Noah leaping skyward, Henri Leconte sinking to his knees and bursting into tears.
For Deniau, the images are all the more vivid because he was in Lyons last December when the French stunned the Americans to win the Davis Cup after a 59-year drought.


TOUGHER MEASURES TO FIGHT TB URGED BY NEW YORK PANEL
Wading into one of the most contentious issues in modern medicine, a panel of 34 scientists, ethicists and public health leaders yesterday released a report calling for broad new measures to stem the rampant spread of tuberculosis in New York City and around the nation.
Two of the panel's recommendations are likely to fuel angry policy debates: that all tuberculosis patients allow someone to watch them take their medication once they leave the hospital and that all patients receive treatment until they are completely cured rather than just no longer contagious.
The recommendations would apply to all patients no matter what their economic background or the cause of their illness.
Curing the Sick
In its report to the United Hospital Fund, a New York philanthropy that focuses on health-care issues, the panel also rejected controversial and growing demands for mandatory AIDS testing, saying it is not necessary for effective TB screening.
People with the virus that causes AIDS are 40 times more likely to develop active cases of tuberculosis once they are infected with TB than those without H.I.V., and health officials say if the TB epidemic is not quickly contained by curing those who are sick, it could spread far more rapidly in the coming years.


Frances Press, Jon Portnof
Frances Press, a psychotherapist in Sunnyside, Queens, was married yesterday to Jon Portnof, an owner of Portnof Realty, a real-estate management company in New York.
Rabbi Haskell Bernat performed the ceremony at Scaletta restaurant in New York.
Mrs.
Portnof, 46 years old, graduated from the Brooklyn Center of Long Island University.
She received a master's degree in special education from Russell Sage College and a master's degree in social work from Fordham University.
She is the daughter of Dorothy Benson of Brooklyn and the late Moses Benson.


U.S. Prisons Challenged By Women Behind Bars
After a decade in which women have been sent to prison at rates previously unknown in the United States, increasing attention is belatedly being paid to the long-term consequences of keeping almost 90,000 women behind bars.
Imprisoning tens of thousands of women has left an estimated 167,000 children without mothers and has caught corrections officials unprepared for the special medical and rehabilitative challenges posed by female prisoners.


John I. White; Cowboy Singer, 90
John I. White, who sang cowboy songs on NBC Radio in the 1920's and 30's, died on Thursday at the Ward Homestead in Maplewood, N.J., where he lived.
He was 90 years old.
He died of pneumonia, said Rich Bradley of the William A. Bradley &amp; Son Funeral Home in Chatham, N.J.


Day Later, Knicks Are No Longer Bullish
Call it pathetic, call it lackadaisical, but whatever you call the Knicks' performance tonight, call it ugly.
Playing like impostors instead of the team that manhandled the Chicago Bulls on Saturday, the Knicks stumbled and fumbled to a 92-76 loss to the Detroit Pistons at the Palace of Auburn Hills.


If It's Overtime, It Must Be the Colts
Colts 16, Bills 13
INDIANAPOLIS, Nov. 29 (AP) -- Dean Biasucci tied the score with a 23-yard field goal in the final minute of regulation and gave the Indianapolis Colts a 16-13 victory over the Buffalo Bills today with a 40-yard field goal 3 minutes 51 seconds into overtime.
The Colts (5-7) went 56 yards after taking the kickoff in overtime.
Jack Trudeau, who passed for a season-high 337 yards, brought Indianapolis to the Buffalo 27 with a 26-yard pass to Jessie Jester.


Political Memo; Vying for Committees, Freshmen Mimic Insiders
After a campaign focused on fighting the status quo, it did not take long for the freshmen in Congress to start wheeling and dealing for coveted positions in the insider network.
Even before they have been sworn in, the members of the largest freshman class to enter Congress in more than 40 years are falling into the clutches of incumbency -- fighting like political pros for the committee assignments that will determine how much influence they will wield over the next two years.


Patents; A Computer That Could Hear Poodles
TWO scientists at the University of Pennsylvania have adopted an unusual strategy for inventing a computer that processes information more in the manner of the human brain.
Many computer companies are now working toward the same goal, which is crucial to developing machines that can recognize complex images and sounds as easily as a person can instantly distinguish a cat, a squirrel or a poodle.
For all the remarkable speed that traditional computers have when it comes to crunching numbers, they remain almost hopelessly obtuse at tasks like recognizing a familiar face.


RESULTS PLUS
PRO FOOTBALL  Flutie Stars in Grey Cup
Doug Flutie completed 33 of 49 passes for 480 yards and 2 touchdowns as the Calgary Stampeders beat the Winnipeg Blue Bombers, 24-10, last night in Toronto to win the Grey Cup, the championship of the Canadian Football League.
Flutie became the first player since Russ Jackson in 1969 to be named most valuable player of the regular season and the playoffs.
The title was the third for Calgary, which also won in 1948 and 1971.
The Stampeders lost, 36-21, to the Toronto Argonauts in last year's Grey Cup.
Just 45,863 attended the game in the Skydome, the lowest attendance for the Grey Cup since 1975, when a capacity crowd of 32,454 watched in Calgary's McMahon Stadium.
Winnipeg had little offense: quarterback Matt Dunigan completed just 6 of 19 passes for 47 yards, and Michael Richardson, the league's rushing champion, gained 27 yards.
Calgary scored on its first three possessions, taking an 11-0 lead on a field goal, a single point from a missed field goal and a 35-yard touchdown pass. (AP) HORSE RACING  McCarron's Long Ride
The Japanese horse Tokai Teio came away with the big-money prize in the Japan Cup, but jockey Chris McCarron went the farthest to win a race yesterday.
About 17 hours after McCarron rode Dr Devious to a 10th-place finish in the Japan Cup outside Tokyo, he guided Flawlessly to a one-length victory in the $400,000 Matriarch Stakes at Hollywood Park in California, more than 5,600 miles away.
Tokai Teio earned $1.36 million by beating Naturalism by a neck in the Japan Cup, one of the world's richest thoroughbred races.
Dr Devious, the 1992 English Derby winner, ran second early but faded to 10th in the 14-horse field.
The 4-year-old Tokai Teio, ridden by Yukio Okabe, sprinted along the outside in the stretch to win in front of a record crowd of 168,000.
He covered the mile and a half on the Tokyo Race Course's turf track in 2:243/5 .
Naturalism, a 4-year-old Australian colt ridden by Leonard Dittman, earned $548,000 from the total purse of $3.16 million.
Dear Doctor of France was third, one-half length behind Naturalism.
The favorite, User Friendly of Britain, finished sixth.


Israel's Cabinet Resists A Break With Germany
Over the last few days, this country has balanced the demands of diplomacy against the anguish of its soul in trying to decide how the Jewish state should respond to the neo-Nazi surge in Germany.
Some Israeli politicians, from both the left and the right, have called for a worldwide Jewish boycott of Germany and a severing of diplomatic relations unless the Government of Chancellor Helmut Kohl acts more firmly than it has thus far against the rightist violence that has claimed Jews, and far more commonly foreigners, as victims.


Signals of the Clinton Recovery: Rebound Is Seen, but a Slow One
A number of business executives say the Clinton expansion may have arrived even before the President-elect moves into the White House.
But they are quick to add that the pace of the economic rebound will continue to be far slower than in past recoveries and that too few jobs will be created to bring unemployment down quickly.
In interviews over the Thanksgiving weekend, business owners and executives said they were seeing signs of a recovery -- from more classified advertising to more business travel -- in their own businesses and communities.
Taken together, the various indicators suggest that the American economy is at last turning a corner.


Gone for 2 Games, and Semi-Forgotten
Nobody knows if Derrick Coleman will be back by the time the Nets return to action, facing the Atlanta Hawks on Wednesday at the Meadowlands.
He has missed the last two games with back spasms.
But the Nets haven't missed their star power forward that much -- they topped the Jazz and the Kings without him and won three of four games on a West Coast trip.
The Nets are 7-7 on the season; though they have won 2 of 6 games at home, they have taken 5 of 8 on the road.
Their record under Coach Chuck Daly is in marked contrast to that of last season, when they got off to a 2-11 start under Bill Fitch and only won 15 games on the road over all.


Review/Dance; Resolution of Terror and Violence in Healing and Renewal
Dance Theater Workshop's Split Stream series of programs brought three choreographers together on Saturday night at the Bessie Schonberg Theater." All three made the stage an awesome or even a terrifying place.
Evelyn Velez's "En Cuclillas" was a poignant tribute to the powers of the earth.
The title derives from a Spanish phrase meaning a crouching or squatting position, and throughout the work Ms.
Velez held her body low toward the ground.
Kukuli Velarde, the designer, adorned the stage with yams, gourds, ears of corn and bits of cornmeal, and Ms.
Velez might have been a priestess making an offering to the forces of nature.
She was assisted in her ritual by an ensemble of little girls in foliage-bedecked costumes designed by Lorena Figuerola.


In Somalia, Unicef Fights Terrible Odds
To the Editor:
"U.N. Somalia Envoy Dismayed Over Aid" (news article, Nov. 13) gives the misleading impression that a hospital in Bardera, Somalia, without staff, drugs or beds is run by Unicef, the United Nations Children's Fund.
Unicef does not run hospitals anywhere.
In Somalia, Unicef has been providing medical supplies, essential drugs and special supplementary foods for children to health facilities.
In the aftermath of intense fighting in Bardera last month, the hospital you describe is no longer functioning as a health facility.


How They Drove Three-Card Monte Out of the Carnival Circuit; What the Shill Does
To the Editor:
Your Nov. 11 article on three-card monte states that the public cannot win, but you err in attributing that solely to the dealer's sleight-of-hand skills.
It is the shill who, in addition to luring the unsuspecting into the "game," plays the important part in assuring the sucker's defeat.


The Media Business: Press; Minority Hiring as a Financial Necessity
This week, the chief executives of some of the most influential newspaper companies in the country are to meet in New York City in an industrywide "summit" conference with representatives of minority groups who work for them.
The topic is the same theme sounded by some industry leaders who say that it is not just a social but a business necessity to have more minority-group members on the staffs, and in the pages, of newspapers.
The topic was the same last year, at the first such annual meeting.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Pat Metheny  Beacon Theater Upper West Side
"Secret Story," the newest album by the jazz guitarist and composer Pat Metheny, is a 75-minute suite of such textural complexity that until he and eight musicians played chunks of it on Wednesday evening, it had seemed too large-scale a work to be performed in concert form.
But thanks to computer programming, which stored many of the album's sound effects and symphonic string orchestrations, the work was largely realized on the stage in all its orchestral grandeur.


Questions Over Verdicts And Doubts About Juries
LEWIS RUDIN cornered Norman Goodman at the Museum of Modern Art's Matisse exhibit a few weeks ago and framed the Crown Heights verdict in a novel perspective.
"Maybe," Mr.
Rudin, the developer and civic booster, suggested to Mr.
Goodman, the New York County Clerk, "we ought to stop letting white middle-class New Yorkers get out of jury duty."


Gunmen Attack White Club in South Africa, Killing 4; Motive Hazy
Gunmen with automatic rifles and hand grenades thundered into a wine-tasting Saturday night at a predominantly white golf club in King William's Town, killing two couples at their dinner table and leaving 17 people seriously wounded.
The police said that they had no firm evidence that the killers, at least two of whom were young black men, were politically or racially motivated, but that they were working on the assumption that the attack was an act of terrorism.


Byrd Is Partly Paralyzed as Jets Fall to Chiefs
The Jets' miserable season lost most of its meaning 23 seconds into the third quarter of the team's game with Kansas City at Giants Stadium this afternoon.
At that moment, defensive end Dennis Byrd crashed to the field after a collision with a teammate, tackle Scott Mersereau, as they converged toward Chiefs quarterback Dave Krieg.
An eerie silence gripped the stadium as Jets doctors and trainers attended to Byrd for seven minutes.
Hopes were raised when Byrd moved his left arm.
A few of his teammates drifted over to talk to him and hold his hand, then slowly they began to realize just how seriously injured he was.


Major Questions Surround Byrd's Medical Future
The nature of the neurological injury suffered by Dennis Byrd of the New York Jets yesterday leaves open several possibilities for his medical future, and his progress over the next two to three days is expected to be critical in determining whether his paralysis will be permanent.
Statements from the Jets have made it clear that Byrd suffered an injury to his spinal cord when he collided with a teammate in a game against the Kansas City Chiefs.


For a Cantor, 1,000 Joys Of Instructing the Young
MOST people who do something a thousand times do it like they've done it a thousand times before.
But here comes Cantor Lawrence AveryLawrence Avery running down the hall of the Beth El Synagogue Center.
He bounds up the steps two at a time and races into the sanctuary.
"Where's Pamela?" he says, looking for Pamela Bookman, 13 years old.
He takes her by the hand, leads her to the ark, takes out the Torah scroll and unfurls it before her.
"You're going to be great," he says with widening eyes looking into hers.


Axiomatic Inside the Beltway: Redskins Usually Beat Cards
Redskins 41, Cardinals 3
WASHINGTON, Nov. 29 (AP) -- Through good times and bad, Washington has been able to count on beating Phoenix at Robert F. Kennedy Stadium.
Today, the defending Super Bowl champions kept their playoff hopes alive with a 41-3 drubbing of Phoenix, which has not won in Washington since 1978, when the franchise played in St.
Louis.


Collision With Teammate Leaves Jet Partly Paralyzed


Queens Youth Held In Cousin's Slaying
A 17-year-old youth from Bayside, Queens, has been arrested in the fatal stabbing of his cousin yesterday after an argument about who was doing more work washing dishes at a restaurant where they worked, the police said.
The youth, Samuel Saelmeron, of 143-27 Barclay Avenue, was charged with second-degree murder and criminal possession of a weapon in the death of his cousin, Victor, 16, said Sgt.
John Russell, commander of the detective unit at the 111th Precinct.


World Economies


Choice for Young Illegal Aliens: Long Detentions or Deportation
In the darkness of the Rio Grande Valley, the beam of a flashlight captured the face of a frightened, skinny 15-year-old, clutching a sack with all his belongings: an extra shirt and pair of pants.
"Where are you from?" the United States Border Patrol officer asked.


Violent Collision Left Mersereau Stunned
Scott Mersereau was gasping for air, writhing on the ground.
But the accident that had sent him sprawling would send Dennis Byrd, one of his teammates and good friends, to a hospital with paralysis below the waist.
The strange accident, a head-on collision, occurred only seconds into the third period of the Jets' game here today with the Kansas City Chiefs.
It would be minutes before Mersereau understood what had happened.
Hours later, speaking in a whisper in a deserted corner of the Jets' locker room, he was still not able to come to grips with it.


David Ferber, 80, Dies; Ex-Solicitor for S.E.C.
David Ferber, a retired solicitor for the Securities and Exchange Commission, died Nov. 22 at Sibley Memorial Hospital in Washington.
He was 80 years old and lived in Washington.
He died of pneumonia, said his daughter Jane Mara, of Seal Rock, Ore.


CHRONICLE
On the day that her father, Tony Richardson, the Academy Award-winning director, died last November, NATASHA RICHARDSON and a friend found a surprise in the back of a closet in his Los Angeles home: a manuscript of his memoirs.
"I'd known he was scribbling some stuff down, but I had no idea that he had completed a book," said Ms.
Richardson, who is in New York rehearsing for "Anna Christie," which opens in January.
"Why he was doing it is open to question. He started it about six years before his death and was doing it as a kind of exercise between projects to keep himself occupied. I don't think he intended it for publication, and I don't think he thought it was any good."


David Sachs, Professor At Johns Hopkins, 71
David Sachs, a retired professor of philosophy at Johns Hopkins University, died Monday in Stella Maris Hospice outside Baltimore.
He was 71 years old and lived in Baltimore.
Professor Sachs died of lung cancer, said Dennis O'Shea, a spokesman for the university.


The Fright Mail Gambit
One sure way to wheedle a fast buck out of America's seniors is to scare them half to death.
Over the past few years, Richard A. Viguerie, a leader of the New Right movement, has raised millions of dollars with a series of "fright letters" suggesting that Social Security and Medicare are about to go down the drain.
One Viguerie creation, United Seniors Association, has bombarded millions of elderly Americans with such scare headlines as "All the Social Security Trust Fund Money Is Gone." To stop this "enormous fraud," the letters ask for a $5 membership fee, plus an extra $10 or $15 so United Seniors can keep "fighting hard" for the elderly.


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Monday  None  Tuesday  Construction Spending . . .
Oct.
Leading Indicators . . .
Oct.
Wednesday  New-Home Sales . . .
Oct.
Thursday Auto Sales . . .
Nov.
Factory Orders . . .
Oct.
Productivity . . . 3d Qtr.
Weekly Jobless Claims  Friday  Employment . . .
Nov.


Who Needs Four Air Forces?
The fate of America's economic recovery may well turn on arguments going on right now in the Tank.
That's the eavesdrop-proof chamber in the Pentagon where the Joint Chiefs of Staff meet to thrash out their differences.
Now they're confronting the toughest questions -- not foreign enemies but their own services' roles and missions.
In other words, turf.
Throughout the cold war America has had two light infantries, one in the Army and the other in the Marines.
It has had four combat air arms, in the Air Force, Navy, Marines and Army.
And it has had three -- in some cases, four -- service academies, chaplains' corps, medical corps, legal corps.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
Business executives say the Clinton economic expansion may have arrived even before the President-elect moves into the White House.
But they add that the pace of the rebound will be far slower than in past recoveries and that too few jobs will be created to bring unemployment down quickly.  [ Page A1. ]
Retailers assessing the Thanksgiving shopping period have altered their outlook for the holiday selling season as a whole from "cautiously optimistic" to "pretty optimistic." An informal survey showed sales up 5 to 8 percent from last year.  [ D1. ]


Nathan Appleman, 88, Oilman and Benefactor
Nathan Appleman, an oilman and philanthropist who was active in the American Jewish Committee and in the Republican Party, died on Thursday at his home in Palm Beach, Fla.
He was 88 years old.
He died of skin cancer, said his wife, the former Ann Thomka-Gazdik.


America's Great S.&amp; L. Land Sale
The Government has embarked on one of the biggest land sales in recent history.
At a time when real estate is still in the doldrums, the Government is selling some 2,300 square miles of land -- an amount twice the size of Rhode Island.
From land suitable only for cattle grazing to vast tracts outside fast-growing cities, the land comes from the portfolios of failed savings and loans taken over by the Government.
It is the wreckage of the real estate excesses of the 1980's and, for the Government, signifies even more: that its savings and loan cleanup effort is nearing an end.


Saturday Night Loss Confounds 2 Networks
The continuing problem of trying to find viewers on Saturday night is leading two networks in different directions.
CBS believes the answer is in one of the most traditional television forms: the western.
ABC has concluded that nothing traditional can work on Saturday night and that the solution lies in something totally new and experimental.
Both networks, which have been unable to make money on Saturday night, agree on one thing: they must find less expensive ways to produce shows for that period.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Matthew Sweet  The Academy Times Square
The lyric spirit ran smack into guitar fetishism on Friday night as Matthew Sweet proved his gift for words without compromising his taste for rafter-shaking rock.
A longtime presence on the college rock scene, Mr.
Sweet rejuvenated his career with 1991's smashing "Girlfriend" (Zoo).
That album insightfully chronicles an affair's disintegration and the start of a new romance.
Mr.
Sweet's unflinching lyrics stray far from moonlight and roses, but for twentysomethings trying to love in an era plagued with divorce, AIDS and classified personal ads, "Girlfriend" makes painful sense.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Tsunami  Wetlands TriBeCa
The secret folkie side of today's love-rock revolution showed its shiny smile at this Sunday matinee.
Sponsored by Sassy magazine, the show typified the alternative rock subculture, promoted by that publication and structured through tiny record labels and photocopied fanzines.
This scene has applied punk's do-it-yourself attitude to values more progressive than transgressive.


Abroad at Home; Tax-Exempt Politics?
On the Friday before Election Day, USA Today carried a full-page advertisement headed "CHRISTIANS BEWARE." It told readers that Bill Clinton supported policies condemned by the Bible.
He was for "abortion on demand," the ad said, and "special rights" for homosexuals, and "giving condoms to teen-agers in public schools." Each item cited a biblical passage.
Giving condoms, for example, was said to violate Exodus 20:12, "honor thy father and thy mother . . ."


To Greek-Americans, Clinton May Just Be No. 2
George StephanopoulosGeorge Stephanopoulos, the brown-eyed baron of communications for President-elect Bill Clinton, is coming back to Washington.
And it isn't just the ladies who are swooning.
The entire Greek-American population here is delirious with glee.
Its 20,000 or so members, clustered in various neighborhoods and suburbs, have never been so energized.


METRO DIGEST
ECONOMIC WAR BEGINS ANEW
A little more than a year after Connecticut, New Jersey, New York State and New York City signed an agreement intended to end the luring of companies from one another, the interstate war for jobs is intensifying and the so-called nonaggression pact seems close to collapse.
In recent months, New Jersey and Connecticut have sweetened the packages of financial aid they offer companies that relocate there, and New York State has been forced to increase sharply the amount it doles out to keep companies from leaving.
This month, for instance, New York City and New York State had to offer $80 million worth of incentives to prevent the New York Mercantile Exchange from moving across the Hudson River to Jersey City.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY SCIENTISTS URGE STRONG TB MEASURES
Wading into one of the most contentious issues in modern medicine, a panel of 34 scientists, ethicists and public health leaders is calling for broad new measures to stem the rampant spread of tuberculosis in New York City and around the nation.
Two of the panel's recommendations are sure to ignite angry policy debates: that all tuberculosis patients should have to let people watch them take their medication once they leave a hospital and that new laws be passed requiring all patients to receive treatment until they are cured.
A1.
O'CONNOR DENIES PRESSURING CLINTON
Denying published reports, John Cardinal O'Connor says that the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of New York is not trying to sway the Clinton transition team from considering Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez, with whom the Cardinal has often been at odds, as a potential Secretary of Education.
The Cardinal says that he does not know of any effort by Catholics to block consideration of Mr.
Fernandez, and, if it existed, that "the archdiocese would have no part of it." B3.
TROLLEY PLAN HITS ROADBLOCKS
A plan to have privately run trolleys shuttle riders along 42d Street is mired in a political deadlock, despite widespread support.
The electric trolleys, seen as an environmentally sound way to reduce congestion along one of the New York City's showcase thoroughfares, has fallen victim to a larger battle between aides to Mayor David N. Dinkins and New York City Council leaders over who has the power to approve future transit franchises.
B3.
MAKING MONEY BY SPECIALIZATION
Though his only business education was in the school of hard knocks, Seymour Rosenberg exemplifies one of the hottest trends in today's industrial sector: flexible manufacturing.
His arcane specialty, as chairman of the New York Sewing Machine Company, is taking ordinary-looking sewing machines and refashioning them for specialty work.
The idea is to tailor production exactly to a customer's needs, anticipate his emerging problems and be there as a continuing and necessary part of his business.
Strictly Business, B2.
REGION  A CANTOR'S JOYS PROVE ENDURING
Lawrence Avery, who is celebrating his 40th year as cantor at Beth El synagogue in New Rochelle, is marking another milestone: his 1,000th bar or bat mitzvah student.
Parents praise not only his skills as a cantor, but also the enthusiasm he brings to every task.
New Rochelle Journal, B6.
CHASE IN NEW JERSEY
A wild car chase over 60 miles in New Jersey and New York State involving dozens of police cars ended when two Newark men in a car the police said was stolen crashed into another vehicle in North Arlington, N.J.
B6.
PASSAIC COUNCIL VOTES TO OUST MAYOR
The Passaic City Council has voted unanimously to remove Mayor Joseph Lipari from office, one day after a Federal jury found the Mayor guilty of conspiracy and tax evasion charges.
The Council instructed the City Attorney, A. William Sala, to meet with the Passaic County Prosecutor to devise the legal strategy for removing the Mayor.
B6.
Metro Matters B3 Neediest Cases B4


Stewart Beats the Odds on Sudden-Death Putt
Payne Stewart put $220,000 worth of salve on an otherwise poor year today by winning his second consecutive Skins Game in sudden death.
In a format where opportunism is everything, Stewart holed a 3-foot birdie putt on the first extra hole, worth $120,000, to edge Fred Couples, who had already won $210,000.


Reviewing the NC-17 Film Rating: Clear Guide or an X by a New Name?
The NC-17 rating, a rarity since being created two years ago to replace the X rating, has been applied to five films in the last four months, raising questions about the criteria for applying it and its usefulness as a consumer guide to a film's content.
The most visible recipient of the rating is "Damage," a tale of sexual obsession directed by Louis Malle and starring Jeremy Irons and Juliette Binoche, which is to open on Dec. 23.


SOMALI CLAN CHIEF SAYS HE BACKS AID
With armed teen-agers from the bush lounging around his front yard near a jeep with a mounted machine gun, Gen.
Mohammed Farah Aidid, a bellicose Somali factional leader, appealed today to aid agencies to keep their workers in the country.
"We believe you are doing well by our people and that is why we believe humanitarian assistance should be handled by the non-governmental organizations," he said.
"We will do everything to protect your safety and your properties."


Two Are Held After Chase Of 60 Miles
A wild car chase over 60 miles in New Jersey and New York State involving dozens of police cars ended yesterday when two Newark men in a car the police said was stolen crashed into another vehicle in North Arlington, N.J.
During the chase through traffic along four major highways, at least three shots were fired between the police and the occupants of the vehicle, which had been stolen from Newark Airport, said Paul Brickfield, first assistant prosecutor of Bergen County, in which much of the case took place.


The Talk of London; Music Resounds Despite Soft Bottom Line
Musical life in London this month has been dominated by two very lively personalities and the anticipation of the tercentenary in 1995 of the death of Henry Purcell.
At the Royal Opera, Covent Garden, there was a new production by the director John Cox and the painter David Hockney of Richard Strauss's grandiose, neo-Wagnerian "Die Frau Ohne Schatten." Ken Russell, the veteran film director and music lover, contributed two events: a production of Gilbert and Sullivan's "Princess Ida" at the English National Opera (through Jan. 21) and a television film about the later years of the English composer Arnold Bax, with Mr.
Russell playing Bax and Glenda Jackson as his long-suffering mistress.
And at the Queen Elizabeth Hall, the South Bank Center offered the first of three annual St.
Cecilia's Day weekends of music by Purcell leading up to a full week of Purcell concerts in 1995.


City Ballet Celebrates 'Nutcracker' Centennial


Review/Ballet; One Hundred Years of 'Nutcracker'
What a year for anniversaries 1992 has been!
Columbus made his voyage in 1492, the year in which Piero della Francesca died.
Rossini and Shelley were born in 1792, Honegger and Milhaud in 1892.
Also that year, Lizzie Borden was alleged to have taken an ax and given her father and stepmother at least 40 whacks, and "The Nutcracker" received its premiere in St.
Petersburg.
Lizzie Borden's woes inspired Agnes de Mille to choreograph "Fall River Legend" in 1948.
But it was "The Nutcracker" that prompted the New York City Ballet to rejoice on Friday afternoon.
No one can deny that the family values extolled in "The Nutcracker" are more wholesome than those that presumably dominated the puritanical Borden household, and little Marie's dream journey to the land of the Sugarplum Fairy is far less controversial than Columbus's expedition.
"The Nutcracker" deserves being treasured as a holiday perennial.


Tailoring Old Sewing Machines to New Tasks
The voice on the phone belonged to a manufacturer of girls' christening dresses.
"I've got a problem and I want it to be yours," he told Seymour RosenbergSeymour Rosenberg.


Baffled by Vector Analysis? Here's Help in 3 Volumes
Care to know who runs the Bank for International Settlements in Switzerland or, for that matter, what the bank really does?
Perhaps you would like to discover what a martingale is (hint: not a bird).
Or maybe you just want to learn, without enrolling in night school, how the gold standard worked in the 19th century.
The Macmillan Press Ltd. of London is betting $2 million and four years' effort that a lot of people will plunk down $595 to find out.
They have crammed the answers -- and just about everything else anyone might want to know about matters financial -- in the three-volume, 2,621-page New Palgrave Dictionary of Money and Finance, introduced last week by the Stockton Press, Macmillan's publishing arm in New York.


Should Women Have to Maim and Kill?; Start With Sports
To the Editor:
"Let Women Prove They Can Fight" by Tanya Domi (Op-Ed, Nov. 14), like other polemics urging military combat roles for women, ignores the most persuasive argument against such policy change: In the peacetime activity closest to military combat, athletics, women seem to feel the need for sex-segregated competitions.
Even in purely mental encounters, such as chess and even contract bridge, women rarely go head to head against men. (Mixed competitions are just as sexually structured.)


Grybauskas Receives Heublein's Cuervo
Heublein Inc. in Farmington, Conn., has moved its estimated $6 million to $8 million Jose Cuervo tequila account to Grybauskas &amp; Partners in New York after almost two and a half years at Goodby, Berlin &amp; Silverstein in San Francisco.
The account includes, in addition to the Jose Cuervo brand, three higher-priced tequilas: Cuervo 1800, Cuervo Tradicional and Dos Reales.
Also there is Jose Cuervo Margaritas, a line of single-serve margaritas recently introduced nationally, and anticipated new products.


'I Paint What I See'
To the Editor:
Your Nov. 20 Man in the News on Sherman Funk, the State Department's Inspector General, reports that he "is guided by a refrain from a Carl Sandburg poem about the Mexican muralist Diego Garcia." But, to paraphrase, while it's not good taste in a man like me, to question your story's integrity, "I Paint What I See" is E. B. White's poem about Diego Rivera.
THOMAS T. TAMLYN JR.
New York, Nov. 20, 1992


No Headline


Review/Music; Intimate Group Explores Neglected Choral Works
The program chosen by the New York Concert Singers on Tuesday night at Merkin Concert Hall tells the story: Durufle's "Notre Pere" and Messiaen's "O sacrum convivium"; various Alleluias by Libby Larsen, William Bolcom, Paul McKibbins, Peter Mennin, Augusta Read Thomas and Ned Rorem; four canons by Mozart, and an extended group of part songs by Haydn.
Plainly, this is a group seeking to discard standard choral fare.
Judith Clurman, the ensemble's director, is onto something wonderful here: for one reason or another, composers past and present have written reams of music for intimate choral groups, works that are seldom retrieved except on recordings.
The Alleluias were for the most part composed at Miss Clurman's behest.
The exceptions were the works by Peter Mennin and Ned Rorem, the first of which had lain unperformed since 1945, the second so far neglected in New York.
Miss Clurman requested short pieces from the other composers in order to fill out a segment of this program.
The one that stood out was, inevitably, William Bolcom's intricate contraption, with medieval, Romantic and modern strands effortlessly interwoven.
But Augusta Read Thomas's brief entry had a severe simplicity of approach that lingered longest in the memory.


Trying to Mend the Ties That Bind
For the last six months, Shaquesha O., her mother and her seven brothers and sisters have lived in a shelter in Brooklyn.
Because of a computer error, the family's welfare checks were reduced to $12.10 every two weeks for over four months.
Then Shaquesha, 13 years old, and her older sister were arrested and charged with larceny in a subway robbery.
That's when Dwight Melhado, a slight man who speaks with a Jamaican lilt, came into their lives.
Carrying the slightly prim job title of "family preservationist," Mr.
Melhado was assigned by a Family Court judge to work with Shaquesha and her family, arranging counseling for her and trying to solve the family's other problems, like getting the welfare checks straightened out.


Venezuelan Chief Rules Out Resigning
Undaunted by a coup attempt on Friday that has caused 230 deaths, President Carlos Andres Perez today defiantly ruled out resigning and vowed to surrender power only to a successor elected in a presidential vote one year from now.
Addressing the nation after the second coup attempt in 10 months, Mr.
Perez said that "cutting the Presidential term or the President's resigning would only precipitate chaos and tragedy in Venezuela." His speech was broadcast from his colonial-style palace, which bears the scars of bombs and bullets from Friday's failed coup attempt.


N.B.A.'s 1992-93 Freshman Class Already Puts Seniors to the Test
On the night Christian Laettner came to play New Jersey, it was as if Bruce Springsteen had grown taller by a foot, lost some muscle definition in the upper body and slipped into the uniform of the Minnesota Timberwolves.
Dozens of teen-agers wearing T-Wolve caps and in jerseys with Laettner's name stitched across the back crowded the edge of the Byrne Meadowlands Arena court.
The loudest ovation during a pre-game ceremony honoring Olympic participants, including the Nets' coach, Chuck Daly, and their leading scorer, Drazen Petrovic, was for Laettner.
Cheers and squeals emanated from a large area of the upper stand behind the benches of the Timberwolves and the Nets the moment he touched the ball.


Retailers Buoyed by First Holiday Shoppers
As a group, retailers rarely describe business forecasts in terms that are not upbeat.
But if any message can be gleaned from their reports on the first two days of the all-important holiday shopping season it is this: "Cautiously optimistic" has been upgraded to "pretty optimistic."
Although only a few retailers offered hard numbers yesterday, a consensus appeared to be emerging that sales were up from 5 to 8 percent over the same period last year.
For example, a survey of about 10,000 retail outlets by Telecheck Services suggests that retail sales on Friday rose 5.1 percent compared with the day after Thanksgiving last year.


Chinese Premier Making a Rare Visit to Hanoi
Prime Minister Li Peng is to travel to Vietnam this week for the first such visit by a Chinese leader in more than two decades.
Despite the normalization of relations a year ago, dealings between the Communist neighbors remain so strained that they threaten the peace in the region.


Saints' Defense Hounds Marino
By now you know the New Orleans Saints' brand of football: Low-risk offense mixed with tenacious and often spectacular defense.
When the philosophy does not work -- as in all three of the franchise's playoff appearances, three losses in the last five years -- it is trashed by Saints' players and fans alike.


Reviews/Music; Musica Antiqua Illuminates The Art of Taking Risks
Early music continues to generate heat and controversy behind the scenes, but what happens onstage has lost much of its edge and excitement over the last decade.
First the smooth, understated British manner of performance became dominant in the Baroque and early Classical repertories, relegating individualists to the periphery.
Then many of the most noted practitioners moved on to fulfill their manifest destiny, annexing the standard repertory of the 19th century under the banner of historically informed performance, with indifferent success. (How did all those sets of Beethoven piano concertos with Melvyn Tan on fortepiano and Roger Norrington conducting end up in the CD clearance bins so soon after Mr. Norrington's Beethoven was hailed as epochal?)


Review/Dance; A Legend Of Voodoo And Power
Abdel R. Salaam's Forces of Nature company celebrated its 10th anniversary with an almost too generous gift of dance on Friday night at Davis Hall at City College.
The highlight of the evening was "The Life and Legend of Marie Laveau," a theater-dance piece about an 18th-century voodoo priestess in New Orleans.
Mr.
Salaam is a good storyteller who deftly blends a range of dance styles.
His dancers are outstandingly good-looking, well trained and as able to act as they are to move.
And the piece is a lavish little beauty that sets forth those skills.


No Bid to Bar Chancellor, Cardinal Says
From the pulpit of St.
Patrick's Cathedral, John Cardinal O'Connor said yesterday that the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of New York was not trying to sway the Clinton transition team from considering Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez, with whom the Cardinal has often been at odds, as a potential Secretary of Education.
Waving aloft an article in The New York Post on Saturday -- which said that "some Catholic groups in the New York area" were trying to block consideration of Mr.
Fernandez for the Cabinet position -- the Cardinal said that he knew of no such effort and, if it existed, that "the archdiocese would have no part of it."


Pop and Jazz in Review
Dizzy Gillespie Tribute  Carnegie Hall
Dizzy Gillespie didn't show up at a birthday tribute held for him on Wednesday night -- Mr.
Gillespie was 75 years old in October and he has been ill recently -- but in a reassuring way, his legacy was intact.
Over the last 50 or so years, Mr.
Gillespie has been a profound influence on American culture, in a profoundly American way, merging aspects of entertainment with a steely musical esthetic, finding kinship in vaudeville and his own musical innovations.
At Wednesday's show, some of the musicians he has influenced and helped over the years showed up, and his lessons have obviously been assimilated, with jokes and routines tempering what at one time might have been forbidding music.


Individuals Pushing Stocks Up
Individual investors, their confidence reviving with the economy, are ardently buying stocks, propelling stock indexes, especially for smaller issues, to new highs.
These investors are forsaking cash and some high-yielding, high-risk bonds to pour money into stock mutual funds at a record rate.


Harry Lyon Morris Is Dead at 77; Long a Liberian Delegate at U.N.
Harry Lyon Morris, a Liberian delegate at sessions of the United Nations General Assembly from 1959 to 1980, died on Thursday at New York University Medical Center.
He was 77 years old and had lived in Manhattan full time since 1980.
He died of lung cancer, said his wife, Wilma.


Joint Cable Effort On AIDS Awareness
The Bravo cable television network, and Cable Positive, a recently formed cable industry AIDS awareness organization, have joined to sponsor a commercial called "A Moment Without Television." The 60-second spot is scheduled to run on 50 cable networks at 8 P.M.
Eastern time tomorrow, which is World AIDS Day.
The spot, created by Telezign Computer Animation/Design in New York, has images of digital clocks intercut with rapidly flashing shots of people's eyes, as an announcer says, "Every eight minutes, a life is lost to AIDS."


The Vietnamese Speak Softly Of Their Own 300,000 M.I.A.
Me Thi Ha believes she is a widow.
But apart from the faded, red-bordered Government certificate proclaiming her husband a "Vietnamese martyr in the struggle against America," she has no proof of his death.
Mrs.
Ha worries about calling herself a widow because she still does not know how or when or where her husband died, and she says she probably never will.


David Ross; Composer, 58
David Ross, a composer, lyricist and musical arranger, died on Friday at his home in Los Angeles.
He was 58 years old.
He died of bone cancer, said a friend, Diana Rosen.


People
*
Marlena Delgado-Coen, senior vice president at Font &amp; Vaamonde Inc., New York, was promoted to the new post of executive vice president, responsible for overall management of the office.


Allene Z. Roach, 65, Journalist and Teacher
Allene Z. Roach, a journalist and teacher whose struggle with Alzheimer's disease was described in a 1985 book by one of her daughters, died on Friday at the Fairfield Division of the Hebrew Home for the Aged in Riverdale, the Bronx.
She was 65 years old.
She died of Alzheimer's disease, said her daughter, Marion Roach Smith.
Mrs.
Smith wrote an article for The New York Times Magazine and a book, both titled "Another Name for Madness" (Houghton Mifflin, 1985), about her mother's ordeal.


C.I.A. Says Iran Makes Progress On Atom Arms
A draft Central Intelligence Agency report on Iran concludes that the country is making progress on a nuclear arms program and could develop a nuclear weapon by 2000, senior Administration officials say.
But the highly technical report reflects a continuing debate among intelligence experts on Iran's military buildup that will intrude on efforts by President-elect Bill Clinton to formulate his Middle East policies.


Davidson's Short Trip To the Final Four
With its quarterfinal victory in the National Collegiate Athletic Association soccer tournament yesterday, Davidson College advanced farther than it ever had before in the sport.
But its first trip to the Final Four will be as short as they come.
The Wildcats, who upset North Carolina State in overtime in Raleigh by 1-0, will be right at home because their campus in Davidson, N.C., was designated last year to be the site of the 1992 Division I semifinals and final.


U.S. to Impose Taxes On Some Steel Imports
The Commerce Department will announce new taxes on some imported steel on Monday, but the taxes will not cover enough of the nation's steel imports to help the American industry much, people with a detailed knowledge of the case said today.
The department has spent the last five months reviewing hundreds of boxes of documents describing subsidies by a dozen foreign governments to their steel producers, and will assess preliminary import duties on Monday to compensate American steelmakers for the unfair competition.


INSIDE
President of Venezuela Vows to Stay in Office
Carlos Andres Perez said that despite a second attempt to depose him, he would surrender power only to a successor chosen in elections a year from now.
More than 200 died during the failed coup on Friday.
Page A6.
Jockeying on Capitol Hill
Even before they take office, freshman members of Congress are fighting like political pros for influential committee assignments.
Page A11.
Diplomatic Anxiety in Israel
The Israeli Cabinet condemned neo Nazism in Germany but avoided saying what it might do if xenophobic violence continued there.
Page A8.
Crackdown on Sick Days
As the number of workers calling in sick rises, companies are hiring investigators to track down abuses of their sick-leave policies, raising concern about privacy rights.
Page A12.


Emily Marbach, Timothy Jackson
Emily Alexandra Marbach, a teacher of English as a second language in Brussels, was married in London yesterday to Timothy David Alexander Jackson, the bureau chief in Brussels for The Independent, a London newspaper.
Rabbi Abraham Levy performed the ceremony at the Spanish and Portuguese Synagogue at Bevis Marks.
Ms.
Marbach, 26 years old, is keeping her name.
She graduated from the State University at Binghamton, N.Y., and received a master's degree in English from Columbia University.
She is a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Joseph J. Marbach of New York.
Her father, a specialist on chronic pain, is a clinical professor of public health in New York at Columbia, where he directs the School of Public Health's pain-research unit.


Dublin Journal; Irishwomen on the March, to Seats in Parliament
The women of Ireland, in a conservative society that has long preferred to restrict their lives to the kitchen and the bedroom, have made their greatest political gains in Ireland's 70 years of independence in elections they called a breakthrough.
In the national elections held on Wednesday, women won 20 seats of the 165 contested, an increase of 53 percent from the 13 they held in the old legislature.
Never before have so many women been sent to Leinster House, where the Parliament is to convene on Dec. 14.
The major political parties are to form a new coalition Government, and women now seem likely to be named to important ministerial posts.


Editorial Notebook; 'If This Sounds Slippery . . .' How to Apologize And Admit Nothing
"If any of my comments or actions have indeed been unwelcome, or if I have conducted myself in any way that has caused any individual discomfort or embarrassment, for that I am sincerely sorry."
Thus did Senator Bob Packwood of Oregon try to "if" his way past damaging accusations of sexual harassment.
He admits nothing and he denies nothing.
Only in the event that someone should choose to take offense, why then he's sorry.


Judge's Power Yields to Jurors' Rights
In a rare case that underscores the rights of prospective jurors and the limits of a judge's power, the Supreme Court of Pennsylvania has removed a state judge from the bench because he persisted in punishing prospective jurors who had asserted that their biases would prevent them from being fair.
In January, the judge, Angelo A. Guarino of the State Court of Common Pleas in Philadelphia, ordered a prospective juror to spend the rest of the day in the courtroom even though he had been rejected.
A legal group filed suit on the man's behalf, and in March, after another prospective juror was disciplined, the legal group complained to a Federal court.
Judge Guarino agreed to end the measures.
But in October the judge held a third prospective juror in contempt, leading to the Supreme Court's action.


Fulmer, an Assistant, To Coach Tennessee
Tennessee named offensive coordinator PHILLIP FULMER as its new coach last night, replacing JOHNNY MAJORS, whose contract was bought out after 16 seasons.
Fulmer, 42 years old, played at Tennessee for DOUG DICKEY, now the athletic director, and has been on Majors's staff since 1980, serving as offensive coordinator since 1989.
Fulmer served as interim coach for games earlier this season that Majors missed because of heart surgery. (AP)


Market Place; Some Performers In Japan's Slump
THE once mighty Japanese electronics companies have been in such a bad slump lately that one securities analyst gave a speech here last week questioning whether the industry will become the "Rust Bowl of the 90's."
Big electronics companies have been reporting huge profit drops or even losses and many have announced plans for a gradual trimming of thousands of people from their work forces.


Ms. Lichtenstein and Mr. Lederberg
Michele Beth Lichtenstein, a daughter of Sande and Susan Lichtenstein of Rye, N.Y., was married yesterday to Tobias Marc Lederberg, the son of Drs.
Seymour and Victoria Lederberg of Providence, R.I.
Rabbi Leslie Gutterman performed the ceremony at the Waveney House in New Canaan, Conn.
Mrs.
Lederberg, 26 years old, graduated from Brown University.
She is a third-year law student at Boston University, as is her husband.
Her father is the senior partner in Lichtenstein &amp; Shindel, a law firm in Mamaroneck, N.Y.
Her mother is a mathematics teacher at the Rye Neck Middle School in Mamaroneck.


Eagles Fly 3,000 Miles to Lose by an Inch
According to the Eagles, too many officials spoil the brew.
With Philadelphia driving toward a go-ahead touchdown in the final minute today, Randall Cunningham's fourth-and-15 pass to Calvin Williams gained 14-plus yards to a spot very near the San Francisco 10-yard line.
A raucous measurement ensued, with the Eagles claiming that an official intervened and yanked the first-down marker farther away from the football.
The lead referee, Howard Roe, kneeled over the ball, spun around and emphatically granted possession to the 49ers.
Eagles Coach Rich Kotite spiked his headset, Cunningham kicked the moist Candlestick Park sod and San Francisco loped off with a 20-14 victory.


Fire Kills 2 Toddlers in Jersey City


NEO-NAZIS TO FIGHT BANNING IN COURT
A leader of the neo-Nazi Nationalist Front, which was banned by the Government on Friday, said the group would battle in court for its right to exist.
Such a case could force judges to decide what police methods are appropriate to repress political violence.


Torretta's Formation Thrives Without the I
Regardless of what the voters say when the Heisman Trophy is awarded Dec. 12, and no matter what happens to the University of Miami Hurricanes on New Year's day or night, Gino Torretta will always have his moment.
His final exit, following the last regular-season game of his career, was made on the shoulders of his teammates.
At the end of a strange Saturday evening at Jack Murphy Stadium in which Marshall Faulk did not appear and the San Diego Chicken did -- on a giant rolling weiner -- Torretta's departure at the end of Miami's 63-17 victory over San Diego State was one of the few heroic images.


Review/Theater: The Seagull; A Vain Little World Of Art and Artists, Painted by Chekhov
The classics may be the mountains of the theater, but you don't climb them just because they're there.
This is the lesson that seems sadly lost on the well-meaning but floundering National Actors Theater, which officially opened its second season over the weekend with a production of "The Seagull" at the Lyceum Theater.
Who would not be in favor of a new company that wants nothing more than to put on great plays with top American actors at affordable prices on Broadway?
Lofty as that ideal sounds in principle, however, it becomes meaningless when the productions lack any artistic passion or even coherent points of view.
When classics are staged for no compelling reason other than their cultural status, the results are lifeless.
The plays stiffen up, much like leather-bound editions of classic novels that remain out of reach, never to be cracked open and read.


Protest Over Tariffs at Mexican Border Turns Violent


Schott Has Hurt Baseball's Interests
It is not in the best interests of baseball to allow Marge Schott to function as the owner of the Cincinnati Reds, at least not in her present incarnation.
When Bud Selig and the executive council meet next week, they must devise some program to bring their fellow owner into the world of civility and humaneness.
Members of the executive council who were reached yesterday cautiously reserved judgment until they had a chance to hear the case against Schott, but there clearly is an uneasy feeling among Schott's colleagues.


Bernard M. Baruch Jr.; Stock Exchange Member, 90
Bernard M. Baruch Jr., a former member of the New York Stock Exchange, died on Thursday at the Mount Sinai Medical Center.
He was 90 years old and lived in Manhattan.
Mr. Baruch, the son of the financier Barnard M. Baruch, was born in Manhattan.


No Headline
"It seems that this recovery is finally under way. I believe it's going to catch on this time." -- GEORGE N. HATSOPOULOS, chief executive of the Thermo Electron Corporation in Waltham, Mass.  [ A1:1. ] "The public is only going to declare the recession over when there's sustained and convincing job growth." -- ROGER BRINNER of DRI/McGraw-Hill, an economic forecasting firm in Lexington, Mass.  [ D4:5. ]


Review/Television; La Gloire Personified: The Career of de Gaulle
The researchers who tracked down the great old black-and-white newsreels that give context and texture to "De Gaulle and France" deserve a medal or two.
Effectively juxtaposed with reminiscences of surviving players, they make for an absorbing account of the operatic career of a man who always defied easy analysis.
Alone among the other giants who bestrode the first half of the 20th century -- Roosevelt, Churchill, Hitler, Stalin -- Charles de Gaulle bore the colors of a vanquished people.
He personified a national glory that was all in the past, or perhaps only in his mind.


In Crown Hts., Mayor Presses For Harmony
Mayor David N. Dinkins took his campaign for racial harmony to Crown Heights yesterday, urging a mixed group of black youths from the neighborhood and Jewish teen-agers from around the city to look beyond their differences and unite in ways their parents have often not been able to.
Holding a microphone and weaving around the Crown Heights Youth Collective, the Mayor worked a crowd of 100 or so teen-agers, at times like a television talk-show host.
He encouraged the teen-agers to talk about race and reflect on a short presentation they had just seen on the life of Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr., a show that evoked images of the bombings, beatings and bravery of the civil-rights movement in the South.


Treasury to Auction Only Bills This Week
Treasury financings this week are confined to the bill market beginning with the regular weekly auction of new three- and six-month bills normally held each Monday.
Tomorrow, the Government plans to raise cash by selling cash management bills with a 49-day maturity.
Traders said that by late in the day Friday, the rate on the three-month bill outstanding was at 3.23 percent and on the six-month bill, 3.45 percent.


How They Drove Three-Card Monte Out of the Carnival Circuit
To the Editor:
As a strategy consultant and adjunct professor of economics, I found your Nov. 11 article on three-card monte too pessimistic.


Should Women Have to Maim and Kill?
To the Editor:
I am appalled at "Let Women Prove They Can Fight" (Op-Ed, Nov. 14) by Tanya L. Domi.


Municipals May Be Near Temporary Correction
While the government bond market has been trading in a narrow yet volatile range recently, the municipal bond market has continued to march ahead.
But if the rally advances much further, some analysts will be raising a yellow flag to warn investors of a correction that would knock prices lower temporarily.
Since the election on Nov. 3, yields on actively traded municipal bonds have fallen by 30 to 40 basis points, or hundredths of a percentage point.
And investor demand has remained solid despite the rise in prices that accompanied the falling yields and the $15 billion in new tax-exempt bonds sold during the month.


Perrier, Going Global, Bids Adieu to Its Local Agencies
ABOUT seven months after being acquired by the Swiss food and beverage giant Nestle S.A., Source Perrier S.A. has unexpectedly awarded Publicis-FCB Communications in Paris, a longtime Nestle agency, the worldwide advertising account for the Perrier brand.
Though billings were not disclosed, French publications have estimated them at more than 300 million French francs, or in excess of $60 million.


Beth Arnold, Joseph Shaulson
Beth Arnold, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Bernard Arnold of Upper Saddle River, N.J., was married yesterday to Joseph H. Shaulson, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Gerald Shaulson of Cranston, R.I.
Rabbi Nathanial Schwartz performed the ceremony at the Pearl River Hilton Hotel in Pearl River, N.Y.
Mrs.
Shaulson, 25 years old, graduated from the University of Pennsylvania, as did her husband, he magna cum laude.
She received a master's degree in landscape architecture from Penn and is a project manager for William B. Kuhl, a landscape architect in New York.
Her father is a partner in Gismondi &amp; Arnold Architects in White Plains.
Her mother, Karyl Arnold, is an architect with the firm.


Equity Issues This Week
The following equity offerings are expected this week:
Ace Cash Express Inc., Dallas, initial public offering of 1.4 million common shares.
Principal/Eppler Guerin &amp; Turner.
Chart Industries Inc., Eastlake, Ohio, initial public offering of 3.5 million common shares.
County Natwest.


Whitefish Journal; Yahoo! 'Cowboy Coffee' in Moscow
If there is such a thing as a new world order, then two businessmen from this remote ski town in the far corner of northwestern Montana are at its cutting edge.
And the two Whitefish men are delighted to be there, proudly claiming credit for supplying numerous citizens of Moscow with their first sips of freshly roasted coffee.


Ford Favored for Job
DANNY FORD looks like he is back in the head coaching business -- at Arkansas.
Unless Athletic Director FRANK BROYLES has a last-minute change of heart, Ford is set to be named coach of the Razorbacks today.
The former Clemson coach, who two months ago answered the interim coach JOE KINES's call to assist him in handling the Razorbacks after JACK CROWE was fired, fits the job description set by the school.
On Saturday, Kines was told he no longer was in the running to become the Razorbacks' coach.
Al WITTE, Arkansas' N.C.A.A. faculty representative and committee chairman, said the committee met with Ford for two hours on Saturday.
He added that only Kines and Ford were interviewed by the committee, which is set to meet again today.
Witte called the seassion thorough and exhaustive and said Ford's presentation was impressive.
"A very open discussion of all the issues we considered relevant," Witte said.
If Ford is hired, Kines is expected to be offered a position as defensive coordinator-assistant head coach.


Overcoming A Death Wish
After many years of extraordinary progress, lesbians and gays are marching on the edge of an abyss.
If we alter our habits, we may enter the greatest period of freedom and accomplishment in our history.
But if we refuse to change we will perish.
Ever since the mid-80's -- after unprotected anal intercourse was identified as the primary means of H.I.V. transmission among gay men -- hundreds of thousands of us have modified our sexual behavior to curb the spread of this epidemic.
But thousands of others are still gambling with their lives and losing.


Croats and Serbs Battle Fiercely in Bosnia
Croatian and Serbian forces clashed in Bosnia and Herzegovina today, just hours before a cease-fire signed by their commanders on Saturday was scheduled to take effect, local news reports said.
Fierce fighting was reported near the towns of Orasje and Brcko, where Croatian units are holding on to their last positions on the Bosnian side of the Sava River valley.


M.R.I. for UConn Star
Connecticut sophomore forward DONYELL MARSHALL will undergo an magnetic resonance imagining today to determine how severely he injured his left leg during the Huskies' 73-69 loss to Purdue in the Tipoff Classic.
"He was just in for therapy today," TIM TOLOKAN, UConn sports information director, said yesterday.
"We won't know how bad he was hurt until we do the M.R.I." The 6-foot-9-inch Marshall was knocked to the floor as teammate KEVIN OLLIE scored on a drive to the basket with 17:19 to play in the second half of Saturday's game.
Ollie landed on Marshall's extended leg and Marshall was helped off the court and was taken to Bay State Medical Center.
X-rays revealed there was no fracture. (AP)


Minnesota's Salisbury Is 1 for 1
Vikings 31, Rams 17
ANAHEIM, Calif., Nov. 29 (AP) -- Sean Salisbury, making his first National Football League start, brought Minnesota's sleeping offense to life, and Terry Allen had a combined 198 yards and three touchdowns today as the Vikings downed the Los Angeles Rams, 31-17.
The victory moved the Vikings (9-3) and rookie Coach Dennis Green within a step of the National Conference Central title.
Either a victory by Minnesota or a loss by second-place Green Bay next week will give the Vikings their first division crown since 1989.


New York City Teachers Protest Working Conditions


Transactions
Football  National Football League
PITTSBURGH STEELERS -- Activated Gerald Williams, nose tackle, from the injured list.
Waived Mark Didio, wide receiver.
Hockey  National Hockey League
CALGARY FLAMES -- Agreed to terms with Gary Suter, defenseman, on a two-year contract.


Honors
*
Nadeen Peterson, vice chairman and executive creative director at Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Advertising, New York, was named "Advertising Woman of the Year" for 1992 by the Advertising Women of New York.


Planned 42d St. Trolley Stalls in Council
A plan to have privately run trolleys shuttle riders along 42d Street is mired in a political deadlock, despite widespread support.
The electric trolleys, seen as an environmentally sound way to reduce congestion along one of the city's showcase thoroughfares, would "unify the street's disparate ends from the U.N. to Theater Row" and speed crosstown travel, said Frederic S. Papert, president of the 42d Street Development Corporation.


Promises Aside, States in Region Fight With One Another for Jobs
A little more than a year after Connecticut, New Jersey, New York State and New York City signed an agreement intended to end the luring of companies from one another, the interstate war for jobs is intensifying and the so-called nonaggression pact seems close to collapse.
In recent months, New Jersey and Connecticut have fattened the packages of financial aid they offer companies that relocate there.
New York State, which has had the biggest arsenal of financial incentives, has been forced to increase sharply the amount it doles out to keep companies from leaving.


Abuse of Sick Leave Rises And Companies Fight Back
As the struggling economy has produced huge numbers of layoffs, significantly more of the workers still employed have been calling in sick.
Many are feeling the stress of working harder, and some are abusing sick leave, using the time as added vacation days or even to look for other jobs.
Some companies are fighting back by using private investigators to uncover abuses of sick-leave policies.
But Trans World Airlines, has gone much further, adopting a policy that raises issues of employees' right to privacy.


Accounts
*
Group W Television, New York, to Earle Palmer Brown, Philadelphia, to handle a combined account for its East Coast stations: KDKA, Pittsburgh; KYW, Philadelphia; WBZ, Boston, and WJZ, Baltimore.
The accounts had previously been separate and divided among various local agencies.
Billings were not disclosed.
KPIX, San Francisco, will remain at Atlas Citron Haligman &amp; Bedecarre, San Francisco.


Clinton May Carry the Campaign Into Office
Running along the beach here Saturday, Bill Clinton came upon a volleyball game, a group of bronzed young Californians at play.
The President-elect briefly joined in.
Gawkers marveled.
"Which one is the President?" a woman asked.


Let's Reform Health Care Before It's Too Late
To the Editor:
Eli Ginzberg, who was kind enough to quote me in "The Health Swamp" (Op-Ed, Nov. 12), is right when he says that not everyone wants health care reform.
Certainly, insurance companies and other powerful lobbies find the present system profitable enough.
However, I think more Americans are dissatisfied with our system than Dr.
Ginzberg suggests.
Every year thousands of families are impoverished by our health care system, yet few are getting their money's worth.
Last year we spent more than $800 billion on health care, nearly half of it on administration and unnecessary tests and procedures.
Our public hospitals are overburdened and will become more so as poverty, drugs and the AIDS epidemic take a further toll.


Sports of The Times; 'Am I Going to Be Paralyzed?'
WHEN the 23-7 loss to the Kansas City Chiefs ended, all the Jets players walked off the field at Giants Stadium and through the gloomy tunnel to their locker room.
Some walked faster than others.
Some held their green helmets in their hands.
Some wore their helmets.
They were walking as easily as they always do.
As easily as most people do.
Without thinking about it.
All the Jets but one.


Neediest Fund Helps Victims of AIDS
Ever since Simon Rutledge learned that he was infected with the virus that causes AIDS, he has worried that his illness would also drag down his two children, as if the mistakes he had made -- dropping out of school and stealing to support a heroin habit -- would linger after his death.
His children, Alicia and Simon Jr., did not get the virus, H.I.V., from him or their mother, who died of AIDS three years ago.
But every day they saw the disease eating away at their parents.
The children became withdrawn and resentful, apparently afraid of getting close to people who would soon be taken away from them.


